AVON LAKE, OHIO
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2026 S-1 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through 12-15-2025
State legislation current through 6-5-2025
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3186.jpg]
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
DIRECTORY OF OFFICIALS
 
COUNCIL
Robert Shahmir, Ward I
Jennifer Fenderbosch, Ward II
Amy Gentry, Ward III
David Kos, Ward IV
Geoffrey R. Smith, Council-at-Large
Kayla C. Goodwin, Council-at-Large
Matthew Reynolds, Council-at-Large
Valerie E. Rosmarin, Clerk of Council
                
OFFICIALS
Mark Spaetzel   Mayor
Gary A. Ebert   Director of Law
Beth Krosse     Director of Finance
Thomas Carleton Building Official
Robert Munro    Chief Utilities Executive
Mark Spaetzel   Safety Director
Caleb Robinson  Police Chief
Jeremy Betsa    Fire Chief
Erin Fach       Recreation Director
Allison Manning Judge of Municipal Court
Buddy Byers     Clerk of Court
 
THE CHARTER OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF AVON LAKE, OHIO
Editor’s note: The Charter was approved by the voters on June 5, 1951. Dates
appearing in parentheses following a section heading indicate that the section
was amended or enacted on the date given.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Preamble
CHAPTER I. NAME, BOUNDARIES AND POWERS
Section 1. Name and Boundaries. (11-6-1973; 11-8-1988)
Section 2. Powers.
CHAPTER II. COUNCIL
Section 3. Number, Term, Powers. (11-6-1962; 11-6-1990)
Section 3A. Dividing and Redividing the City into Wards. (11-6-1962; 5-2-1989;
11-3-1998; 7-8-2024)
Section 4. Qualifications. (6-8-1976; 11-4-2003)
Section 5. Removal. (11-4-2003)
Section 6. Vacancies. (11-6-1990; 5-2-1995)
Section 7. Salaries. (11-6-1973; 5-2-1995; 11-4-2003)
Section 8. Meetings and Organization. (11-8-1988; 11-8-2005)
Section 8A. President. (11-6-1990; 11-2-1999; 11-6-2001; 5-6-2003)
Section 8B. Clerk of Council. (Repealed 11-6-1973)
Section 8B. Special Meetings. (Renumbered 11-6-1973; 5-6-2003)
Section 8C. Quorum. (Renumbered 11-6-1973; 11-4-2003)
Section 9. Procedure of Council. (11-8-1977; 5-6-2003)
Section 9A. Referral by Council to the Electorate. (5-7-1985; 11-4-2003; 5-6-
2014)
Section 9B. The Council Annual Report. (11-4-2003)
Section 10. Emergency Ordinances. (11-6-2018)
Section 11. Procedure on Disapproval of Legislation by Mayor.
Section 12. Salaries and Pay of Officers and Employees. (11-7-2023)
CHAPTER III. INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM, RECALL
Section 13. Initiative, Referendum, Recall. (11-4-1986; 5-6-2003;11-8-2005)
CHAPTER IV. MAYOR
Section 14. Term. (11-6-1990)
Section 15. Vacancy. (11-2-1999; 5-6-2003)
Section 15A. Acting and Interim Mayor - Temporary Absence. (11-6-2018)
Section 16. Qualifications. (11-6-1990)
Section 17. Removal. (11-8-1988)
Section 18. Powers, Judicial and Legislative. (11-6-1973; 11-6-2001)
Section 19. Powers, Administrative.
Section 19A. Suspension by the Mayor from Office or Employment.
Section 19B. Preferring Charges by the Mayor Against Officers or Employees.
Section 19C. Mayor, Conservator of Peace, Chief Executive.
Section 20. Salary. (5-6-2014; 11-7-2023)
Section 21. Office.
CHAPTER V. DIRECTOR OF FINANCE
Section 22. Appointment and Term. (11-7-1978; 11-3-1998; 5-6-2003; 3-2-2004)
Section 23. Vacancy. (11-7-1972; 5-6-2003)
Section 24. Qualifications. (11-7-1972; 5-6-2014)
Section 25. Removal. (11-7-1972)
Section 26. Powers and Duties. (11-7-1978)
Section 27. Salary. (11-7-1972)
Section 28. Office. (11-7-1972)
CHAPTER VI. CLERK OF COUNCIL
Section 29. Appointment and Term. (11-6-1973)
Section 30. Vacancy. (11-6-1973)
Section 31. Qualifications. (11-6-1973)
Section 32. Removal. (11-6-1973; 11-8-2005)
Section 33. Powers and Duties. (11-7-1978)
Section 34. Salary. (11-6-1973)
Section 35. Office. (11-6-1973)
CHAPTER VII. DEPARTMENTS
Section 36. Establishment of Departments.
Section 37. Director of Law. (11-6-1973; 11-3-1998; 5-6-2003)
Section 38. Municipal Engineer. (11-3-1998; 5-6-2003; 3-2-2004)
Section 39. Building Inspector. (11-3-1998; 5-6-2003; 3-2-2004)
Section 40. Safety Department.
Section 40A. Department of Recreation. (3-2-2004)
CHAPTER VIII. MUNICIPAL PLANNING COMMISSION
Section 41. Organization. (5-2-1995)
Section 42. Term. (5-2-1995; 11-2-2004)
Section 43. Powers and Duties.
Section 44. Compensation.
CHAPTER IX. BOARD OF MUNICIPAL UTILITIES
Section 45. Number and Term.
Section 46. Qualifications. (6-8-1976)
Section 47. Removal.
Section 48. Vacancies.
Section 49. Meetings and Organization. (3-2-2004; 8-7-2012)
Section 49A. Day of Meetings and Organization. (8-7-2012)
Section 50. Quorum.
Section 51. Powers and Duties.
Section 52. Salary. (11-3-2009)
Section 53. Salaries and Wages of Employees.
CHAPTER X. FINANCE
Section 54. Finance. (11-7-1978)
Section 55. Transfers and Balances.
Section 56. Payment of Claims. (11-7-1978)
Section 57. Custody and Deposit of Funds. (11-6-1973)
Section 58. Certification of Expenditures. (5-2-1989; 11-4-2008)
Section 59. Competitive Bidding. (11-4-1986; 5-2-1989; 5-2-1995; 5-6-2003; 11-
4-2008; 11-5-2013; 11-6-2018)
Section 60. Public Improvements.
CHAPTER XI. FRANCHISES
Section 61. Franchises.
CHAPTER XII. NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
Section 62. Nominations and Elections. (11-6-1973; 5-2-1995; 11-6-2001; 11-2-
2004; 8-7-2012)
CHAPTER XIII. MISCELLANEOUS
Section 63. Bonds of Officers and Employees. (11-6-1973)
Section 64. Pensions, Insurance. (11-7-1978)
Section 65. Civil Service. (5-2-1995)
Section 66. Effect of Charter.
Section 67. Military Service. (11-2-2004; 5-6-2014)
Section 68. Words Held to be Inclusive.
Section 69. Limitation on Industrial Area. (11-8-1994)
Section 69A. Property for Future Industrial Zoning. (11-8-1960; 5-3-1966; 5-4-
1971)
Section 70. Partial Invalidity.
Section 71. Interpretation.
Section 72. Amendment to Charter; Charter Review Commission. (11-7-1972; 11-3-
1998; 11-4-2003; 11-2-2004; 11-8-2005; 11-4-2008; 11-6-2018)
Section 73. Time of Taking Effect.
Section 74. Requirement, Terms and Procedure for Binding Arbitration. (11-2-
1982)
PREAMBLE
   We, the people of the Municipality of Avon Lake, in the County of Lorain and
the State of Ohio, in order to secure for ourselves the benefits of local self-
government under the Constitution of the State of Ohio, do ordain and establish
this Charter for the government of the Municipality of Avon Lake.
CHAPTER I NAME, BOUNDARIES AND POWERS
SECTION 1. NAME AND BOUNDARIES.
   The Municipal corporation now existing and now known as the City of Avon
Lake, hereafter in this Charter called the “Municipality,” shall continue to be
a body politic and corporate under the same name and with the same boundaries,
with power and authority to change the boundaries and annex other territory
contiguous thereto in the manner authorized by the general laws of the State of
Ohio; but no territory shall be detached therefrom, nor shall the Municipality
be annexed to any other municipality without the consent of Council and a
majority of its electors voting on such question at a general election held and
conducted in the manner provided by law.
(Amended 11-6-1973; 11-8-1988)
SECTION 2. POWERS.
   The Municipality shall have all powers of local self-government now and
hereafter granted to municipalities by the Constitution of the State of Ohio,
and such further powers as are now or hereafter granted by the laws of the
State of Ohio; and all such powers shall be exercised in the manner prescribed
by this Charter or by ordinances of Council created hereby. Enumeration of or
reference to particular powers by this Charter shall not be construed to be
exclusive.
CHAPTER II COUNCIL
SECTION 3. NUMBER, TERM, POWERS.
   The Council of the Municipality shall consist of seven (7) members, one
member to be elected from each of four (4) wards and three (3) members to be
elected at large. The term of the members of Council shall begin the first day
of January following their election, and they shall serve for a term of four
(4) years, or until their successors are elected and qualified, except that at
the regular municipal election held in the year 1991 the members to be elected
at large shall be elected for a two (2) year term and then in 1993 and every
four (4) years thereafter shall be elected and serve for a term of four (4)
years. Except as limited by this Charter, the legislative power of the
Municipality granted by this Charter and by the Constitution and the laws of
the State of Ohio, shall be vested in Council; and without limitation of its
general powers, Council shall have power to provide by ordinance for employment
of personnel in any department of the Municipality for an indefinite term
subject to being removed at the will of Council and to fix the rate and basis
of compensation therefor.
(Amended 11-6-1962; 11-6-1990)
SECTION 3A. DIVIDING AND REDIVIDING THE CITY INTO WARDS.
   (a)   The Council shall, not later than July 1, 1991, divide the
Municipality into the number of wards which equals the number of members of the
legislative authority to be elected from wards, as required by this Charter.
Wards so formed shall be as nearly equal in population as is practically
possible, and shall be composed of contiguous and compact territory, and
bounded by natural boundaries or street lines.
   (b)   In order to maintain substantially equal population in each of the
wards on a continuing basis, the Council may redivide the Municipality into the
required number of wards at any time for such purpose. It shall review ward
division and redivision, within ninety (90) days after the first day of July of
the year following the decennial census year, to determine if a redivision is
necessary to comply with the provisions of this section.
   (c)   The Council may authorize and provide for conducting a census of the
population of the Municipality at any time in order to carry out the powers
granted by this section.
   (d)   Any action of Council to divide or redivide the Municipality into
wards as required herein shall be by ordinance, which shall be effective on
July 1 of the next calendar year following the calendar year during which such
ordinance was passed.
(Enacted 11-6-1962; Amended 5-2-1989; 11-3-1998; 7-8-2024)
SECTION 4. QUALIFICATIONS.
   No person shall be a member of Council of the Municipality unless the person
is a resident and a qualified elector at the time the petition for election is
filed, and no person shall serve as a member of Council unless that person
shall continue to be a resident of the Municipality throughout his term of
office. No person shall be a member of Council elected from a ward unless he is
a resident of that ward at the time his petition for election is filed, and no
person shall serve as a member of Council elected from a ward unless he shall
continue to be a resident of the ward throughout his term of office. No member
of Council shall hold any other public office with the Municipality or
employment with the Municipality. No member of Council shall be interested in
the profits or emoluments of any contract, job, work or service for which
moneys of the Municipality are being expended.
   Any member of Council who shall cease to possess, or who violates any of the
qualifications herein enumerated shall forfeit his office. Failure of any
member of Council to maintain said qualifications shall not render void or
ineffective any action of Council in which such member has participated.
(Amended 6-8-1976; 11-4-2003)
SECTION 5. REMOVAL.
   Council shall be the sole and final judge of the election and qualification
of its members. It may expel or remove any member for gross misconduct, or for
misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in, or disqualification from holding
office, or for conviction while in office of a crime, or for conviction in
office of a crime as enumerated by the Ordinances of the Municipality or the
Ohio Revised Code, or for the violation of his oath of office, or for
persistent failure to abide by the rules of Council, or for absence without
justifiable excuse for three consecutive regular meetings of Council. Such
expulsion shall not take place except on concurrence of five (5) of the members
elected to Council, nor until the accused member shall have been notified in
writing of the charge against him at least ten (10) days in advance of any
hearing upon such charge, and until he or his counsel shall have been given the
opportunity to appear before Council and be heard, present evidence and examine
witnesses appearing in support of the charge.
(Amended 11-4-2003)
SECTION 6. VACANCIES.
   Whenever the office of a member of Council becomes vacant for any reason,
the vacancy shall be filled by a majority vote of the then remaining members of
Council. If the vacancy is not filled by Council within thirty (30) days of its
occurrence, the Mayor shall fill the vacancy by appointment.
   Such person shall serve through December 31 following the next regular
municipal election, provided, however, that the term of a member shall not be
lengthened by their resignation and subsequent appointment. At such election a
successor shall be elected to serve for the unexpired term, if any remains, for
a full term commencing January 1 next following his election.
(Amended 11-6-90; 5-2-95)
SECTION 7. SALARIES.
   Council shall determine and fix the salary of its members on or before the
first day of June each year. If the Council determines to change the
established salary of its members in respect to a term of office, such change
must be made by Council on or before the first day of June, to be effective
January 1 of the following year; and unless and until the salary is so changed
it shall remain as last fixed. The salary of a member of Council shall be
payable in substantially equal installments fixed by ordinance of Council.
(Amended 11-6-1973; 5-2-95; 11-4-2003)
SECTION 8. MEETINGS AND ORGANIZATION.
   At 7:30 P.M. on the first business day after January 1st following each
regular municipal election, Council shall meet at the Council Chambers of the
Municipality for the purpose of confirmation of organization. Thereafter,
Council shall meet at such times as may be prescribed by its rules,
regulations, ordinances and by-laws; but it shall hold regular meetings at
least twice during each calendar month of the year, with the exception of the
months of July and August, during each of which months Council may at its
discretion dispense with one of its regular meetings. All meetings of the
Council, whether regular or special, shall be open to the public. However,
Council may meet in closed executive session upon an affirmative majority roll
call vote of at least four members, in order to discuss and act on those
matters as are now authorized by the general laws of the State of Ohio.
(Amended 11-8-1988; 11-8-2005)
SECTION 8A. PRESIDENT.
   The Council shall, at the time of its organization, choose one of its
members as President. When the Mayor is absent or inaccessible, or for any
reason is unable to perform his duties as Mayor, the President shall become the
acting Mayor, and while so acting shall have and exercise all of the powers of
the Mayor, but shall not cease to be a Council member, nor lose the right to
vote as a member of Council. The President shall preside at all meetings of
Council.
   If the office of President becomes vacant, any vacancies in Council shall
first be filled in the manner provided in Section 6 of this Charter, and then a
new President shall be chosen by Council.
(Amended 11-6-1990; 11-2-1999; 11-6-2001; 5-6-2003)
SECTION 8B. CLERK OF COUNCIL.
Editor’s note:
   Former Section 8B., as amended November 7, 1972, was repealed by the voters
on November 6, 1973.
   Former Sections 8C. and 8D. were renumbered 8B. and 8C., respectively.
SECTION 8B. SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   Special meetings of Council may be held in accordance with and as provided
for by the rules, regulations and by-laws adopted by Council; but in the
absence of such provisions, special meetings may be called by a vote of Council
taken at any regular or special meetings; or special meetings may be called by
the Clerk of Council upon the written request of the Council President, or the
written request of three (3) members of Council. Any such vote or request for
the calling of a special meeting shall state the subject or subjects to be
considered at the meeting and no other subject or subjects shall be there
considered, except on the approval of five (5) or more of the members of
Council in attendance at the special meeting. Twenty-four hours notice, in
writing, of such special meeting, if called by the Council President or by
three (3) members of Council, shall be given to each member of Council and the
Council President by personal service, or by leaving it at their usual place of
residence; except that the members of Council shall be held to have waived such
notice by their attendance at the special meeting.
(Amended 5-6-2003)
SECTION 8C. QUORUM.
   A majority of Council members shall constitute a quorum to do business, but
a less number may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of absent
members in such manner and under such penalties as may be prescribed by the
rules of Council.
(Amended 11-4-2003)
SECTION 9. PROCEDURE OF COUNCIL.
   The Council shall determine its own rules and order of business in so far as
they are not set forth in this Charter. Council shall keep a journal of its
proceedings which shall be a public record.
   Action by Council, not required by law to be by ordinance or resolution, may
be taken by motion approved by at least a majority vote of the members present
at the meeting when the action is taken.
   On the passage of every ordinance or resolution, the vote shall be taken by
a “yes” or “no” vote of each member which shall be entered into the journal. No
ordinance or resolution shall be passed without the concurrence of a majority
of the members of Council. Each ordinance or resolution shall be read by title
only, unless a majority of the members of Council vote to require any reading
to be in full. Each ordinance or resolution shall be read on three different
days unless five (5) members of Council vote to suspend this rule. No ordinance
shall deal with more than one subject, and such subject shall be clearly
expressed in the title.
   Council may provide for the revision, rearrangement and codification of the
ordinances of the Municipality or any portion thereof, at such time as Council
may determine. All ordinances, resolutions, statements, orders, proclamations,
notices and reports required by law, or by this Charter, or by ordinance of
Council, to be published, may either be posted in five (5) of the most public
places in the Municipality as determined by Council for a period of not less
than fifteen (15) days next following action thereon, or be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Municipality, as the Council may
determine. All ordinances or resolutions upon their final passage shall be
recorded in a book kept for that purpose and shall be authenticated by the
signature of the presiding officer and the Acting Clerk of Council, save and
except that the failure of the presiding officer, Clerk or Acting Clerk to sign
an ordinance or resolution for the purpose of authentication shall neither
invalidate the ordinance nor impair its effectiveness. All ordinances and
resolutions of a general or permanent nature, or involving the expenditure of
money in which no emergency is declared, shall take effect thirty (30) days
after their passage by Council, subject to the provisions of
Section 11 of this Charter. Emergency ordinances in which the emergency is
declared in one section thereof shall take effect as provided by Section 10 of
this Charter.
(Amended 11-8-1977; 5-6-2003)
SECTION 9A. REFERRAL BY COUNCIL TO THE ELECTORATE.
   By a two-thirds vote of the members of the Council any ordinance or
resolution may be referred to the electors of the City at a general, primary or
special election. Any referral must be submitted, for placement on the ballot,
not later than the deadline established by the election laws of the State of
Ohio.
(Enacted 5-7-1985; Amended 11-4-2003; Amended 5-6-2014)
SECTION 9B. THE COUNCIL ANNUAL REPORT.
   Council shall prepare an annual report. At minimum, the report shall
communicate the Council’s strategic plan for the future of the Municipality,
including the means to achieve the plan. The annual report shall also discuss:
(1) accomplishments to date and resultant impacts, (2) multi-year and current
year plans (and costs) for roads, recreational and utility facilities
improvements and repairs, and (3) multi-year and current year plans (and costs)
for organizational charges.
(Enacted 11-4-2003)
SECTION 10. EMERGENCY ORDINANCES.
   Emergency ordinances or resolutions necessary for the preservation of public
peace, health and safety, shall go into immediate force and effect from and
after their passage, subject to the provisions of Section 11 of this Charter.
No ordinance or resolution granting, renewing, or extending a franchise or
other special privilege, or regulating a rate to be charged for its services by
any privately owned public utility, shall ever be passed as an emergency
ordinance or resolution. Emergency ordinances or resolutions must, upon a “yes”
or “no” vote, receive a two-thirds vote of all the members of Council.
(Amended 11-6-2018)
SECTION 11. PROCEDURE ON DISAPPROVAL OF LEGISLATION BY MAYOR.
   An ordinance or resolution passed as an emergency legislation, without a
dissenting vote of Council, shall not be subject to disapproval of the Mayor,
and it shall be his duty to forthwith authenticate it by his signature.
   Every other ordinance or resolution of the Council shall be presented to the
Mayor for his consideration before it goes into effect. The Mayor, if he
approves it, shall sign it and file it with the Clerk forthwith. The Mayor may
approve or disapprove the whole or any item of an ordinance appropriating
money, but otherwise his approval or disapproval shall be addressed to the
entire ordinance or resolution. Unless an ordinance or resolution is filed with
the Clerk of Council with written notice of disapproval within ten (10) days
after its passage by Council, it shall take effect as though the Mayor had
approved it. When the Mayor has disapproved an ordinance or resolution or item
of it, as herein provided, Council shall at its next regularly called meeting
thereafter reconsider it, and if upon such reconsideration the ordinance,
resolution or item is reapproved by the vote of five (5) or more of the members
of Council, it shall take effect as provided therein, notwithstanding the
disapproval of the Mayor; otherwise the disapproved measure or item thereof, as
the case may be, shall not take effect or be in force.
SECTION 12. SALARIES AND PAY OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   Council shall have the power to establish all offices and positions not
otherwise provided for by this Charter which are necessary from time to time
for the efficient conduct of the affairs of the Municipality. Council shall by
ordinance fix all salaries and rates of compensation; but the salary or rate of
compensation of an elected or appointed official, officer or employee who has
been elected or employed for a definitely fixed period of time, with the
exception of the Mayor, shall not be increased or decreased during the term of
office or appointment. All salaries and wage rates of employees of the Board of
Municipal Utilities shall be approved by said Board before they are fixed by
Council; and, unless and until changes in salaries and wages are so approved
and modified by action of Council they shall remain as last fixed.
(Amended 11-7-2023)
CHAPTER III INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM, RECALL
SECTION 13. INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM, RECALL.
   The rights and powers of initiative, referendum and recall are reserved to
the people of the Municipality and shall be exercised in accordance with the
provisions of the general laws of the State of Ohio which are applicable
thereto, subject always to the following special provisions with respect to the
exercise of initiative, referendum and recall within the Municipality, anything
to the contrary provided in the general laws of the State of Ohio as now or
hereafter enacted to the contrary notwithstanding:
   (a)   Initiative. The electors shall have the power to propose any ordinance
or resolution except an ordinance appropriating money or authorizing the levy
of taxes, and to adopt or reject the same at the polls, such power being known
as the initiative. An initiated ordinance or resolution shall be submitted to
the Clerk of Council, by petition signed by electors, at least equal in number
to fifteen (15) percent of the number of registered electors of the
Municipality on the date of the last general election in the Municipality, as
determined by the Board of Elections of Lorain County, Ohio. When so submitted,
the Board of Elections shall determine the sufficiency thereof and if
sufficient, Council shall take final action, either enacting, amending or
rejecting the proposed ordinance within forty (40) days after submission. If
Council fails to pass such proposed ordinance or resolution or passes it in
some form different from that set forth in the petition therefor, the
petitioners through the committee named on such petition may by the next
regular meeting of Council request in writing that it be submitted to a vote of
the electors. Thereupon, Council shall provide for submitting the petitioned
ordinance or resolution to the electors at the next general or regular
municipal election occurring more than ninety (90) days after filing of such
petition with the Board of Elections of Lorain County, Ohio, but if such
petition is signed by at least twenty percent (20%) of such electors, the date
of the election may be fixed therein, which may be a special election to be
held at any time more than ninety (90) days after the filing of such petition.
   (b)   Referendum. All ordinances and resolutions passed by the Council,
whether passed as emergency measures or otherwise, shall be subject to being
repealed on a referendum with the exception of ordinances or resolutions
pertaining to budgets, appropriations, current operating expenses, rates of pay
and compensation and employment by the Municipality of nonelected employees,
payrolls and legislation pertaining to any improvement the cost of which is to
be borne in whole or in part by special assessment upon benefited properties
where the owners of sixty percent (60%) or more of the street frontage of the
properties to be benefited have petitioned for the improvement.
         Whenever Council is by law required to pass more than one ordinance or
resolution to complete the legislation necessary to make and pay for any public
improvement, the right to a referendum shall apply only to the first ordinance
or resolution required to be passed and not to any subsequent ordinances or
resolutions.
         Nothing in this Charter pertaining to referendum shall ever be
construed to apply to any proceeding or to any measure taken by Council for the
accomplishment of the purpose thereof, where the undertaking or the method of
financing thereof has been approved by a vote of the people of the
Municipality.
         A valid petition for a referendum election within the Municipality
must be signed by at least fifteen percent (15%) of the number of registered
electors of the Municipality on the date of the last general election in the
Municipality, as determined by the Board of Elections of Lorain County, Ohio.
In addition to all other legal requirements, the referendum petition must set
out with exactness the respects in which objections to the measure are made,
and must state the reasons advanced to support the objection.
         A valid petition for a referendum must be filed with the Clerk of
Council by 4:00 P.M. on or before forty (40) days after the ordinance or
resolution was passed by Council. When a referendum petition is filed with the
Clerk of Council, the ordinance or resolution sought to be reconsidered shall
be suspended from taking effect. Such suspension shall terminate when:
      (1)   There is a final determination of insufficiency of the petition, or
      (2)   The petitioners withdraw the petition, or
      (3)   The Council repeals the ordinance or resolution, or
      (4)   The vote of the referendum has been certified.
         The Board of Elections shall determine the sufficiency of the
referendum petition within thirty (30) days. If said petition is found to be
sufficient the Clerk shall certify and deliver it to the Board of Elections of
Lorain County, Ohio, for submission to a referendum vote of the people of the
Municipality.
         The vote of the City on a referred ordinance or resolution shall be
held not less than sixty (60) days and not later than one year from the date of
the final Council vote thereon. If said petition is signed by at least twenty
percent (20%) of such electors, the date of the election may be fixed therein.
If no regular City election is to be held within the period prescribed in this
subsection, the Council shall provide for a special election; otherwise, the
vote shall be held at the same time as such regular election, except that the
Council may in its discretion provide for a special election at an earlier date
within the prescribed period.
   (c)   Recall. Electors shall have the power to remove from office by recall
election any elected officer of the Municipality. After an elected officer has
served six (6) months of his term, a petition demanding his recall and removal
may be filed with the Clerk of Council. Such a petition shall be signed by
electors eligible to vote in the last election for the office to which the
recall petition is directed equal in number to at least twenty percent (20%) of
the registered voters eligible to vote for the office. Such petition shall
contain a general statement in not more than two hundred words of the grounds
upon which the removal of such person is sought. The filing of the petition
with the Clerk of Council must be done by 4:00 P.M. on or before forty (40)
days after the date the first signature was affixed to the petition. The Board
of Elections shall determine the sufficiency of the recall petition within 30
days of such filing. If the Board of Elections shall find the petition
sufficient the Clerk shall promptly so certify to the Council, shall deliver a
copy of such certificate to the official whose removal is sought and make a
record of such delivery. If such official shall not resign within five (5) days
after the day on which such delivery shall have been made, the Council shall
fix a day for holding a recall election not less than thirty (30) days, or more
than forty (40) days from the date of delivery. The ballots at such recall
election shall submit the question: “Shall (name of person) be removed from the
office of (name of office) by recall?” with provision on the ballot for voting
affirmatively or negatively on such question. If a majority of the votes cast
on the question of removal are affirmative, the person whose removal is sought
shall be removed from office and such vacancy shall be filled as provided in
this Charter. The official removed by such recall election shall not be
eligible for appointment to the vacancy created thereby.
(Amended 11-4-1986; 5-6-2003; 11-8-2005)
CHAPTER IV MAYOR
SECTION 14. TERM.
   The Mayor shall be elected at the regular municipal elections, held in the
year 1991 and every four (4) years thereafter, for a term of four (4) years
commencing on the first day of January next after such election, and shall
serve until his successor is elected (or chosen) and qualified.
(Amended 11-6-1990)
SECTION 15. VACANCY.
   In case of death, resignation or removal of the Mayor, or in case the Mayor
ceases to reside in the Municipality, the duties of the office of Mayor shall
be discharged by the Acting Mayor to be selected in the following order of
succession: Council President; if the Council President is unable to or
declines to serve as Acting Mayor, then the Council members at large in
descending order of longevity in service in the office of Council member at
large; if all of the Council members at large are unable to or decline to serve
as Acting Mayor, then Ward Council members in descending order of longevity in
service in the office of Ward Council member; if all of the Ward Council
members are unable to or decline to serve as Acting Mayor, then the Director of
Finance; if the Director of Finance is unable to or declines to serve as Acting
Mayor, then the Director of Law, provided, however, that in order for the
Director of Finance or the Director of Law to serve as Acting Mayor, the
Director of Finance and/or the Director of Law must be a resident of the City
of Avon Lake. In the event that more than one Council member at large has the
same longevity in service in the office of Council member at large, the Council
member at large, of those who have the same longevity in service in the office
of Council member at large, who received the largest number of votes in the
most recent general election shall, if the Council President is unable to or
declines to serve as Acting Mayor, serve as Acting Mayor. In the event that
more than one Ward Council member has the same longevity in service in the
office of Ward Council member, the Ward Council member, of those who have the
same longevity in service in the office of Ward Council member, who received
the largest number of votes in the most recent general election shall, if the
Council President and all Council members at large are unable to or decline to
serve as Acting Mayor, serve as Acting Mayor.
   In the performance of the duties of Acting Mayor, the Council member or
department head acting in this capacity shall not thereby cease to retain
status as Council member or department head. The individual serving as Acting
Mayor shall receive the salary provided for in Section 20 of this Charter,
except that in no event shall the salary or benefits of the individual serving
as Acting Mayor be reduced while serving in this capacity.
   If the office of the Mayor becomes vacant by reason of death, resignation or
removal of the Mayor, or in case the Mayor ceases to reside in the
Municipality, and such vacancy occurs more than two hundred and seventy (270)
days before the next regular Municipal election to be held for the office of
Mayor, such vacancy shall be filled by special Municipal election. Such special
election shall be held on the first Tuesday after sixty (60) days from the day
on which the vacancy first occurs; however, if a previously scheduled May or
November election is no less than one hundred (100) days from the day on which
the vacancy first occurs, such special election shall be held in conjunction
with such election. All of the provisions in this Charter applicable to
nominations and elections of candidates for the office of Mayor shall apply.
The person elected at such special election shall immediately assume office,
shall have the same rights and responsibilities as any duly elected Mayor and
shall serve the remainder of the term of the prior Mayor.
(Amended 11-2-1999; 5-6-2003)
SECTION 15A. ACTING AND INTERIM MAYOR - TEMPORARY ABSENCE.
   When the Mayor is absent or inaccessible, or is unable for any cause to
perform duties of the office of Mayor, the person designated by Section 15 of
this Charter shall be the Acting Mayor until the Mayor resumes the office. If
the Mayor does not resume the duties of the office within 60 days, then Council
shall declare the office vacant and shall fill the vacancy in accordance with
Section 15 of this Charter.
(Enacted 11-6-2018)
SECTION 16. QUALIFICATIONS.
   No one shall be eligible to hold the office of Mayor of the Municipality
unless he shall have been a continuous resident and qualified elector thereof
for at least three (3) years next prior to his election. The Mayor shall
continue to be a resident of the Municipality throughout his term of office, or
Council shall remove him.
   The Mayor shall be a full-time employee of the Municipality as of January 1,
1992, and shall not hold any other elective or appointive public office for
compensation, or other full-time employment, public or private, except that of
Notary Public or member of the National Guard or Reserve Forces of the United
States, or as otherwise provided in this Charter.
(Amended 11-6-1990)
SECTION 17. REMOVAL.
   The Council may remove the Mayor for gross misconduct, malfeasance,
misfeasance or nonfeasance in, or for disqualification for office, or for the
conviction while in office of a crime involving moral turpitude, or for the
violation of his oath of office. Such removal shall not take place without the
concurrence of five (5) members of Council, and until the Mayor shall have been
notified in writing of the charges against him, at least ten (10) full days in
advance of any hearing upon such charge, and until he or his counsel shall have
been given an opportunity to be heard, present evidence and examine witnesses
appearing in support of such charge.
(Amended 11-8-1988)
SECTION 18. POWERS, JUDICIAL AND LEGISLATIVE.
   The Mayor shall have all the general and judicial powers granted by the
general laws of the State of Ohio to Mayors of municipalities, as now are or
hereafter may be enacted.
   The Mayor shall attend all meetings of Council, but shall have no vote
therein. He shall have the right to introduce ordinances and resolutions and to
take part in the discussion of all matters coming before Council.
(Amended 11-6-1973; 11-6-2001)
SECTION 19. POWERS, ADMINISTRATIVE.
   The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the Municipality, charged
with the duty and cloaked with the authority to supervise the administration of
all departments and divisions of the Municipality, unless Council shall
otherwise provide; except that he shall not have such powers with respect to
the affairs of any department or division of the municipal administration which
by this Charter is placed under the supervision and direction of a board which
is chosen by popular election, nor as to an elected office holder, nor as to
personnel holding office or employment in the municipal administration by
virtue of being appointed thereto or employed therefor by direct and sole
action of Council.
SECTION 19A. SUSPENSION BY THE MAYOR FROM OFFICE OR EMPLOYMENT.
   Within the limits of his authority as established in the immediately
preceding Section 19 of this Charter, the Mayor shall have power to suspend for
a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, without compensation during the term
of suspension, any officer or employee of the Municipality (but not including
elected officers, nor officers or employees appointed by the sole action of
Council, nor subordinates of offices or appointees who have been appointed by
the sole action of Council) whom the Mayor determines to be or to have been
guilty of misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in respect to duties
specifically imposed or by implication clearly enjoined upon such person in the
administration of the affairs of the Municipality; and in the event of such
suspension, the Mayor shall designate another suitable person to discharge the
duties of the suspended person during the period of the suspension. Such
suspension must be in writing with the cause for and the reason of the action
clearly appearing therein, as well as the period during which the suspension
shall remain in effect. Such written notice of suspension must be delivered to
the suspended person in person if by reasonable diligence he can be found in
the Municipality, and if he cannot be so found, the notice of suspension shall
be left at the usual place of residence of the person so suspended; and a copy
of said notice of suspension shall be forwarded to Council forthwith. A
suspension by the Mayor shall be final unless an appeal is taken as hereinafter
provided. Any person who has been suspended by the Mayor as above provided
shall have the right to appeal to Council during the period of the suspension.
In the event of an appeal being so taken, the decision of Council on the appeal
shall be final. On hearing an appeal, if Council by a vote of not less than
five (5) of its members shall overrule the suspension imposed by the Mayor, the
person so suspended forthwith shall be restored to duty and shall be paid at
the rate of his usual compensation for the period of the suspension; but if the
suspension by the Mayor is not overruled by a vote of at least five (5) of the
members of Council, the suspension shall stand as imposed by the Mayor. Nothing
herein provided, however, shall prevent the Mayor from modifying his order of
suspension at any time while it is in effect, nor prevent the Mayor from
cancelling such suspension.
SECTION 19B. PREFERRING CHARGES BY THE MAYOR AGAINST OFFICERS OR EMPLOYEES.
   When the Mayor has reason to believe that any officer or employee of the
Municipality has been guilty in the performance of his official duties of
misfeasance, malfeasance, nonfeasance, misconduct in office, gross neglect of
duty, gross immorality, or habitual drunkenness, he shall immediately file with
Council written charges against such person, setting forth in detail a
statement of such alleged guilt, and, at the same time, or as soon thereafter
as possible, serve or cause to be served, a true copy of such charges upon the
person against whom the charges are made. Such service may be made in person or
by leaving a copy of the charges at the office or the usual place of residence
of such person, and due return of such service shall be made to Council as is
provided for the return of service of summons in a civil action.
   When so filed with Council, such charges shall be for hearing at the next
regular meeting thereof, unless Council, with the consent of the accused, shall
extend the time of hearing. The accused may appear in person or by counsel,
examine all witnesses and answer all charges against him. The judgment or
action of Council shall be final; but to remove such officer or employee so
charged, the votes of five (5) members of Council shall be required.
   Pending any such proceedings, such person may be suspended by a majority
vote of all members of Council; but such suspension shall not be for a longer
period than fifteen (15) days unless the hearing of such charges is extended
with the consent of the accused, and in such event the suspension shall not
exceed a period of thirty (30) days.
   For the purpose of investigating charges against an officer or employee,
Council may issue subpoenas or compulsory processes to compel the attendance of
persons and the production of books and papers before Council, and may provide
by ordinance for exercising and enforcing this provision.
   In all cases in which the attendance of witnesses may be compelled for such
investigation, any member of Council may administer the requisite oaths, and
Council shall have the same power to compel the giving of testimony by the
attending witnesses as is conferred upon courts of justice. In all such cases,
witnesses shall be entitled to the same privileges, immunities and compensation
as are allowed witnesses in civil cases, and the cost of all such proceedings
shall be paid from the General Fund of the Municipality.
SECTION 19C. MAYOR, CONSERVATOR OF PEACE, CHIEF EXECUTIVE.
   The Mayor shall be the chief conservator of the peace and shall see that all
laws and ordinances are enforced within the Municipality. He shall recommend to
Council such measures as he deems necessary or expedient. He shall see that all
terms and conditions imposed in favor of the Municipality or its inhabitants in
any franchise or contract to which the Municipality is a party are faithfully
kept and performed. The Mayor shall execute on behalf of the Municipality all
contracts, conveyances, evidence of indebtedness and all other instruments to
which the Municipality is a party. He shall have custody of the seal of the
Municipality which shall be the Mayor’s seal, and shall affix it to all the
above mentioned documents requiring the same; but the absence of such seal
therefrom shall not affect the validity of any such document. The Mayor shall
be recognized as the official and ceremonial head of the Municipality by the
Governor for military purposes, and by the Courts for the purpose of serving
processes.
SECTION 20. SALARY.
   The Council of the Municipality shall, no later than December 31 of the
first year following a general election of a Mayor, fix the salary of the
Mayor.
   The Council may maintain or increase the salary, in which case such change
shall take effect immediately and shall not thereafter be changed during the
term of the Mayor. In the event that the Council shall decrease the salary, the
change shall take effect starting at the next term of the Mayor.
   If the Council fails to take action by the aforementioned required date, the
compensation of the Mayor shall be fixed at three percent higher than the base
salary of the highest paid exempt employee of the Municipality appointed by the
Mayor and confirmed by the Council calculated from the preceding twelve months.
Such modification shall occur automatically without further action by the
Council, and shall not thereafter be changed during the term of the Mayor.
(Amended 5-6-2014; 11-7-2023)
SECTION 21. OFFICE.
   The Mayor shall be provided with a suitable office, and with necessary
stenographic assistance, of the same standard and in the same manner in which
Council shall make provisions for other offices of the Municipality.
CHAPTER V DIRECTOR OF FINANCE
SECTION 22. APPOINTMENT AND TERM.
   The Director of Finance shall, commencing on January 1, 1964, be appointed
by the Mayor with the concurrence of a majority of the members of Council. The
Director of Finance shall serve for a term not longer than the term of the
Mayor who appoints him/her.
(Amended 11-7-1978; 11-3-1998; 5-6-2003; 3-2-2004)
SECTION 23. VACANCY.
   When a vacancy occurs in the office of Director of Finance, the vacancy
shall be filled by an appointment made by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by
the vote of a majority of Council.
(Amended 11-7-1972; 5-6-2003)
SECTION 24. QUALIFICATIONS.
   The Director of Finance must have a bachelor’s degree with a major in
finance, accounting or a business-related field and five (5) years of financial
experience. However, the individual who holds the position of Director of
Finance on the date the foregoing requirements become effective shall be exempt
from such requirements.
(Amended 11-7-1972; 5-6-2014)
Editor’s note:
   The Ohio Supreme Court decided in Lima v. State, 122 Ohio St. 3d 155 (June
2009), that R.C. § 9.481
 prevents municipalities from requiring its employees to reside in the
municipality, other than as provided in R.C. § 9.481(B)(2)(b).
SECTION 25. REMOVAL.
   The Council may remove the Director of Finance for gross misconduct,
malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance, in, or for disqualification for
office, or for the conviction while in office of a crime involving moral
turpitude or for violation of his oath of office. Such removal shall not take
place without the concurrence of five (5) of the members of Council, nor until
the Director of Finance shall have been notified in writing of the charges
against him at least ten (10) full days in advance of any hearing upon such
charges, and until he or his counsel shall have been given an opportunity to be
heard, present evidence, and examine witnesses appearing in support of such
charge.
(Amended 11-7-1972)
SECTION 26. POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Director of Finance shall attend all meetings of Council.
   The Director of Finance of the Municipality shall be custodian of all moneys
of the Municipality and of all evidences of investments of Municipal moneys,
and shall keep and preserve the same in such manner and in such place or places
as shall be determined by Council. He shall keep the books of the Municipality,
exhibit accurate statements of all moneys received and expended, and a record
of all property owned by the Municipality, and the income derived therefrom,
and a record of all taxes and assessments levied or assessed by the
Municipality, and generally shall perform the fiscal duties and functions
discharged by the Auditor and Treasurer of a City.
   Without limitation as to the generality of his duties, the Director of
Finance shall examine all payrolls, bills and other claims against the
Municipality, and shall issue no warrant for the payment thereof unless he
shall find that they are in proper form, correctly computed and duly approved
and payable, and that the necessary appropriation from moneys in the Treasury
or in the process of collection has been made. He shall pay out moneys from the
Municipal Treasury as authorized by Council. The Director of Finance shall
perform all other duties required by him of this Charter or by ordinance of
Council.
   Not less than one hundred eighty (180) days before the end of each fiscal
year as established by the general laws of the State of Ohio, the Director of
Finance shall prepare and submit to Council estimates of the revenues and
expenditures of the Municipality for the next succeeding fiscal year.
(Amended 11-7-1978)
SECTION 27. SALARY.
   The Council of the Municipality shall have power to fix the salary of the
Director of Finance.
(Amended 11-7-1972)
SECTION 28. OFFICE.
   The Director of Finance shall be provided with a suitable office and with
the necessary stenographic and other assistance of the same standard and in the
same manner in which Council shall make provision for other offices of the
Municipality.
(Amended 11-7-1972)
CHAPTER VI CLERK OF COUNCIL
SECTION 29. APPOINTMENT AND TERM.
   The Clerk of Council shall be appointed by Council. He shall serve for a
term not longer than the term of the Council which appoints him.
(Amended 11-6-1973)
SECTION 30. VACANCY.
   When a vacancy occurs in the office of Clerk of Council, the vacancy shall
be filled by an appointment made by a majority of Council.
(Amended 11-6-1973)
SECTION 31. QUALIFICATIONS.
   The Clerk of Council shall be a resident of the Municipality at the time of
his appointment and shall continue to be a resident throughout his term of
office or Council shall remove him.
(Amended 11-6-1973)
Editor’s note:
   The Ohio Supreme Court decided in Lima v. State, 122 Ohio St. 3d 155 (June
2009), that R.C. § 9.481
 prevents municipalities from requiring its employees to reside in the
municipality, other than as provided in R.C. § 9.481(B)(2)(b).
SECTION 32. REMOVAL.
   The Council may remove the Clerk of Council, for gross misconduct,
malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance, in, or for disqualification for
office, or for the conviction while in office of a crime involving moral
turpitude. Such removal shall not take place without the concurrence of five
(5) of the members of Council, nor until the Clerk of Council shall have been
notified in writing of the charges against him at least ten (10) full days in
advance of any hearing upon such charge, and until he or his counsel shall have
been given an opportunity to be heard, present evidence, and examine witnesses
appearing in support of such charge.
(Amended 11-6-1973; 11-8-2005)
SECTION 33. POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Clerk of Council shall attend all meetings of Council and shall keep the
journal of Council and its records and perform such other duties as Council may
from time to time require. The Clerk of Council shall have custody of all
rules, by-laws, ordinances and resolutions passed or adopted by Council and
such records shall be available for the inspection of all interested persons.
(Amended 11-7-1978)
SECTION 34. SALARY.
   The Council of the Municipality shall have the power to fix the salary of
the Clerk of Council.
(Amended 11-6-1973)
SECTION 35. OFFICE.
   The Clerk of Council, at the discretion of Council, shall be provided with a
suitable office and with necessary stenographic and other assistance of the
same standard and in the same manner in which Council shall make provision for
other offices of the Municipality.
(Amended 11-6-1973)
CHAPTER VII DEPARTMENTS
SECTION 36. ESTABLISHMENT OF DEPARTMENTS.
   The Council may by ordinance provide for a Safety Department, a Service
Department, a Finance Department, a Law Department, a Recreation Department,
and such other departments, divisions, boards, commissions, officers and
employees as it may deem necessary from time to time, and determine the
organization and the duties of each. Council may by ordinance change, abolish,
combine, divide or rearrange any of such departments, divisions, boards,
commissions, offices or employments, and may authorize one person to be the
head of two or more departments, divisions, boards, commissions, offices or
employments.
SECTION 37. DIRECTOR OF LAW.
   The Director of Law shall be the chief law officer of the Municipality. He
shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the concurrence of a majority of the
members of Council, and shall be immediately responsible to Council for the
discharge of his respective duties. The Director of Law shall be duly admitted
to the practice of law in the State of Ohio, shall have been engaged in the
active practice of law continuously for a period of five (5) years next
preceding his appointment and shall have been a resident and qualified elector
of the Municipality for at least two (2) full years before he is elected to
office. The Director of Law shall prepare all contracts, bonds and other
instruments in writing in which the Municipality is concerned and shall serve
as legal counsel and attorney for the various officers and heads of the
Municipality in the performance of their official duties. When required to do
so by resolution of Council, the Director of Law shall prosecute or defend, as
the case may be, for and in behalf of the Municipality, all complaints, suits
and controversies in which the corporation is a party, and such other suits,
matters and controversies as he shall by resolution or ordinance be directed to
prosecute; but shall not be required to prosecute any action for the violation
of a municipal ordinance without first advising such action. In general and
without limitation as to particularity, the Director of Law shall discharge the
duties and functions of the Director of Law of a municipality.
   The Director of Law shall serve for a term not longer than the term of the
Mayor who appoints him/her. Council shall fix the rate and basis of
compensation of the Director of Law.
(Amended 11-6-1973; 11-3-1998; 5-6-2003; 3-2-2004)
Editor’s note:
   The Ohio Supreme Court decided in Lima v. State, 122 Ohio St. 3d 155 (June
2009), that R.C. § 9.481
 prevents municipalities from requiring its employees to reside in the
municipality, other than as provided in R.C. § 9.481(B)(2)(b).
SECTION 38. MUNICIPAL ENGINEER.
   The Municipal Engineer, who shall be duly admitted to the practice of civil
engineering in the State of Ohio, and shall have been engaged in active
practice of civil engineering continuously for a period of five (5) years next
preceding his appointment, shall be appointed by the Mayor with the concurrence
of a majority of the members of Council. The Municipal Engineer shall serve for
a term not longer than the term of the Mayor who appoints him/her. His salary
or rate of compensation shall be fixed, and his duties shall be as prescribed
by Council.
(Amended 11-3-1998; 5-6-2003; 3-2-2004)
SECTION 39. BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   The Municipal Building Inspector shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the
concurrence of a majority of the members of Council. The Building Inspector
shall serve for a term not longer than the term of the Mayor who appoints him/
her at a rate of compensation to be fixed by Council.
(Amended 11-3-1998; 5-6-2003; 3-2-2004)
SECTION 40. SAFETY DEPARTMENT.
   The Police Department, Fire Department and all other departments created
from time to time, having to do with the preservation of safety of persons and
property within the Municipality, shall be included within the Safety
Department of the Municipality; and until otherwise provided by Council, shall
be under the general supervision of the Mayor.
SECTION 40A. DEPARTMENT OF RECREATION.
   The Department of Recreation shall be headed by the Director of Recreation
who shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the concurrence of a majority of the
members of Council. The Director of Recreation shall serve a term not longer
than the term of the Mayor who appoints him/her. The duties, salary and
compensation for this position shall be determined by the Council.
(Enacted 3-2-2004)
CHAPTER VIII MUNICIPAL PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION 41. ORGANIZATION.
   The Municipal Planning Commission shall consist of (a) the Mayor, (b) one
member of Council, to be chosen by Council, and (c) five (5) citizens to be
chosen by Council, who at the date of their respective appointment are and have
for two (2) years last past been registered, qualified electors of the
Municipality, who hold no other elective or appointive offices or positions in
the municipal administration. The members of the Planning Commission shall
continue to possess the qualifications of registered, qualified electors of the
Municipality throughout their term of office, or they shall forfeit their
office. Failure of any member of the Commission to maintain said qualifications
shall not render void or ineffective any action of the Municipal Planning
Commission in which such member has participated.
(Amended 5-2-1995)
SECTION 42. TERM.
   The Mayor or the Mayor’s appointee and member of Council shall serve only
during the term of office for which the Mayor and member of Council have been
elected. The five (5) electors chosen by Council shall serve a term of five (5)
years each, the plan being that one elector’s term should expire every five (5)
years and a new appointment for a five (5) year term should be made every year
and shall serve no more than two (2) consecutive terms.
   Any vacancy occurring in the Commission shall be filled for the remainder of
the unexpired term in the same manner that the position was originally filled.
(Amended 5-2-1995; 11-2-2004)
SECTION 43. POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Municipal Planning Commission shall have such powers and duties as are
or may be conferred upon it by the general laws of the State of Ohio, and such
powers as may be conferred upon it by Council, concerning the plan, design,
location, removal, relocation, widening, extension and vacation of streets,
parkways, playgrounds, and other public places; the approval of plats for
subdivision of land; and the zoning of the Municipality for any lawful purpose.
They shall constantly endeavor to formulate plans for the future physical
development of the Municipality.
SECTION 44. COMPENSATION.
   The members of the Municipal Planning Commission shall serve without
compensation. With the prior approval of Council, any expense incurred by the
Commission or the members thereof in the performance of their duties, shall be
paid from the Municipal Treasury.
CHAPTER IX BOARD OF MUNICIPAL UTILITIES
SECTION 45. NUMBER AND TERM.
   The administrative authority over municipally owned utilities shall be
vested in a Board of five (5) members elected at large. The term of office of a
member of the Board shall be four (4) years. At the Municipal election in the
calendar year of 1951 five (5) members shall be elected to the Board; the three
(3) who receive the highest number of votes shall be elected for a term of four
(4) years, and the two (2) who receive the next highest number of votes shall
be elected for a term of two (2) years. Thereafter, members shall be elected
for a term of four (4) years to fill vacancies caused by the expiration of
terms of members of the Board as they may occur.
SECTION 46. QUALIFICATIONS.
   No person shall be a member of the Board of Municipal Utilities unless he
shall have been a resident of and a qualified elector of the Municipality
continuously for two (2) years immediately prior to his election or
appointment. No person shall serve as a member of the Board unless he shall
continue to be a resident of the Municipality throughout his term of office. No
member of the Board shall hold any other public office with the Municipality or
employment with the Municipality. No member of the Board shall be interested in
the profits or emoluments of any contract, job, work or service for which the
moneys of the Municipality are being expended.
   Any member of the Board who shall cease to possess, or violates any of the
qualifications herein enumerated shall forfeit his office; but failure of any
member of the Board to maintain said qualifications shall not render void or
ineffective any action of the Board in which such member has participated.
(Amended 6-8-1976)
SECTION 47. REMOVAL.
   The Council shall be the sole and final judge of the election and
qualifications of the members of the Board of Municipal Utilities. The Council
may expel or remove any member of the Board of Municipal Utilities for gross
misconduct, or for malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance, in, or
disqualification from holding office, or for conviction while in office of a
crime involving moral turpitude, or for violation of his oath of office, or for
persistent failure to abide by the rules of the Board of Municipal Utilities,
or for absence from three (3) consecutive regular meetings without justifiable
excuse. Such expulsion shall not take place except on concurrence of five (5)
of the members elected to Council, nor until the accused member shall have been
notified in writing of the charge preferred against him at least ten (10) days
in advance of any hearing upon such charge, and until he or his counsel shall
have been given an opportunity to appear before Council and be heard, present
evidence and examine witnesses appearing in support of the charge.
SECTION 48. VACANCIES.
   Whenever the office of a member of the Board of Municipal Utilities becomes
vacant, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term by a majority vote
of the remaining members of the Board. If the vacancy is not so filled within
thirty (30) days after it shall have occurred, the Mayor shall fill the vacancy
by appointment.
SECTION 49. MEETINGS AND ORGANIZATION.
   During the month of December following each regular municipal election, the
Board of Municipal Utilities shall meet at the Utilities Office Building for
the purpose of organization. Thereafter, said Board shall meet at such place as
may be prescribed by its rules, regulations and by-laws; but it shall hold
regular meetings at least twice during each calendar month of the year, with
the exception of the months of July and August, during each of which months the
Board may at its discretion dispense with one of its regular meetings. All
meetings of the Board, whether regular or special, shall be open to the public.
However, the Board may meet in closed executive session upon an affirmative
majority roll call vote of at least three members in order to discuss and act
on those matters as authorized by the general laws of the State of Ohio.
   At the organization meeting the Board shall choose one of its members as the
Chairman of the Board and shall choose a Clerk-Secretary of the Board who may
be a member of the Board or may be an employee of the Board. In the event of
the absence of the Chairman or the Clerk-Secretary of the Board at any meeting,
the members of the Board present shall designate one of the attending members
as acting Chairman, and shall designate a member or an employee of the Board as
acting Secretary, as circumstances may require. The Board shall keep a journal
of its proceedings which shall be available for the inspection of all
interested persons.
(Amended 3-2-2004; 8-7-2012)
SECTION 49A. DAY OF MEETINGS AND ORGANIZATION.
   As of January 1, 2013, the meetings of the Board of Municipal Utilities
shall not occur on the same days as regularly scheduled meetings of the Avon
Lake City Council.
(Enacted 8-7-2012)
SECTION 50. QUORUM.
   A majority of the members elected to the Board of Municipal Utilities shall
constitute a quorum to do business, but a less number may adjourn from time to
time and compel the attendance of absent members in such manner and under such
penalties as may be prescribed by the rules and regulations of the Board.
SECTION 51. POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board of Municipal Utilities shall manage, conduct, control and furnish
service of the water works, electric light and power plant, sanitary sewerage
treatment works and system, artificial or natural gas plant, or other similar
public utilities when and if owned by the Municipality.
   The Board may make such by-laws and regulations, and appoint or employ such
personnel as it may deem necessary for the safe, economical and efficient
management, operation and protection of such works, plants and public
utilities. Such by-laws and regulations when not repugnant to the ordinances of
the Municipality, the Constitution of the State of Ohio, and to this Charter,
shall have the same validity as municipal ordinances. For the purpose of paying
the expenses and of conducting and managing such works, plants and public
utilities, of making necessary additions thereto, and extensions thereof, and
of making necessary repairs thereon, such Board may assess and collect utility
rent charges of sufficient amount and in such manner as it may deem most
equitable upon all tenements and premises supplied with its utility services.
When such rents or charges are not paid, such Board may certify the same over
to the Auditor of Lorain County, Ohio, to be placed on the duplicate and
collected as other municipal taxes, or may collect the same by action at law in
the name of the Municipality.
   The Board of Municipal Utilities shall have the same powers and perform the
same duties as now are or may hereafter be possessed by or enjoined by law upon
Boards of Trustees of Public Affairs in villages and Directors of Public
Service in cities in respect to the public utilities under their direction and
supervision; and all powers and duties relating to water works shall extend to
and include any municipally owned public utility. The Board shall have such
other powers and duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or ordinance of
Council not inconsistent herewith.
SECTION 52. SALARY.
   Council shall determine and fix the salary of the members of the Board of
Municipal Utilities on or before the first day of June each year. If Council
determines to change the established salaries of the members of the Board of
Municipal Utilities in respect to a term of office, such change must be made by
Council on or before the first day of June, to be effective January 1st of the
following year; unless the salary date is so changed, it shall remain as last
fixed. The salary of a member of the Board of Municipal Utilities shall be
payable in substantially equal installments fixed by ordinance of Council.
(Amended 11-3-2009)
SECTION 53. SALARIES AND WAGES OF EMPLOYEES.
   See
Section 12.
CHAPTER X FINANCE
SECTION 54. FINANCE.
   The Director of Finance of the Municipality shall furnish to Council not
later than the second regular meeting of the month of January of each calendar
year an ordinance making appropriations for the expenditures of the
Municipality during the year. The Council shall adopt such ordinance in its
original form or with such revision as it may find proper. Such appropriation
ordinance shall be in such form and detail as may be required by the general
laws of the State of Ohio, and may be amended or supplemented by Council after
its passage, but appropriations shall not be made in excess of the estimated
revenues of the Municipality. The Council may make preliminary appropriations
for current expenses sufficient in amount to meet the current needs until the
annual appropriation ordinance has been enacted and is in effect.
   The passage of an ordinance authorizing the issue or sale of bonds or notes
of the Municipality shall constitute an appropriation of the proceeds thereof
to the purpose for which said bonds or notes are issued.
(Amended 11-7-1978)
SECTION 55. TRANSFERS AND BALANCES.
   The Council may transfer any part of an unencumbered balance of an
appropriation of any fund to any purpose or object for which the appropriation
for the current year has proven insufficient, or may authorize a transfer of
money to be made between items appropriated to the same office or department,
except as follows:
No transfer shall be made from any bond or note fund, except that the
unexpended balance of such fund no longer needed for the purpose for which such
fund was created shall be transferred to the fund from which said bonds or
notes are to be paid.
No transfer shall be made of money raised or appropriated for the payment of
any bond or note of the Municipality unless all indebtedness, interest and
obligations which can lawfully be paid from such money have been paid.
   At the close of each fiscal year, the unencumbered balance of each
appropriation, other than appropriations of bond and note funds, shall revert
to the fund from which it was appropriated and shall be subject to future
appropriation, except as otherwise provided in the next following paragraph of
this section.
   A fund to be known as the Improvement Fund may be maintained in the treasury
into which municipal moneys may be appropriated or allocated from time to time
by action of Council and which shall then become and remain separate and
distinct from general funds. Improvement Fund moneys may be advanced or
expended from time to time by action of Council for public improvements or
requirements not otherwise provided for.
SECTION 56. PAYMENT OF CLAIMS.
   No money shall be drawn from the treasury nor shall any obligation for the
expenditure of money be incurred, except pursuant to appropriation made by
Council.
   The Director of Finance shall have power to require evidence that the amount
of each claim is justly due and is in conformity to law and municipal
legislation relating thereto. For that purpose he may summon before him any
officer, agent or employee of any department of the Municipality, and examine
him under oath or affirmation relative thereto.
(Amended 11-7-1978)
SECTION 57. CUSTODY AND DEPOSIT OF FUNDS.
   The Council shall by ordinance provide for the custody of all funds of the
Municipality and for the deposit of funds as provided by the Uniform Depository
Act of the State of Ohio. All funds received on behalf of the Municipality by
any officer, employee or agent thereof, shall be promptly placed in the
depository bank by the Director of Finance. Council, however, may authorize
such sums as it deems proper to be kept in cash for the daily operations of any
department or office.
   Inactive funds in the treasury of the municipal depository may be invested
from time to time in such manner as is now or hereafter may be authorized by
the general laws of the State for the investment of inactive funds of
municipalities.
(Amended 11-6-1973)
SECTION 58. CERTIFICATION OF EXPENDITURES.
   No contract, agreement or other obligation involving the expenditure of
money in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be entered into, nor
shall any ordinance, resolution or order for the expenditure of money be passed
or issued by Council or be authorized by any officer of the Municipality,
unless the Director of Finance shall have certified in writing that the money
required for such contract, agreement, obligation or expenditure is in the
treasury to the credit of the fund from which it is to be drawn and not
appropriated for any other purpose. The provisions of this section shall not be
construed to prevent the making of contracts for a period extending beyond a
single fiscal year, when such contracts are otherwise authorized by the
Constitution of the State of Ohio, by this Charter or by general laws of the
State of Ohio. All moneys actually in the treasury to the credit of the fund
from which they are to be drawn and all moneys applicable to the payment of the
obligation or appropriation involved that are anticipated to come into the
treasury before the maturity of such contract, agreement, or obligation from
taxes, assessments, license fees or from the sales of service, products, or by-
products of any municipal undertaking, and moneys to be derived from lawfully
authorized bonds or notes shall for the purpose of certification be deemed to
be in the treasury to the credit of the appropriate fund, and shall be subject
to such certification.
(Amended 5-2-1989; 11-4-2008)
SECTION 59. COMPETITIVE BIDDING.
   Council or the Board of Municipal Utilities shall not authorize expenditures
in excess of that provided by the Ohio Revised Code, unless pursuant to
contract made with the person, firm or corporation whom Council or the Board of
Municipal Utilities determines to be the lowest and best responsible bidder,
after public advertising and receipt of bids in the manner provided in this
section and the ordinances of Council or, to the extent not in conflict with
such ordinances, the regulations of the Board of Municipal Utilities.
   Council or the Board of Municipal Utilities may authorize the expenditure of
funds exceeding that provided by the Ohio Revised Code without public bidding,
for the acquisition of real estate, for the discharge of non-contractual claims
against the Municipality or the Board of Municipal Utilities, for personal
services, for the joint use of facilities or exercise of power with other
political subdivisions, or for the products or services of public utilities,
including those municipally operated.
   An act performed by a particular entity, including an individual,
corporation, partnership or firm, which is, in effect, an economic service,
including either the intellectual or manual effort of that entity, not the
saleable product of his, her or its skill. This includes, without limitations,
the individual personal and professional services normally rendered by an
architect, an engineer and other professional person irrespective of whether
that skill is discharged through an individual’s corporation, partnership or
firm.
   Council or the Board of Municipal Utilities may also authorize the
expenditure of funds exceeding that provided by the Ohio Revised Code without
public bidding, when the expenditure is pursuant to a contract for the purchase
or lease of supplies, materials, equipment and/or services through employment
of cooperative purchase arrangements as authorized by the State.
   Council or the Board of Municipal Utilities may also authorize the
expenditure of funds exceeding that provided by the Ohio Revised Code without
public bidding, for any purpose for which contracts may be awarded by a
municipal corporation without advertisement or competitive bidding under the
general laws of the State of Ohio.
(Amended 4-11-1986; 5-2-1989; 5-2-1995; 5-6-2003; 11-4-2008; 11-5-13; 11-6-
2018)
SECTION 60. PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   Public improvements of all kinds may be made by the appropriate department
either by the direct employment of the necessary labor and purchase of supplies
in the manner herein provided, with separate account being kept as to each
improvement so made; or by contract let as provided in the next preceding
section, either for a closed, firm bid price, or upon a unit basis.
CHAPTER XI FRANCHISES
SECTION 61. FRANCHISES.
   The Council may by ordinance grant permission to any person, firm or
corporation to construct and operate a public utility in, on, across, under or
above any public street or ground within the Municipality. It may prescribe in
the ordinance the kind and quality of service or product to be furnished, the
rate or rates to be charged therefor, and any other terms conducive to the
public interest. Such grant may be amended or renewed in the manner and subject
to the provisions established by this Charter for original grants. Such grant,
amendment or renewal shall be for such period of time as Council may determine,
and shall not be perpetual or exclusive.
   No consent of the owner of property abutting on any public street or ground
shall be necessary to the effectiveness of any grant, amendment, or renewal,
unless the construction or operation of the public utility authorized thereby
is of such character as to constitute an additional burden upon such public
street or ground. All such grants, amendments or renewals shall be made subject
to the continuing right of Council to provide reasonable regulations for the
operation of such utilities with reference to such streets and public grounds,
including the right to require such reconstruction, relocation or
discontinuance of appliances, plant or equipment used in such streets or public
grounds as shall, in the opinion of Council, be necessary in the public
interest.
CHAPTER XII NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
SECTION 62. NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS.
   Nominations for elective offices of the Municipality shall be made by
petition, signed by registered electors of the Municipality in number not less
than prescribed by the general election laws of the State of Ohio. The
nomination of each candidate shall be made by separate petition. No primary
election shall be held for the selection of candidates for any elective office,
except as hereinafter set forth. No party mark or designation shall be used in
any Municipal election. The names of all candidates, who have been nominated by
petition for Municipal office shall be rotated, in as far as possible, in the
manner provided by the election laws of the State of Ohio.
   If a citizen who has filed his nomination petition properly for any of the
elective offices shall become disqualified for holding office or die between
(a) the last day for filing nomination petitions and (b) the day of election,
then provision shall be made on the day of election to fill the office for
which he was a candidate, so that the electors may vote for a write-in
candidate for the office for which he was a candidate; anything otherwise
provided herein to the contrary notwithstanding.
   All nominating petitions shall be filed with the Board of Elections not
later than the deadline established for participation in a primary election by
the election laws of the State of Ohio.
   If three (3) or more candidates file petitions for an office, other than the
office of council at large or the office of member of the Board of Municipal
Utilities, a primary election shall be held for that office, in accordance with
the laws of the State of Ohio in the year of and preceding the regular
election. The names of the two (2) candidates for that office receiving the
highest number of votes at the primary election shall appear at the regular
Municipal election.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the general laws of Ohio shall
govern the nomination and election of elective officers of the Municipality.
(Amended 11-6-1973; 5-2-1995; 11-6-2001; 11-2-2004; 8-7-2012)
CHAPTER XIII MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION 63. BONDS OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   The Council may require any officer or employee of the Municipality to give
bond to the Municipality for the faithful performance of his duties in such
amount as Council may determine, and with such surety or sureties as it may
approve; and may from time to time require additional bond or surety of any
officer or employee; and may provide that the premium for any such bond be paid
by the Municipality. The following officers and employees shall be required to
furnish bond, namely: Mayor, Municipal Clerk, Chief of Police, Building
Inspector, all officers and employees carrying firearms and all other officers
or employees having moneys of the Municipality in their custody or control,
including employees of the Board of Municipal Utilities.
(Amended 11-6-1973)
SECTION 64. PENSIONS, INSURANCE.
   No municipal fund or system of pensions for officers or employees of the
Municipality other than that provided under the Ohio Workmen’s Compensation and
Public Employees Retirement System Acts, or any State or Federal agencies with
which they may be merged or consolidated shall ever be created or established
unless or until Council shall so determine and provide by ordinance; but in its
discretion Council may at municipal expense provide health, accident or life
insurance within limits determined by Council for all full-time employees of
the Municipality.
(Amended 11-7-1978)
SECTION 65. CIVIL SERVICE.
   The Mayor, with the concurrence of a majority of Council, shall appoint a
Civil Service Commission consisting of three (3) electors of the City not
holding other Municipal office or appointment, to serve for a term of six (6)
years. A vacancy occurring during the term of any member of the Commission
shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner authorized for an original
appointment.
   The Civil Service Commission shall designate one of its members as
Chairperson and may appoint a Secretary who need not be a member of the
Commission and who may hold other Municipal office or appointment.
   Members of the Civil Service Commission shall serve without compensation
unless otherwise provided by ordinance. A sufficient sum shall be appropriated
by Council to pay expenses of the Commission and to otherwise carry out the
civil service provisions.
   The Civil Service Commission shall provide by rule for the qualification and
promotion of personnel in the administrative service of the City according to
merit, to be ascertained, insofar as practical, by open competitive
examinations, as required by the State Constitution. The Commission shall
review the rules every three (3) years. No amendments to the Commission’s rules
shall be made by the Civil Service Commission nor shall any rule be repealed
nor any new rule adopted at the same meeting at which it is proposed. No final
action to amend, repeal or supplement rules shall be taken in less than seven
(7) days after its proposal. All amendments to rules shall be subject to the
approval of Council prior to becoming effective.
   The Civil Service Commission shall recommend to Council for their approval
the exempt or unclassified positions in the City with City Council’s approval.
The Commission’s determination of exempt or unclassified positions shall be
guided by the laws of the State of Ohio.
   The Commission shall provide for appeals from the action of the Mayor in any
case of transfer, reduction or removal, and the action of the Commission shall
be final. The Commission shall keep a record of its proceedings and
examinations, which shall be open to public inspection.
   The Mayor, at any time, may suspend any member of the Civil Service
Commission for inefficiency, neglect of duty, malfeasance, misfeasance,
nonfeasance, incapacity or incompetency. The suspended Civil Service Commission
member may request a hearing before City Council. The suspension shall not
become final without the concurrence of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of
Council.
(Amended 5-2-1995)
SECTION 66. EFFECT OF CHARTER.
   All general laws of the State of Ohio as now or hereafter enacted which are
not in conflict with this Charter, as now enacted or hereafter amended, or with
any ordinance enacted hereunder shall apply to the government of the
Municipality; and all ordinances, resolutions and by-laws in force in the
Municipality at the time when this Charter takes effect which are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter shall continue in full force
and effect until amended or repealed.
   The taking effect of this Charter shall not affect any pre-existing rights
of the Municipality, nor any right or liability or pending suit or provision
either on behalf of or against the Municipality, nor any contract entered into
by the Municipality, nor any franchise granted by the Municipality, nor pending
proceedings for the authorization of public improvements or the levy of
assessments therefor.
SECTION 67. MILITARY SERVICE.
   Except as hereinafter in this section provided, if a person holding an
elective office in the Municipality shall be called into active military
service during his or her elective term, his or her office shall be filled as
provided by this Charter. The person filling such office may hold such office
until the expiration of the elective term or until the person he or she
replaced is able to resume such office, whichever shall first occur. In case of
the death, resignation or removal of a substitute office holder, another
substitute office holder shall be selected in accordance with the foregoing
procedure. If, prior to the expiration of the elective term, an elected office
holder who was called into active military service becomes able to resume his
or her office, he or she shall be permitted to do so. Membership in the
military reserve or State Militia shall not create a vacancy in office unless
the office holder is called to full time military service for a period
exceeding ninety (90) consecutive days.
(Amended 11-2-2004; 5-6-2014)
SECTION 68. WORDS HELD TO BE INCLUSIVE.
   Masculine pronouns used in this Charter shall be construed to include the
feminine pronoun, and the singular number shall be construed to include the
plural number whenever the context shall require.
SECTION 69. LIMITATION ON INDUSTRIAL AREA.
   Any other provision in this Charter to the contrary notwithstanding, the
territory within the Municipality which is zoned for industrial uses, as
defined by the Zoning Ordinance in effect on January 1, 1952, shall not be
increased in area by action of Council unless such increase is approved by a
majority of the votes cast by the electors of the Municipality on the question
of such increase.
   The Council of the Municipality may, upon the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, increase the territory within the Municipality which is zoned for
industrial use by rezoning for such use the following described property, or
any portion thereof:
Situated in the City of Avon Lake, County of Lorain, State of Ohio, a part of
Avon Township Section Number 17, and being a part of permanent parcel numbers
04-00-017-102-067, 04-00-017-102-056, 04-00-017-102-017, 04-00-017-102-088 and
04-00-017-102-058 that are of record in May of 1994, at the Lorain County Tax
Map Department, and being more fully described as follows:
   Beginning at a monument box found set at the intersection of the centerline
of Belmont Drive (50 feet wide), and the centerline of Avon Belden Road - State
Route 83 (60 feet wide);
   Thence southerly along the centerline of Avon Belden Road, a distance of
about 140 feet to a point;
   Thence westerly, in part along the southerly line of permanent parcel number
04-00-017-102-052, a distance of about 600 feet to the principal place of
beginning, the southwest corner of permanent parcel number 04-00-017-102-052;
   Thence southerly and crossing the following permanent parcel numbers, 04-00-
017-102-058, 04-00-017-102-088, 04-00-017-102-017 and 04-00-017-102-067, a
distance of about 854 feet to a point in the southerly line of permanent parcel
number 04-00-017-102-067, said point being 600 feet westerly from the
centerline of Avon Belden Road;
   Thence westerly along the southerly lines of permanent parcel number 04-00-
017-102-056, and in part 04-00-017-102-067, a distance of about 1,731 feet to
the southwest corner of permanent parcel number 04-00-017-102-056, said corner
being also in the westerly line of Section Number 17;
   Thence northerly along the westerly line of Section Number 17, and the
following westerly lines of permanent parcel numbers 04-00-017-102-056, 04-00-
017-102-017, 04-00-017-102-088 and 04-00-017-102-058, a distance of about 1,592
feet to the northwest corner of permanent parcel number 04-00-017-102-058;
   Thence easterly along the northerly line of permanent parcel number 04-00-
017-102-058, a distance of about 1,728 feet to the northeast corner of
permanent parcel number 04-00-017-102-058;
   Thence southerly along the easterly line of permanent parcel number 04-00-
017-102-058, a distance of about 723 feet to the principal place of beginning,
containing about 63 acres, more or less.
(Amended 11-8-1994)
SECTION 69A. PROPERTY FOR FUTURE INDUSTRIAL ZONING.
   The Council of the Municipality may, upon the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, increase the territory within the Municipality which is zoned for
industrial use by rezoning for such use the following described property, or
any portion thereof:
   (a)   Situated in the Municipality of Avon Lake, County of Lorain and State
of Ohio, and known as being a part of Original Avon Township Section No. 8,
bounded and described as follows:
Bounded southerly, by the northerly line of the Industrial District as
heretofore established in said Original Avon Township Section No. 8; bounded
westerly, by the center line of Moore Road; bounded northerly, by the center
line of Webber Road; bounded easterly, by the easterly line of said Original
Avon Township Section No. 8, excepting from the above described premises, the
parcel of land conveyed by Flossie A. Weiss and Louis C. Weiss to the Village
of Avon Lake by deed dated December 8, 1952, and recorded in Volume 559, page
184 of Lorain County Records.
(Enacted 11-8-1960)
   (b)   Situated in the City of Avon Lake, County of Lorain, and State of
Ohio, and bounded northerly by Lake Erie; bounded easterly by the present “I”
Industrial District; bounded southerly by the northerly property line of land
conveyed to the Village of Avon Lake by deed dated February 14, 1948, and
recorded in Vol. 434, Page 278, of Lorain County Records and presently in use
as the site of the Avon Lake Sewage Treatment Plant; bounded westerly by the
westerly property line, and its northerly extension to Lake Erie, of land
conveyed to Eugene and Martha Haussman as recorded in Vol. 314, Page 445, of
Lorain County Records, and being about 460 feet westerly of the present “I”
Industrial District at the point where said westerly boundary intersects the
low water mark of Lake Erie; and in addition to the above described area, that
portion of land now owned by the Cleveland Electric Illuminating Company now
being used for industrial purposes and being the property that is bounded
northerly by Lake Road; bounded easterly by property now owned by the
Frielingsdorf Company; bounded southerly by the right-of-way of Electric
Boulevard (proposed); bounded westerly by the present “I” Industrial District,
and the combined area of portions of all land herein described being not more
than 21 acres.
(Enacted 5-3-1966)
   (c)   Situated in the City of Avon Lake, County of Lorain, State of Ohio and
being a part of the Avon Park Subdivision Proposed, and the entire Krogh-Barr
Syndicate’s Avon Beach Allotment Proposed and bounded on the north by Electric
Boulevard, on the east by the transmission line right of way of petitioner
known as its Avon Lines, on the south by the commercial zoning fronting on
Walker Road, and on the west by Norfolk and Western Railway Company right of
way.
(Enacted 5-4-1971)
SECTION 70. PARTIAL INVALIDITY.
   The determination that any section or part thereof of this Charter is
invalid, shall not invalidate nor impair the force or effect of any other
section or part thereof, except to the extent that such other section or part
thereof is dependent for its operation upon the part declared invalid; and in
the event any section or sections or parts thereof shall be held invalid, then
the laws of the State of Ohio pertaining to municipalities and dealing with the
same subject matter shall apply.
SECTION 71. INTERPRETATION.
   In order that a ready means may be at hand for reconciling any conflicts,
resolving any inconsistencies and clarifying any obscurities which may be
discovered in the language of this Charter; the power is hereby vested in
Council to interpret the various sections and parts of this Charter in harmony
with the spirit thereof, by ordinance of said Council adopted by the
affirmative vote of five (5) or more of its members.
SECTION 72. AMENDMENT TO CHARTER; CHARTER REVIEW COMMISSION.
   (a)   There shall be a review of the Charter by a Charter Review Commission
beginning in the calendar year of 1973 and each and every five years
thereafter. The Charter Review Commission shall consist of nine (9) members,
including at least one member from each ward, all of whom shall be residents of
the Municipality of at least two (2) or more years immediately preceding their
appointment. Five (5) of the members shall be appointed by the Mayor, and four
(4) of the members (one from each ward) shall be appointed by the City Council.
The Council of the City of Avon Lake, Ohio shall submit to the electors, not
later than the next succeeding regular election, any proposed alterations,
revisions or amendments to the Charter by a majority vote of the appointed
members of the Charter Review Commission.
(Enacted 11-7-1972; Amended 11-3-1998; 11-4-2003; 11-2-2004; 11-8-2005; 11-4-
2008)
   (b)   The Council may by a vote of at least five (5) of its members, submit
to the electors of the Municipality amendments to this Charter; and, upon
petition being presented to Council setting forth a proposed amendment, signed
by not less than that number of resident, qualified electors of the
Municipality which equals fifteen (15) per cent of the number of registered,
qualified electors of the Municipality on the date of the last election in the
Municipality as determined by the Board of Elections of Lorain County, Ohio,
such proposed amendment shall be submitted to the electors of the Municipality
for adoption or rejection. The submission of a proposed amendment to the
electors shall be governed by the provisions of the Constitution of the State
of Ohio, and to such extent as the Constitution shall fail to provide therefor,
the Council shall determine the manner of such submission. If any amendment so
submitted is approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon, its
provisions shall be incorporated into this Charter; except that if two (2) or
more inconsistent amendments on the same subject matter are submitted at the
same election, only the one receiving the largest affirmative vote, not less
than a majority, of the votes cast on the subject matter, shall become
incorporated into this Charter.
   (c)   The Charter Review Commission shall be appointed by February 1 of the
calendar year in which it is to serve and the Charter Review Commission shall
serve for a term not longer than one (1) year. The first meeting of the Charter
Review Commission shall take place not later than thirty (30) days after the
Charter Review Commission has been appointed.
(Enacted 11-3-1998; Amended 11-6-2018)
SECTION 73. TIME OF TAKING EFFECT.
   For the purpose of electing officers and holding and conducting municipal
elections, this Charter shall take effect from the time of its approval by the
electors of the Municipality; but for all other purposes, it shall take effect
on the first day of January in the year 1952.
SECTION 74. REQUIREMENT, TERMS AND PROCEDURE FOR BINDING ARBITRATION.
   (a)   Not less than ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of any existing
work and wage agreement, the City of Avon Lake or the Avon Lake Fire Fighters
Association, collectively or separately, shall notify the other party to begin
negotiations for a new agreement. Upon completion of ninety (90) days of
negotiations, either the City of Avon Lake or the Avon Lake Fire Fighters
Association, upon written notice, which is to be delivered by certified mail,
return receipt requested, date delivered to be considered as date received, to
the chairmen of any or all negotiating parties, may demand final and binding
arbitration on all unresolved issues. The decision of the Board of Arbitration
shall be final and binding on both parties.
   (b)   The Board of Arbitration shall be composed of three (3) persons who
shall be selected as follows:
      (1)   One (1) arbitrator shall be appointed by the City of Avon Lake and
one (1) arbitrator shall be appointed by the Avon Lake Fire Fighters
Association, within fourteen (14) days from the date of the written request for
arbitration. The third impartial member shall be appointed upon mutual
agreement of the two (2) appointed arbitrators within five (5) days after the
appointment of the two (2) arbitrators, and he shall be the Chairman of the
Board of Arbitration.
      (2)   In the event the two (2) arbitrators cannot agree on the selection
of the third arbitrator within the said five (5) days, then either arbitrator
shall request the American Arbitration Association to furnish a list of three
(3) members of said association from which the third arbitrator shall be
selected. Within five (5) days after the receipt of the list, each arbitrator
shall strike the name of one (1) arbitrator from the list and the remaining
arbitrator shall be the third member of the Board of Arbitration and shall
assume the position of Chairman. The order of striking shall be determined by
the toss of a coin by one arbitrator in the presence of the other.
      (3)   The American Arbitration Association shall be notified of the
arbitrator chosen from the list and the arbitration proceedings and hearings
shall begin as soon as possible thereafter and shall be conducted in accordance
with the “Voluntary Labor Arbitration Rules” of the American Arbitration
Association. Each party shall bear the expense of its own arbitrator and both
parties shall equally share the expense of the third arbitrator chairman, court
reporter and other expenses incurred as a result of the arbitration hearings.
   (c)   The Board of Arbitration shall have jurisdiction to hear and decide
any unresolved issue not agreed upon in negotiation by and between the City of
Avon Lake and the Avon Lake Fire Fighters Association, including, but not
limited to, existing wage rates, the establishment of new wage rates, benefits
and working conditions, any existing ordinance notwithstanding.
   (d)   Within five (5) days after the arbitrator has been appointed the City
of Avon Lake and the Avon Lake Fire Fighters Association shall submit their
final offer on each unresolved issue to the Board of Arbitration. Upon hearing
evidence and testimony from each party, the Board of Arbitration shall select
the final offer of one (1) of the parties on each of the unresolved issues and
make an award or order incorporating and determining all of unresolved issues
without modification. A vote of a majority of the members of the Board of
Arbitration shall be binding and each of said members shall be required to vote
on each unresolved issue for a final determination. The Board of Arbitration
shall render its award or order within five (5) days after the hearings are
concluded.
   (e)   In making its final award or order, the Board of Arbitration shall
give careful consideration to the following factors:
      (1)   The lawful authority of the City of Avon Lake.
      (2)   The health, welfare and safety of the citizens of Avon Lake and the
financial ability of the City of Avon Lake to meet its current financial
obligations.
      (3)   A comparison of the wages, hours, benefits and conditions of
employment of other employee organizations in Ohio performing the same or
similar services in both the public and private sectors.
   (f)   The Avon Lake Fire Fighters Association shall not call, sanction,
encourage, finance, assist or participate in any strike, slowdown, walkout,
concerted sick leave, mass resignation, work stoppage, picketing or job action.
Any interference with operation of this section by the Avon Lake Fire Fighters
Association shall cancel all of the provisions of this Charter amendment and
any violation of this section by a member of the Avon Lake Fire Fighters
Association shall be deemed to be proper cause for disciplinary action or
discharge by the City of Avon Lake.
   (g)   The City of Avon Lake shall not lock out, lay off or otherwise
discipline any member of the Avon Lake Fire Fighters Association, during the
negotiation and arbitration procedures set forth in this Charter amendment.
Only after the Board of Arbitration has rendered its final award or order may
the City of Avon Lake take appropriate action for violations by members of the
Avon Lake Fire Fighters Association, in reference to subsection (f) hereof.
   (h)   Should any section or provision of this Charter amendment be declared
by the Courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect
the validity of this Charter amendment as a whole, or any part thereof, other
than those parts so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
   (i)   This Charter amendment shall stay in full force and effect until
changed by mutual agreement of the parties.
(Enacted 11-2-1982)
PART TWO - ADMINISTRATION CODE
TITLE TWO - General Provisions
   
Chap. 202. Code of Ordinances.
   
Chap. 204. Official Standards.
   
Chap. 206. Wards and Boundaries.
   
Chap. 208. General Fee Schedule.
   
Chap. 210. Assessments.
   
Chap. 212. American with Disabilities Act.
TITLE FOUR - Legislation
   
Chap. 220. Council.
   
Chap. 222. Ordinances and Resolutions.
TITLE SIX - Administration
   
Chap. 230. Mayor.
   
Chap. 232. Finance Director.
   
Chap. 234. Employment and Use of Outside Counsel.
   
Chap. 238. Safety Department.
   
Chap. 240. Police Department.
   
Chap. 242. Fire Department.
   
Chap. 244. Public Works Department.
   
Chap. 247. Urban Forester.
   
Chap. 248. Recreation Department.
   
Chap. 249. Communications & Technology Department
   
Chap. 250. Avon Lake Community Improvement Corporation.
   
Chap. 251. Community Development Department.
   
Chap. 252. Purchasing Procedures.
   
Chap. 254. Conflicts of Interest.
   
Chap. 256. Personnel Administration.
   
Chap. 258. Wage and Salary Administration.
   
Chap. 260. Employees Generally.
   
Chap. 268. Subpoenas.
TITLE EIGHT - Boards, Commissions and Committees
   
Chap. 270. Audit Commission.
   
Chap. 272. Avon Lake Historical Preservation Commission.
   
Chap. 274. City Records Commission.
   
Chap. 276. Civil Service Commission.
   
Chap. 278. Communications and Technology Commission.
   
Chap. 280. Community Relations Board.
   
Chap. 282. Economic Development Advisory Board.
   
Chap. 284. Environmental Affairs Advisory Board.
   
Chap. 286. Parks and Recreation Commission.
   
Chap. 288. Tree Commission.
TITLE TEN - Judiciary
   
Chap. 298. Municipal Court.
TITLE TWO - General Provisions
   
Chap. 202. Code of Ordinances.
   
Chap. 204. Official Standards.
   
Chap. 206. Wards and Boundaries.
   
Chap. 208. General Fee Schedule.
   
Chap. 210. Assessments.
   
Chap. 212. American with Disabilities Act.
CHAPTER 202: CODE OF ORDINANCES
Section
202.01 Designation; citation; headings
202.02 General definitions
202.03 Rules of construction
202.04 Revivor; effect of re-enactment, amendment or repeal
202.05 Construction of section references
202.06 Separability
202.99 Penalty
§ 202.01 DESIGNATION; CITATION; HEADINGS.
   This volume consists of all ordinances and resolutions of a permanent and
general nature of the City of Avon Lake, revised and consolidated into
component codes, titles, chapters and sections, and as such shall be known and
designated as the Avon Lake Code of Ordinances, for which designation “code of
ordinances” may be substituted. Code, title, chapter and section headings do
not constitute any part of the law as contained in the code of ordinances.
(R.C. § 1.01)
§ 202.02 GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AND. May be read “or”, and “or” may be read “and”, if the sense requires it.
   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject
of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other owner of
property.
   BOND. Includes an undertaking.
   CHILD. Includes child by adoption.
   COUNCIL. The legislative authority of the municipality.
   COUNTY. Lorain County, Ohio.
   FIRE CHIEF. Shall include the Chief of the Fire Department if such Fire
Department has been established in the municipality, and shall include the Fire
Prevention Officer if no Fire Department has been established in the
municipality.
   IMPRISONED. Shall have the same meaning as in R.C. § 1.05.
   INTERNET. The international computer network of both federal and non-federal
interoperable packet switched data networks, including the graphical subnetwork
known as the world wide web.
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves or
as a servant, agent or employee.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of incorporeal nature.
   LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY. The legislative authority of the municipality.
   MAY. The action referred to is permissive.
   MUNICIPALITY or CITY. When used in this code of ordinances, shall denote the
City of Avon Lake, Ohio.
   O.A.C. Refers to the Ohio Administrative Code.
   OATH. Includes affirmation; and “swear” includes affirm.
   OF UNSOUND MIND. The person lacks the relevant mental capacity.
   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner or
tenant in common of the whole or part of the property.
   PERSON. Includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership and association.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real property.
   PLAN OF SEWERAGE, SYSTEM OF SEWERAGE, SEWER and SEWERS. Includes sewers,
sewage disposal works and treatment plants, and sewage pumping stations,
together with facilities and appurtenances necessary and proper therefor.
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates and interests.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes boards of education; the municipal, county, state
or federal government, its officers or an agency thereof; or any duly
authorized public official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance or any other place for the sale
of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail; and “certified mail” includes
registered mail.
   REVISED CODE or R.C. Refers to the Ohio Revised Code.
   SHALL. The action referred to is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of the street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   STATE. The State of Ohio.
   STREET. Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts and all other public thoroughfares within the municipality.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of the
premises, alone or with others.
   UNDERTAKING. Includes a bond.
   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
   WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; principals,
agents and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   WRITING. Includes printing.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Include any representation of words, letters, symbols
or figures; this provision does not affect any law relating to signatures.
   YEAR. Twelve consecutive months.
(R.C. §§ 1.02, 1.05, 1.44, 1.59, 701.01)
§ 202.03 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   Common and technical use. Words and phrases shall be read in context
and construed according to the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and
phrases that have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by
legislative definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
(R.C. § 1.42)
   (b)   Singular and plural; gender; tense. As used in this code of
ordinances, unless the context otherwise requires:
      (1)   The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the
singular.
      (2)   Words of one gender include the other genders.
      (3)   Words in the present tense include the future tense.
(R.C. § 1.43)
   (c)   Computation of time.
      (1)   The time within which an act is required by law to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day; except that when
the last day falls on Sunday or a legal holiday, then the act may be done on
the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal holiday.
      (2)   When a public office, in which an act required by law is to be
performed, is closed to the public for the entire day that constitutes the last
day for doing the act or before its usual closing time on that day, the act may
be performed on the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal
holiday.
      (3)   “Legal holiday,” as used in divisions (c)(1) and (c)(2) of this
section, means the following days:
         A.   The first day of January, known as New Year’s Day;
         B.   The third Monday in January, known as Martin Luther King, Jr.
Day;
         C.   The third Monday in February, known as President’s Day;
         D.   The day designated in the “Act of June 28, 1968”, 82 Stat. 250, 5
U.S.C. 6103, as amended, for the commemoration of Memorial Day;
         E.   The nineteenth day of June, known as Juneteenth day;
         F.   The fourth day of July, known as Independence Day;
         G.   The first Monday in September, known as Labor Day;
         H.   The second Monday in October, known as Columbus Day;
         I.   The eleventh day of November, known as Veteran’s Day;
         J.   The fourth Thursday in November, known as Thanksgiving Day;
         K.   The twenty-fifth day of December, known as Christmas Day; and
         L.   Any day appointed and recommended by the Governor of this state
or the President of the United States as a holiday.
      (4)   If any day designated in this section as a legal holiday falls on a
Sunday, the next succeeding day is a legal holiday.
(R.C. § 1.14)
      (5)   When an act is to take effect or become operative from and after a
day named, no part of that day shall be included. If priority of legal rights
depends upon the order of events on the same day, the priority shall be
determined by the times in the day at which they respectively occurred.
(R.C. § 1.15)
      (6)   If a number of months is to be computed by counting the months from
a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding
month as the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there
are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the period ends
on the last day of that month.
(R.C. § 1.45)
§ 202.04 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF RE-ENACTMENT, AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (a)   The repeal of a repealing provision of this code of ordinances does
not revive the provision originally repealed nor impair the effect of any
saving clause therein.
(R.C. § 1.57)
   (b)   The re-enactment, amendment or repeal of this code of ordinances does
not, except as provided in division (c) of this section:
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the provision or any prior action
taken thereunder.
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded or incurred thereunder.
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal.
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding or remedy in respect of any
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment; and the
investigation, proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced,
and the penalty, forfeiture or punishment imposed, as if the provision had not
been repealed or amended.
   (c)   If the penalty, forfeiture or punishment for any offense is reduced by
a re-enactment or amendment of this code of ordinances, the penalty, forfeiture
or punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to this code
of ordinances as amended.
(R.C. § 1.58)
§ 202.05 CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
   (a)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, or of divisions or subdivisions of a
section, such reference shall be construed to mean a violation of any provision
of the section, sections, divisions or subdivisions included in the reference.
   (b)   References in this code of ordinances to action taken or authorized
under designated sections of this code of ordinances include, in every case,
action taken or authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is
superseded by this code of ordinances.
(R.C. § 1.23)
   (c)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless the subject matter be
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
(R.C. § 1.55)
§ 202.06 SEPARABILITY.
   If any provisions of a section of this code of ordinances or the application
thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not
affect other provisions or applications of the section or related sections
which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to
this end the provisions are severable.
(R.C. § 1.50)
§ 202.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Whenever, in this code of ordinances or in any ordinance of the city,
any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the failure to do
any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is otherwise
provided, whoever violates any such provision shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $500, a term of imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation continues or occurs.
   (b)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code of ordinances shall not subject the officer
or employee to the penalty imposed for a violation unless a penalty is
specifically provided for the failure.
Statutory reference:
   Ordinance violations and penalties, see R.C. § 715.67
CHAPTER 204: OFFICIAL STANDARDS
Section
204.01 Datum line; grade levels
204.02 City seal
204.03 Civic flower
Editor’s note:
   The State of Ohio operates on Eastern Daylight Savings Time from 2:00 a.m.
of the first Sunday in April until 2:00 a.m. of the last Sunday in October.
Congress on March 22, 1966, passed the Uniform Time Act requiring uniform
observance throughout the nation of Daylight Savings Time starting in 1967,
except that a state legislature could exempt the entire state from Daylight
Savings Time or divide a state into not more than two parts, each with a
different time standard. The Ohio legislature, through inaction, has elected to
observe Eastern Daylight Savings Time throughout the State of Ohio.
   On August 8, 2005, the Energy Policy Act of 2005 was enacted. This Act
changed the time change dates for Daylight Saving Time in the United States.
Beginning in 2007, the State of Ohio begins Daylight Saving Time at 2:00 a.m.
on the second Sunday in March and reverts to standard time at 2:00 a.m. on the
first Sunday in November. The Secretary of Energy will report the impact of
this change to Congress. Congress retains the right to resume the 2005 Daylight
Saving Time schedule once the Department of Energy study is complete.
§ 204.01 DATUM LINE; GRADE LEVELS.
   All grade levels within the city shall be measured from the United States
Geological Survey marker nearest to the proposed work or construction.
(Ord. 1233, passed 11-24-1958)
§ 204.02 CITY SEAL.
   (a)   The following pictured emblem is hereby adopted as the emblem to
appear with the name of the city and the designation of the city official as
the official seal of the City of Avon Lake:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3186.jpg]
   (b)   The seal shall be used by the Mayor, the Clerk of Council, and any
other municipal official requiring a seal and shall be affixed where necessary
to all transcripts, orders, certificates and other papers requiring
authentication or to represent the city in official documents, the Internet or
on public assets.
(Res. 47-2018, passed 3-26-2018)
§ 204.03 CIVIC FLOWER.
   The marigold is hereby designated the civic flower of the city.
(Ord. 104-70, passed 9-28-1970)
CHAPTER 206: WARDS AND BOUNDARIES
Section
206.01 Division of city
206.02 First Ward
206.03 Second Ward
206.04 Third Ward
206.05 Fourth Ward
206.06 Harbor line in Lake Erie
§ 206.01 DIVISION OF CITY.
   The city is hereby divided into four wards. The boundaries of such wards
shall be as provided in subsequent sections of this chapter.
(Ord. 65-89, passed 4-25-1989)
§ 206.02 FIRST WARD.
   The First Ward shall contain the territory bounded and described as follows:
      (1)   Beginning on a point being the intersection of the northerly
corporation line and the easterly corporation line of the City of Avon Lake at
the shoreline of Lake Erie;
      (2)   Thence heading southerly along the eastern corporation line to the
southern corporation line of the City of Avon Lake;
      (3)   Thence westerly along the southern corporation line to Lear Road;
      (4)   Thence northerly along the centerline of Lear Road to Lake Road;
      (5)   Thence easterly along the centerline of Lake Road to North Point
Drive;
      (6)   Thence northerly along the centerline of North Point Drive
extending from the point of its closest proximity to the shoreline of Lake
Erie; and
      (7)   Thence easterly along the north corporation line back to the point
of beginning herein containing properties to be known as Ward 1.
(Ord. 165-98, passed 10-12-1998; Ord. 24-93, passed 7-8-2024)
§ 206.03 SECOND WARD.
   The Second Ward shall contain the territory bounded and described as
follows:
      (1)   Beginning on a point being the northerly corporation line of the
City of Avon Lake at the shoreline of Lake Erie and also being an extension out
into Lake Erie of North Point Avenue;
      (2)   Thence southerly to Lake Road;
      (3)   Thence westerly along the centerline of Lake Road to Lear Road;
      (4)   Thence southerly along the centerline of Lear Road to the southern
corporation line of the City of Avon Lake;
      (5)   Thence westerly along the southern corporation line of the City of
Avon Lake to Avon Belden Road;
      (6)   Thence northerly along the centerline of Avon Belden Road to Walker
Road;
      (7)   Thence easterly along the centerline of Walker Road to Avon Point
Avenue;
      (8)   Thence northerly along the centerline of Avon Point Avenue to Gable
Ditch;
      (9)   Thence southeasterly along Gable Ditch to where an extension of Fay
Avenue would intersect Gable Ditch;
      (10)   Thence northerly along the centerline of Fay Avenue to the
intersection with Division Road;
      (11)   Thence easterly along the centerline of Division Road to Sunset
Road;
      (12)   Thence northerly along the centerline of Sunset Road to Lake Road;
      (13)   Thence westerly along the centerline of Lake Road to the
intersection with Gable Ditch;
      (14)   Thence north along Gable Ditch to the shoreline of Lake Erie and
also being an extension out into Lake Erie; and
      (15)   Thence easterly along the shoreline of Lake Erie to the northern
point of an extension of North Point Road at its closest point to the Lake Erie
shoreline and the point of beginning herein containing properties to be known
as Ward 2.
(Ord. 165-98, passed 10-12-1998; Ord. 24-93, passed 7-8-2024)
§ 206.04 THIRD WARD.
   The Third Ward shall contain the territory bounded and described as follows:
      (1)   Beginning at the intersection of Walker Road and Avon Point Avenue;
      (2)   Thence westerly along the centerline of Walker Road to Moorewood
Road;
      (3)   Thence northerly along the centerline of Moorewood Avenue to
Canterbury Road;
      (4)   Thence easterly along the centerline of Canterbury Road to Inwood
Boulevard;
      (5)   Thence northerly along the centerline of Inwood Boulevard to
Redwood Boulevard;
      (6)   Thence westerly along the centerline of Redwood Boulevard to Moore
Road;
      (7)   Thence northerly along the centerline of Moore Road to the north
corporation line of the City of Avon Lake, also being the shoreline of Lake
Erie; and
      (8)   Thence easterly along the shoreline of Lake Erie, and the north
corporation line of the City of Avon Lake, back to the place of beginning
herein containing properties to be known as Ward 3.
(Ord. 165-98, passed 10-12-1998; Ord. 24-93, passed 7-8-2024)
§ 206.05 FOURTH WARD.
   The Fourth Ward shall contain the territory bounded and described as
follows:
      (1)   Beginning at the northwesterly corporation line of the City of Avon
Lake at a point being the shoreline of Lake Erie;
      (2)   Thence southerly along the western corporation line of the City of
Avon Lake to the southerly corporation line of the City of Avon Lake;
      (3)   Thence heading easterly along the southern corporation line of the
City of Avon Lake to Avon Belden Road;
      (4)   Thence northerly along the centerline of Avon Belden Road to Avon
Belden Road and Walker Road;
      (5)   Thence westerly along the centerline of Walker Road to Moorewood
Avenue;
      (6)   Thence northerly along the centerline of Moorewood Road to
Canterbury Road;
      (7)   Thence easterly along the centerline of Canterbury Road to Inwood
Boulevard;
      (8)   Thence northerly along the centerline of Inwood Boulevard to
Redwood Boulevard;
      (9)   Thence westerly along the centerline of Redwood Boulevard to Duff
Road;
      (10)   Thence westerly in an extension of Redwood Boulevard to Moore
Road; and
      (11)   Thence northerly along the centerline of Moore Road to the
intersection with the north corporation line of the City of Avon Lake, also
being the shoreline of Lake Erie, back to the place of beginning herein
containing properties to be known as Ward 4.
(Ord. 165-98, passed 10-12-1998; Ord. 24-93, passed 7-8-2024)
§ 206.06 HARBOR LINE IN LAKE ERIE.
   (a)   R.C. § 721.04 gives municipalities bordering on Lake Erie the ability
to establish jurisdiction in Lake Erie waters beyond their natural shorelines.
   (b)   The City of Avon Lake establishes a harbor line as follows:
Extending between the west and east corporate limits of the city and extending
into Lake Erie for a distance of two miles from the natural shoreline.
   (c)   The City of Avon Lake does this for all purposes of government and
exercise of such powers.
(Ord. 102-2005, passed 6-27-2005)
CHAPTER 208: GENERAL FEE SCHEDULE
Section
208.01 Schedule established
§ 208.01 SCHEDULE ESTABLISHED.
   The following general fee schedule is hereby established for the city:
 
GENERAL FEE SCHEDULE
(a)   Safety Department.
   (1)   Police.
      A.   Accident and insurance reports (see division (d)(4)G. below)
      B.   Dogs (redemption)                                                            $10
      C.   Dogs (per day boarding)                                                      $10
      D.   Cats (impounding)                                                            $10
      E.   Cats (per day boarding)                                                      $2
      F.   Permits for commercial and heavy vehicles:
         Single or round trip                                                           $5
         More than one round trip or for a period of time determined by the Public Works$20
Director
      G.   Unlawful sign storage (per day or part thereof)                              $1
      H.   Emergency alarm systems
         1.   Residential permit fee                                                 $10
         2.   Business permit fee                                                    $25
         3.   Inspection fee                                                         $50
      I.   Motor vehicle, storage (per day)                                             $5
      J.   Background check as mentioned in                                             $15
840.03(n)
      K.   Scavenger license                                                            $15
   (2)   Fire.
      A.   Copies of fire and rescue reports (see division (d)(4)G. below)
      B.   Permits for fire protection and alarm systems
         1.   New systems                                                            $50
         2.   Extending or enlarging of existing systems                             $50
      C.   Transporting of hazardous materials out of the city or from one location to a$25her
within the city
      D.   Required and discretionary permits listed in the Ohio Fire Code
         1.   Except for tents, air supported and other temporary structures         $15
      E.   Emergency ambulance transport service
         1.   Basic life support (BLS)                                               $500 per
                                                                                                 patient
         2.   Advanced life support (Level 1)                                        $600 per
                                                                                                 patient
         3.   Advanced life support (Level 2)                                        $700 per
                                                                                                 patient
                                                                                                 $11 per
                                                                                                 mile from
         4.   Loaded patient transport mileage                                       pick- up
                                                                                                 point to
                                                                                                 hospital
         5.   EMS response without transport                                         No charge
 
         6.   Emergency access gate permit                                           $25
(b)   Building Department.
   (1)   Residential.
      A.   Building permits-residential.
         1.   Plan review                                                            $150
         2.   One-, two- and three-family dwelling                                   $200
            Additional per 100 square feet                                           $1
         3.   Occupancy permit add on                                                $25
         4.   Multi-family dwellings, four or more units per building
            Building permit per building                                             $500
            Plus per dwelling unit                                                   $100
            Occupancy permit add on per dwelling unit                                $25
         5.   Detached garage                                                        $75
         6.   Swimming pool
            In-ground                                                                $40
            Above-ground                                                             $20
         7.   Storage building, miscellaneous structure, i.e., gazebo and the like   $30
         8.   Decks and porches                                                      $20
         9.   Sidewalks (per lineal foot)                                            $1
         10.   Miscellaneous building permit                                         $20
         11.   Hot tubs                                                              $50
         12.   Waterproofing                                                         $25
         13.   Patios, driveway replacement                                          $30
      B.   Addition or alteration permits.
         1.   Plan review per 100 square feet                                        $5
         2.   Residential                                                            $100
         3.   Plus per 100 square feet                                               $1
         4.   Occupancy permit add on                                                $25
      C.   Electrical permits.
         1.   New residential - per dwelling                                         $75
            Plus per 100 square feet                                                 $2
         2.   Temporary service                                                      $25
         3.   Service change                                                         $50
         4.   Miscellaneous electric                                                 $25
            Plus per 100 square feet                                                 $2
      D.   Plumbing permits.
         1.   New residential - per dwelling                                         $75
         2.   Miscellaneous plumbing                                                 $25
            Plus per trap                                                            $2
         3.   Lawn sprinklers                                                        $50
      E.   HVAC permits.
         1.   Central heating system residential - per dwelling                      $50
         2.   Air conditioning, residential (except window types) - per dwelling     $50
         3.   Furnace replacement, residential                                       $50
         4.   Duct work                                                              $25
         5.   HVAC heating and air                                                   $100
         6.   Service charge; gas to electric                                        $50
         7.   Hot water tank                                                         $25
      F.   Fence permits.
         Residential                                                                    $20
      G.   Miscellaneous.
         1.   Siding permit
            Single-family dwelling                                                   $40
            Accessory building                                                       $20
         2.   Dish-type antennas                                                     $50
         3.   Eighteen-inch or less satellite dish                                   $10
         4.   Demolition permits                                                     $50
         5.   Inspections for appraisal                                              $50
         6.   General inspection                                                     $50
         7.   Reinspection fee                                                       $25
         8.   Circuses and carnivals                                                 $100
            Plus for electrical inspections                                          $35
            Plus if inspection conducted on overtime                                 $70
         9.   Moving houses                                                          $200
         10.   Gutters                                                               $20
      (2)   Commercial.
         A.   Commercial permit fees.
            1.   Commercial or industrial building per building                   $400
               (Floor area calculation shall include cellars, basements and sub-basements as
measured at the outside foundation dimension)
               Plus add on per 100 square feet                                    $2
               Occupancy permit add on                                            $25
            2.   Commercial or industrial accessory building or miscellaneous stru$25re per 100
square feet
         B.   Addition or alteration permits.
            1.   Commercial or industrial                                         $250
               (Floor area calculation shall include cellars, basements and sub-basements as
measured at the outside foundation dimension)
                  Plus per 100 square feet                                     $2
                  Occupancy permit add on                                      $25
            2.   Miscellaneous alteration (minor alteration such as nonbearing par$50ions)
         C.   Electrical permits.
            1.   Commercial or industrial - per building                          $150
            2.   Plus per 100 square feet                                         $3
            3.   Miscellaneous electrical (service changes or adding maximum of 2 $75cuits)
         D.   Plumbing permits.
            1.   Commercial or industrial - per building                          $150
               Plus per trap                                                      $2
            2.   Miscellaneous plumbing (moving existing lines, adding maximum of $50raps)
            3.   Commercial water heater                                          $50
         E.   HVAC permits.
            1.   Commercial or industrial HVAC system, per unit                   $75
            2.   Miscellaneous HVAC (replacement, duct work)                      $50
         F.   Fence permits, commercial or industrial.
            1.   Wood or wire                                                     $50
            2.   Masonry                                                          $50
         G.   Sign permits.
            1.   Non-electric                                                     $50
               Plus per square foot                                               $0.10
            2.   Electric                                                         $75
               Plus per square foot                                               $0.10
            3.   Temporary                                                        $5
            4.   Temporary renewal                                                $15
         H.   Miscellaneous.
            1.   Siding                                                           $50
         I.   Plan reviews - commercial and industrial.
                                                                                                 Plans
            Type of Plans                                                 Processing examination
                                                                                      Fee        fee/100 sq.
                                                                                                 ft. gross
            1.   Structural                                            $275       $10.50
            2.   Mechanical plans (including medical gas piping)       $275       $6.50
            3.   Electrical plans                                      $275       $6.50
            4.   Automatic sprinkler and other fire suppression system $275s (all $6.50
suppressed areas)
            5.   Industrialized unit plans                             $200       $1.75
            6.   Fire alarm system                                     $275       $6.50 per
                                                                                                 device
         J.   Contractor registration                                     $100
         K.   Plan review - commercial and Industrial resubmittals. Plan review
resubmittals for any category in division (b)(2)I. shall be charged at a rate of $100 $100
for each category resubmitted.
   (c)   Planning and Zoning.
      (1)   Zoning Board of Appeals fee                                                 $75
      (2)   Rezoning petition                                                           $75
                                                                                                 $200 per
      (3)   Subdivision Recreation Trust Fund                                           lot or
                                                                                                 dwelling
                                                                                                 unit
      (4)   Petition for change in zoning regulations                                   $10
      (5)   Planning Commission agenda fee, lot split                                   $50
      (6)   Planning Commission agenda fee, including final plats                       $200
      (7)   Comprehensive Land Use Plan                                                 $16
      (8)   Planning Commission agenda fee, conditional use permit fee                  $300
      (9)   Planning Commission agenda fee, signs                                       $50
      (10)   Planning Commission Work Session agenda fee                                $75
   (d)   Finance Department.
      (1)   Bicycle license                                                             No charge
      (2)   City Charter                                                                $3.75 each
      (3)   Copy of Income Tax Ordinance                                                $2 each
      (4)   Copies of Code of Ordinances
         A.   Hard-bound volumes                                                     $60 each
         B.   Loose-leaf volumes                                                     $50 each
         C.   Planning and Zoning Code                                               $10 each
         D.   Regional Dwelling House Code                                           $6 each
         E.   Regional Dwelling House Code supplement                                $4 each
         F.   Zoning, street or ward map                                             $2 each
         G.   Photocopies
            1.   0 - 9 copies no charge
            2.   Over 9 copies   black and white                               $0.05 per
                                                                                                 copy
                        color                                            $0.10 per
                                                                                                 copy
            3.   No charge for copies e-mailed
            4.   Downloaded copies to digital media                               $5
                                                                                                 $75 per
                                                                                                 hour of
         H.   Police Department video recordings duplicated, copied, or prepared by tvideo
Lake Police Department. Costs include employee or contractor time expended in retrieving,        produced,
downloading, redacting and producing the video record. The requester provides a USB flash drive  not to
for the video download. The Avon Lake Police Department will not supply USB flash drives.        exceed $750
                                                                                                 total, per
                                                                                                 video.
      (5)   Mailing charges
         A.   Council agendas                                                        $10/year
         B.   Planning Commission agenda                                             $6/year
         C.   Zoning agenda                                                          $3/year
         D.   Council minutes                                                        $18/year
         E.   Planning Commission minutes                                            $15/year
         F.   Zoning minutes                                                         $6/year
         G.   Council committee notice                                               $15/year
      (6)   Annual mobile food vehicle permit
         A.   For one mobile food vehicle                                            $25
         B.   For each additional mobile food vehicle owned by the same person       $5
      (7)   Short-term rental registration one-time fee                                 $150
   (e)   Recreation.
      (1)   Use of electricity in the area of the shelter at Weiss Field by organization$50nd
persons outside the city
      (2)   Use of Weiss corral by nonresident groups                                   $100
      (3)   Preparation and use of baseball and softball diamonds by organizations other than those involved
in Recreation Department programs, such preparation to include the installation of bases, the lining of the
diamond and the dragging of the infield.
            The above preparations will be made only during the regular 40-hour work week of
city employees. When field preparation and maintenance are required to be done on weekends and   City to
outside of the regular 40-hour work week, the fee will be the actual cost of providing the labor invoice
as determined by the Public Works Director or his or her agent.
      (4)   A $100 security deposit will be required for each tournament. This will cover any
damages incurred to fields or property and is refundable upon a satisfactory inspection by the
Public Works Director.
      (5)   Rental of the lighted softball field (excluding Recreation Department activi$150),
without preparation
                                                                                                 Open fee,
                                                                                                 per person,
      (6)   Enrollment in sports and recreation programs.                               based on
                                                                                                 cost to
                                                                                                 city *
         * Cost to city is defined as any and all expenses incurred by the city to conduct the
program. These expenses can include, but are not limited to labor, materials, equipment,
marketing, utilities and any other direct or indirect expense.
                                                                                                 $400 per
      (7)   Adult softball league field use fee with 50% or more residents on team      team per
                                                                                                 season
                                                                                                 $460 per
      (8)   Adult softball league field use fee with less than 50% residents on team    team per
                                                                                                 season
                                                                                                 $400 per
      (9)   Adult softball tournament field use fee with more than 50 % residents on teafield per
                                                                                                 day
                                                                                                 $460 per
      (10)   Adult softball tournament field use fee with less than 50 % residents on tefield per
                                                                                                 day
                                                                                                 $400 per
      (11)   Youth softball field use fee for travel baseball teams                     team per
                                                                                                 season
      (12)   Youth softball tournament field use fee for baseball teams
      (13)   Old Firehouse Community Center use fee
         A.   The Old Firehouse Community Center is available to city civic and social organizations as
follows:
                                                                                                 $20 per
            Corporate business (including HOAs)                                      rental/
                                                                                                 meeting
                                                                                                 $10 per
            Non-profit and community groups                                          rental/
                                                                                                 meeting
            Government agencies                                                      No fee
            Usage fees can be waived upon recommendation of the Recreation Director or his or her designee.
            1.   Building hours are Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., except on federal
holidays when city offices are closed. City civic and social groups are permitted to use the building
outside of building hours with written consent from the Recreation Director or his or her designee.
            2.   City civic and social groups must consist of a minimum of 51% Avon Lake residents.
            3.   The groups must have 501(c)3 tax status. Groups that do not possess 501(c)3 status may be
permitted use of the Old Firehouse Community Center with written permission from the Recreation Director or
his or her designee.
            4.   The Old Firehouse Community Center may not be used by private groups for private functions
such as parties, receptions, commercial enterprise or other similar functions.
            5.   Park and recreation programs take precedence over city civic and social organization
functions, and the city reserves the right to cancel facility use agreements in the interest of city
sponsored programming.
                                                                                                 Open fee,
         B.   Enrollment in recreation programs not held at the Old Firehouse Communiper person,
such as youth, adult and seniors activities and programs and the like                            based on
                                                                                                 cost to
                                                                                                 city*
               * Cost to city is defined as any and all expenses incurred by the city to conduct the
program. These expenses can include, but are not limited to labor, materials, equipment, marketing,
utilities and any other direct or indirect expense.
         C.   Membership fee (45 years of age and over)                              $25
      (14) Pool fees.
Infant                                                                                NC         NC
Active Duty, retired Armed Forces personnel, Purple Heart recipients, and immediate   NC         NC
families
 
 
   GENERAL FEE SCHEDULE
2026                                    2027
Individual                            Individual
Memberships                             Memberships
                  Before 6/1 After 6/1                    Before 6/1 After 6/1
Individual (Ages   $73        $94       Individual (Ages   $82        $106
3-59)                                   3- 59)
Senior (Ages 60+)  $23        $34       Senior (Ages 60+)  $26        $38
Senior Couple      $34        $45       Senior Couple      $38        $51
(Ages 60+)                              (Ages 60+)
Silver Sneakers & Renew       FREE      Silver Sneakers & Renew       FREE
Active Members                          Active Members
Swim Team Members  $51                  Swim Team Members             $57
All Avon Lake                           All Avon Lake
Storm Swim Team                         Storm Swim Team
members must                            members must
purchase an                           purchase an
individual                              individual
membership or be                        membership or be
included in a                           included in a
family membership.                      family membership.
Family Memberships                    Family Memberships
                  Before 6/1 After 6/1                   Before 6/1 After
                                                                      6/1
Family of 2        $135       $158      Family of 2        $152       $178
Family of 3        $186       $219      Family of 3        $209       $246
Family of 4        $225       $270      Family of 4        $253       $304
Family of 5        $253       $309      Family of          $285       $348
Family of 6+       $270       $338      Family of 6+       $304       $380
Nanny              $84                  Nanny              $95
Available with the                      Available with the
purchase of a                           purchase of a
family membership                       family membership
only. The nanny                         only. The nanny
membership will be                      membership will be
assigned directly                       assigned directly
to the nanny/                           to the nanny/
individual member                       individual member
not the family.                         not the family.
Resident Daily                          Resident Daily
Admission & Guess                       Admission & Guess
Fees                                    Fees
                  Resident   Guest                       Resident   Guest
Adult (Ages 18-59) $8         $9        Adult (Ages 18-59) $9         $10
Child/Student                           Child/Student
(Ages 3-18)        $7         $9        (Ages              $8         $10
                                        3-18)
Senior (Ages 60+)  $3         $9        Senior (Ages 60+)  $4         $10
Children 2 years                        Children 2 years
of age and younger                      of age and younger
are free with the                       are free with the
paid admission of                       paid admission of
an adult.                               an adult.
Learn to Swim      $84        $96                         $95        $108
 
 
   GENERAL FEE SCHEDULE
      (15)   Boat Launch.
         A.   Per launch                                        $5 per 24-hour
                                                                            day
         B.   Season pass                                       $50
      (16)               LAKE HOUSE FEE SCHEDULE
FOLGER HOME FEE SCHEDULE
                                             Rental Fee                           Deposit
                                                                            All
                                                                            Day    Refund-
                                              First                         Rental able
         Weekday: Monday - Thursday  3     Additional Hours        9:00   Security
                                              Hours                         a.m. - Deposit
                                                                            11:00
                                                                            p.m.
         Resident                    $150  $50                     $350   $200
         Non-resident                $250  $75                     $450   $200
                                             Rental Fee                           Deposit
                                                                            All
                                                                            Day    Refund-
                                                                            Rental able
         Weekend: Friday - Sunday and Holiday                      9:00   Security
                                                                            a.m. - Deposit
                                                                            11:00
                                                                            p.m.
         Resident                                                  $450   $200
         Non-resident                                              $600   $200
The Folger Home is managed by Heritage Avon Lake which is a 501(c)3 and is responsible for
facility renovations. Three hour minimum rental time will be charged for all weekday
rentals. All setup and cleanup time must be included in the charged rental time. Non-profit
organizations must provide non-profit documentation. Non-profit and business address will
be used to determine residency. All day rental fees will be applied for all weekend
rentals. All reservations must be made through the Recreation Office.
      (17)   Enrollment in recreation programs not held at the Old Open fee, per
Firehouse Community Center, such as basketball, football, tennis and the    person, based
like                                                                        on cost to
                                                                            city*
         * Cost to city is defined as any and all expenses incurred by the city to conduct
a program. These expenses can include, but are not limited to, labor, materials, equipment,
marketing, utilities, and any other direct or indirect expense.
      (18)   Picnic Pavilion and Gazebo Rentals - The following picnic pavilions are
offered for private rentals May 1 through October 15 each year starting March 1 of the same
year, depending on availability, with a signed Facility Use Agreement and the payment of a
user fee as defined below. Usage fees can be waived upon recommendation of the Recreation
Director or his/her designee.
         Miller Road Park Pavilion
            Resident:                                           $50
            Nonresident:                                        $100
         Miller Road Park Gazebo
            Resident:                                           $50
            Nonresident:                                        $100
         Bleser Park Pavilion A
            Resident:                                           $50
            Nonresident:                                        $100
         Bleser Park Pavilion B
            Resident:                                           $50
            Nonresident:                                        $100
         Weiss Field Pavilion A
            Resident:                                           $50
            Nonresident:                                        $100
         Weiss Field Pavilion B
            Resident:                                           $50
            Nonresident:                                        $100
         Walker Road Park Pavilion (Bay Village Residents receive resident
rate)
            Resident:                                           $50
            Nonresident:                                        $100
         Veterans Memorial Park Gazebo
            Resident:                                           $50
            Nonresident:                                        $100
      (19)   Special Event Permits
         See Avon Lake code of ordinances
1224.02 (f) for rules.
         Special Event Permit Application Fees:
            Application fee:                                    $25
            Security Deposit:                                   $100
            Nonprofit organization:                             $200
            For profit organization:                            $400
         Special events held at Veterans Memorial Park shall include the Lake House with an
additional fee of $200 per day.
   (f)   Public Works Department.
      (1)   Stormwater pollution prevention plan review and permit $150
      (2)   Stormwater pollution plan violations                   $200/day/
                                                                            occurrence
      (3)   Illicit discharge violation                            $200/day/
                                                                            occurrence
      (4)   Second notice of violation                             $400/day/
                                                                            occurrence
                                                                            Fines double
      (5)   Stepped notices of violation                           every day
                                                                            violation
                                                                            exists
      (6)   Additional fines:
         Any illicit discharge violation where it is found that mud/dirt/debris is being
deposited on a public road shall be determined to be a violation. The offending party, in
addition to the above listed fines, shall be responsible for all related cleaning costs
including, but not limited to, cleaning of the roads, and cleaning of the catch basins and
storm sewers.
      (7)   Grading permit (new construction)                      $100
      (8)   Re-grading permit                                      $50
      (9)   Right-of-way permit (excavation outside of pavement and$50
city right-of-way)                                                          (permit
                                                                            required)
      (10)   Road opening permit (necessitating pavement repair)   $200
      (11)   Ditches, curbs, and driveway openings                 $20
                                                                            0.25/ft. (for
      (12)   Sidewalk permit (new construction in right-of-way)    properties over
                                                                            100 ft.)
      (13)   Rain barrel assembly kit                              $20 (each kit)
      (14)   Rain barrel assembly workshop                         $40 (each
                                                                            barrel)
      (15)   Landscape contractor registration                     $75*
      (16)   Central Avon Lake Drainage Project (CALDP)
                                                                            Shall be
                                                                            determined and
                                                                            adjusted yearly
         Tap in fee                                                based on the
                                                                            Cleveland
                                                                            Construction
                                                                            Cost Index
      (17)   Pollinator garden in tree lawn permit fee             $20
                                                                            $6/linear foot
                                                                            of right-of-
      (18)   Street Tree Program                                   way on both
                                                                            sides of the
                                                                            street
      *   In accordance with the rules adopted by Avon Lake City Council through adoption
of the Avon Lake Green Team program the yearly registration will be lowered by $25 by the
Stormwater Program Manager for Green Team landscape contractors in good standing.
 
(Ord. 1233, passed 11-24-1958; Ord. 68-59, passed 10-26-1959; Ord. 50-62,
passed 4-23-1962; Ord. 29-63, passed 3-11-1963; Ord. 73-68, passed 7-10-1968;
Ord. 33-71, passed 2-22-1971; Ord. 95-74, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 63-76, passed
5-10-1976; Ord. 78-76, passed 6-14-1976; Ord. 80-76, passed 6-14-1976; Ord.
136-77, passed 10-24-1977; Ord. 64-80, passed 5-12-1980; Ord. 26-81, passed 3-
23-1981; Ord. 93-81, passed 9-28-1981; Ord. 116-81, passed 12-14-1981; Ord. 91-
82, passed 6-28-1982; Ord. 119-82, passed 9-27-1982; Ord. 153-82, passed 12-27-
1982; Ord. 42-83, passed 4-11-1983; Ord. 151-83, passed 12-12-1983; Ord. 33-84,
passed 1-23-1984; Ord. 53-84, passed 3-12-1984; Ord. 90-84, passed 6-11-1984;
Ord. 152-84, passed 11-12-1984; Ord. 163-84, passed 11-26-1984; Ord. 175-84,
passed 12-26-1984; Ord. 51-85, passed 5-13-1985; Ord. 52-86, passed 3-24-1986;
Ord. 85-86, passed 5-12-1986; Ord. 139-86, passed 8-18-1986; Ord. 10-87, passed
1-26-1987; Ord. 16-87, passed 2-9-1987; Ord. 44-87, passed 3-23-1987; Ord. 65-
87, passed 4-13-1987; Ord. 74-88, passed 4-11-1988; Ord. 97-88, passed 5-23-
1988; Ord. 75-89, passed 5-8-1989; Ord. 83-89, passed 5-22-1989; Ord. 107-89,
passed 6-12-1989; Ord. 153-89, passed 7-17-1989; Ord. 239-89, passed 12-26-
1989; Ord. 82-90, passed 4-23-1990; Ord. 171-91, passed 12-23-1991; Ord. 73-92,
passed 5-11-1992; Ord. 82-92, passed 6-1-1992; Ord. 83-92, passed 6-8-1992;
Ord. 181-93, passed 12-27-1993; Ord. 46-94, passed 3-14-1994; Ord. 236-94,
passed 12-19-1994; Ord. 166-95, passed 10-9-1995; Ord. 39-96, passed 2-12-1996;
Ord. 97-96, passed 5-13-1996; Ord. 214-96, passed 11-25-1996; Ord. 39-97,
passed 3-10-1997; Ord. 137-97, passed 7-14-1997; Ord. 22-98, passed 1-26-1998;
Ord. 32-98, passed 2-9-1998; Ord. 87-98, passed 5-11-1998; Ord. 20-00, passed
1-24-2000; Ord. 52-00, passed 2-28-2000; Ord. 23-01, passed 2-12-2001; Ord. 43-
01, passed 3-12-2001; Ord. 228-01, passed 12-10-2001; Ord. 31-02, passed 2-11-
2002; Ord. 73-02, passed 3-25-2002; Ord. 74-2002, passed 3-25-2002; Ord. 57-03,
passed 3-10-2003; Ord. 247-03, passed 11-10-2003; Ord. 247-03, passed 11-10-
2003; Ord. 82-04, passed 4-5-2004; Ord. 118-04, passed 5-10-2004; Ord. 186-04,
passed 9-13-2004; Ord. 42-06, passed 4-10-2006; Ord. 14-07, passed 2-12-2007;
Ord. 15-07, passed 2-26-2007; Ord. 140-07, passed 12-10-2007; Ord. 26-08,
passed 2-25-2008; Ord. 101-08, passed 7-14-2008; Ord. 106-08, passed 7-14-2008;
Ord. 164-08, passed 12-8-2008; Ord. 13-09, passed 1-26-2009; Ord. 3-2010,
passed 1-11-2010; Ord. 41-2010, passed 3-22-2010; Ord. 52-2010, passed 4-26-
2010; Ord. 16-2011, passed 3-14-2011; Ord. 27-2011, passed 4-11-2011; Ord. 36-
2012, passed 3-12-2012; Ord. 96-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 157-2012, passed
12-17-2012; Ord. 6-2013, passed 1-28-2013; Ord. 34-2013, passed 4-8-2013; Ord.
59-2013, passed 5-28-2013; Ord. 148-2013, passed 11-25-2013; Ord. 29-2014,
passed 2-24-2014; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014; Ord. 79-2014, passed 7-9-
2014; Ord. 33-2015, passed 3-9-2015; Ord. 75-2015, passed 6-8-2015; Ord. 84-
2015, passed 6-8-2015; Ord. 121-2015, passed 9-28-2015; Ord. 149-2015, passed
11-23-2015; Ord. 71-2016, passed 6-13-2016; Ord. 107-2016, passed 8-22-2016;
Ord. 169-2016, passed 12-12-2016; Ord. 2-2017, passed 1-9-2017; Ord. 35-2017,
passed 3-13-2017; Ord. 180-2017, passed 12-11-2017; Ord. 51-2018, passed 4-9-
2018; Ord. 82-2018, passed 5-14-2018; Ord. 100-2018, passed 6-11-2018; Ord.
171-2018, passed 11-26-2018; Ord. 182-2018, passed 12-17-2018; Ord. 98-2019,
passed 7-8-2019; Ord. 101-2019, passed 8-26-2019; Ord. 121-2019, passed 11-12-
2019; Ord. 126-2019, passed 12-9-2019; Ord. 127-2019, passed 12-9-2019; Ord.
74-2020, passed 7-13-2020; Ord. 22-51, passed 6-13-2022; Ord. 22-128, passed 9-
26-2022; Ord. 22-190, passed 12-19-2022; Ord. 23-1, passed 1-9-2023; Ord. 23-
199, passed  12-11-2023; Ord. 24-177, passed 12-16-2024; Ord. 25-175R2, passed
12-8-2025)
CHAPTER 210: ASSESSMENTS
Section
210.01 Projects costing $500 or less
§ 210.01 PROJECTS COSTING $500 OR LESS.
   If the estimated cost of a public project is less than the administrative
costs involved to levy and collect special assessments for that project, and
the total amount of special assessments to be collected is $500 or less for
such project, the city may assume and pay the costs of such public project.
(Res. 55-91, passed 5-13-1991)
CHAPTER 212: AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT
Section
212.01 Grievance procedure
§ 212.01 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE.
   (a)   Complaints alleging any action by the city which is prohibited by
regulations of the U.S. Department of Justice implementing Title II of the
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA), 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq.,
should be addressed to the ADA Coordinator, City of Avon Lake, 150 Avon Belden
Road, Avon Lake, OH 44012, (440) 930-4121. The ADA Coordinator has been
designated to coordinate ADA compliance efforts. A complaint should be filed in
writing or verbally and should contain the name and address of the person
filing it and briefly describe the alleged violation of the regulations.
   (b)   A complaint should be filed within five days after the complainant
becomes aware of the alleged violation. (The processing of allegations of
discrimination which occurred before the effective date of this section will be
considered on a case-by-case basis.)
   (c)   An investigation, as may be appropriate, shall follow the filing of a
complaint and shall be conducted by the ADA Coordinator. This section
contemplates informal but thorough investigations, affording all interested
persons and their representatives, if any, an opportunity to submit evidence
relevant to a complaint.
   (d)   A written determination as to the validity of the complaint and a
description of the resolution of the complaint, if any, shall be issued by the
ADA Coordinator and a copy shall be forwarded to the complainant no later than
15 working days after its filing.
   (e)   The ADA Coordinator shall maintain the files and records of the city
relating to complaints filed.
   (f)   A complainant may request a reconsideration of a case in instances
where he or she is dissatisfied with the resolution. The request for
reconsideration should be made within ten days to the Law Director.
   (g)   The right of a person to a prompt and equitable resolution of a
complaint filed hereunder shall not be impaired by the person’s pursuit of
other remedies, such as the filing of an ADA complaint with the responsible
federal department or agency. Use of this grievance procedure is not a
prerequisite to the pursuit of other remedies.
   (h)   This section shall be construed to protect the substantive rights of
interested persons to meet appropriate due process standards and to assure that
the city complies with the ADA and the regulations of the U.S. Department of
Justice implementing the same.
(Ord. 38-97, passed 3-10-1997)
TITLE FOUR - Legislation
   
Chap. 220. Council.
   
Chap. 222. Ordinances and Resolutions.
CHAPTER 220: COUNCIL
Section
220.01 Meetings
220.02 Attendance of certain department officials
220.03 Powers and duties
220.04 Council President
220.05 Standing committees
220.06 Special committees
220.07 Committee meetings
220.08 Reference to more than one committee
220.09 Committee reports
220.10 Agenda
220.11 Order of business at a Council meeting
220.12 Rules of the floor and debate
220.13 Motions
220.14 Seconds
220.15 Order of precedence of motions
220.16 Introduction of ordinances and resolutions
220.17 Three readings
220.18 Passage or adoption
220.19 Voting
220.20 General consent
220.21 Public input
220.22 Resignation
220.23 Parliamentary authority
220.24 Suspension of the rules
220.25 Amendment of the rules
220.26 Subpoenas
Editor’s note:
   This chapter, formerly a codification of Ordinance 28-90, passed February
19, 1990, together with any amendments thereto, was reenacted in its entirety
by Ordinance 61-02, passed March 11, 2002, codified herein.
§ 220.01 MEETINGS.
   (a)   Regular meetings.
      (1)   The regular meetings of Council shall be held at 7:00 p.m. on the
second and fourth Mondays of each month, with the following exceptions:
         A.   July meeting shall be on the second Monday;
         B.   August meeting shall be on the fourth Monday of August;
         C.   December meetings shall be on the second and third Mondays;
         D.   Holidays: If the regular meeting falls upon a legal, national or
locally observed holiday, or the day preceding a legal, national or locally
observed holiday, such meeting shall be rescheduled for the same time on a date
selected by a majority vote of the members of Council that occurs within seven
days or after the date the meeting would have been held but for such holiday.
      (2)   A written record of the items covered and discussed at the meeting
shall be kept by the Clerk of Council.
   (b)   Special meetings.
      (1)   Special meetings of the members of Council may convene in the
following manner:
         A.   A majority vote of members of Council shall constitute a quorum
present at any regular or special meeting;
         B.   A call of the Clerk of Council, upon written request of either
the Mayor or the President of Council; or
         C.   A call of the Clerk of Council, upon written request of three
members of Council, as provided by Section 8B. of the City Charter.
      (2)   However, if the call for a special meeting is under the authority
of division (b)(1)B. or (b)(1)C. of this section, then 24 hours’ notice, in
writing, of such special meeting shall be given to each member of Council and
the Mayor by personal service or by leaving such written notice at their usual
places of residence, except that such notice shall be held to have been waived
by attendance at the special meeting.
      (3)   A written record of the items covered and discussed at the meeting
shall be kept by the Clerk of Council.
   (c)   Collective committee meetings.
      (1)   For purposes of the exchange of information, to review Council
Committee items, and to formulate the regular meeting agenda, collective
committee meetings may be held on the Monday prior to the regular Council
meeting. Requests for legislation may be presented either at the collective
committee meetings or to the appropriate committee of Council.
      (2)   Written notice of collective committee meetings shall be given by
the Clerk of Council at least 72 hours prior to the date and time of the
meeting.
      (3)   A written record of the items covered and discussed at the meeting
shall be kept by the Clerk of Council.
   (d)   Work sessions.
      (1)   For purposes of providing detailed information on a topic of
interest or importance to the residents of the city, members of Council or the
Mayor may request a work session of the members of Council. Upon approval of
the Council President or a majority of members of Council, notice of the work
session shall be given by the Clerk of Council at least 72 hours prior to the
date and time of the work session.
      (2)   A written record of the items covered and discussed at the work
session shall be kept by the Clerk of Council.
   (e)   Executive sessions.
      (1)   At the request of the Mayor or any member of Council, and upon an
affirmative majority roll call vote of at least four members, members of
Council may meet in executive session immediately before, during or immediately
following any regular meeting, special meeting or work session of Council, with
or without the presence of any party or parties deemed necessary, for any
purpose permitted by the laws of the state as were enacted and as are in full
force and effect on the date this section becomes effective.
      (2)   Persons who are not members of Council may only attend if invited
by a member of Council. Information discussed at executive sessions shall not
be disclosed without consent of Council.
   (f)   Quorum.
      (1)   A majority of the members of Council shall constitute a quorum to
do business, but a lesser number may adjourn from day to day and may compel the
attendance of absent members in the manner and under such penalties as may be
prescribed by ordinance.
      (2)   No member of Council or the Mayor, the Law Director, the Finance
Director, and/or the Public Works Director thereof shall leave the Council
Chamber or its immediate environs without the general consent of the members of
Council as provided in §
220.20, subject to censure at the members of Council’s discretion.
      (3)   When a quorum is not present, no member of Council shall be
required to remain in the Council Chambers longer than one-half hour after the
appointed time set for the meeting.
   (g)   Advance notification of time, place and agenda of regular and special
meetings.
      (1)   Any person may be notified of the time and place of all regularly
scheduled meetings, and the time, place and purpose of all special meetings,
upon written request to the Clerk of Council.
      (2)   The Clerk of Council shall post the agenda of all regularly
scheduled meetings, and the time, place and purpose of all special meetings,
not later than 72 hours immediately preceding such scheduled meetings, on the
City’s website and a public bulletin board located at the City Hall, whereby
any person may opt to determine such information as is contained in such posted
agenda.
(Ord. 145-06, passed 12-18-2006; Ord. 1-09, passed 1-12-2009; Ord. 61-02,
passed 3-11-2002; Ord. 21-92, passed 7-12-2021; Ord. 25-116, passed 7-14-2025)
Statutory reference:
   Public meetings - exceptions, see R.C. § 121.22
§ 220.02 ATTENDANCE OF CERTAIN DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS.
   The Mayor, the Law Director, the Public Works Director, the Finance Director
and the Clerk of Council shall be seated at the Council dais at designated
positions and shall attend all meetings of Council unless excused. Their
attendance shall be recorded in the initial roll call taken for attendance
purposes and they shall be entitled to speak on matters affecting their
respective departments.
(Ord. 61-02, passed 3-11-2002; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014; Ord. 25-116,
passed 7-14-2025)
§ 220.03 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Mayor, the members of Council, the Law Director, the Finance Director,
the Public Works Director, the Clerk of Council, and all other elected or
appointed officers of the city shall exercise the powers and perform the
functions, with respect to the proceedings of Council, that are vested in or
enjoined upon them by either the City Charter, the ordinances of the city or
the general laws of the state.
(Ord. 61-02, passed 3-11-2002; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014; Ord. 25-116,
passed 7-14-2025)
§ 220.04 COUNCIL PRESIDENT.
   (a)   Not later than seven days after the certification of general election
results by the Board of Elections, the presiding Council President shall
convene a meeting of the Council-elect. The sole purpose of this meeting shall
be to elect the President of Council and President Pro Tempore for the new
upcoming term.
   (b)   The Council President shall act as presiding officer at all regular
meetings, special meetings, collective committee meetings and work sessions of
Council and shall be responsible for the orderly function and coordination of
all Council activities.
   (c)   (1)   In the absence of the Council President, the President Pro
Tempore shall convene meetings to order and preside at said meetings. The
President Pro Tempore shall be elected by the members of Council at its
organizational meeting and shall continue to be the President Pro Tempore
throughout the term of said Council.
      (2)   In the absence of the Council President and the President Pro
Tempore, the Clerk of Council or any member of Council present with the most
seniority should convene the meeting to order and Council, by motion, should
immediately elect a Chairperson to preside at said meeting.
(Ord. 61-02, passed 3-11-2002; Ord. 39-04, passed 2-23-2004; Ord. 25-116,
passed 7-14-2025; Ord. 25-198R, passed 12-15-2025)
§ 220.05 STANDING COMMITTEES.
   (a)   Within 19 days following the Council President’s election, the
Council-elect shall meet to discuss standing committee assignments, with
Chairpersons recommended by the Council President-elect. Such assignments shall
be confirmed by a majority of the members of Council at their organizational
meeting.
   (b)   The following standing committees shall perform the duties prescribed
in this section.
      (1)   Economic Development Committee.
         A.   All ordinances, resolutions and other matters relating to
economic development and involving the Community Development Department,
including, but not limited to, retaining existing businesses and attracting new
businesses to Avon Lake shall be referred to the Economic Development Committee
for study, investigation and recommendation to Council, except that such
referral on a particular matter may be waived by the Council President upon the
Mayor’s request and advice that timely consideration of such matter by Council
is necessary or appropriate.
         B.   Works with members of the Community Improvement Corporation.
         C.   Reviews the Recreation Department's goals and objectives, along
with recreational programming (includes youth and senior services and other
recreational activities).
         D.   Proposes arts and humanities programming.
         E.   Oversees and advises all matters related to public
transportation.
      (2)   Finance Committee.
         A.   All ordinances, resolutions, and other matters relating to
finances, indebtedness, appropriations, payment of moneys and taxation, and all
matters involving the office of the Finance Director and insurance and pensions
of employees, shall be referred to the Finance Committee for study,
investigation, and recommendation to Council.
         B.   Quarterly, reviews and compares expenditures against the
established budget to identify and analyze possible fiscal trends that may
affect the city's financial position.
         C.   Oversees the ongoing review of the city budget, annual
appropriations, bond issues, levies, and possible legal issues affecting the
city.
         D.   Reviews the goals and objectives of the Finance Department.
      (3)   Human Resources Committee.
         A.   All ordinances, resolutions and other matters relating to the
hiring or promotion of new or existing employees, the grade and step increases
of qualifying city employees, the determination of grades and steps for newly
created positions, the writing or amending of job descriptions and other
matters involving the office of Human Resources pertaining to Chapter 258 shall
be referred to the Human Resources Committee for study, investigation and
recommendation to Council.
         B.   All ordinances, resolutions and other matters relating to
negotiations of wage and salary increases for city employees, and the provision
of fringe benefits for such employees and special programs, shall be considered
and recommended by the Human Resources Committee to members of Council.
         C.   The Human Resources Committee shall include among its members the
Chairpersons of the Finance and Public Safety and Health Committees. A member
of the Board of Municipal Utilities and a member of the Civil Service
Commission shall serve as ex officio, non-voting members.
         D.   Reviews the goals and objectives of the Human Resources
Department.
      (4)   Environmental Committee.
         A.   All ordinances, resolutions and other matters relating to natural
resources and environmental protection; shoreline protection; preservation and
conservation of Lake Erie; recycling; yard waste, waste collection and
contract, leaf humus, branch pickup and woodchips; compost; and inventory of
brownfields shall be referred to the Environmental Committee for study,
investigation and recommendation to Council.
         B.   One member of the Environmental Committee shall serve as an ex
officio, non-voting member of the Environmental Affairs Advisory Board.
         C.   Proposes green renewable energy and alternative strategies.
      (5)   Public Service Committee.
         A.   All ordinances, resolutions, and other matters relating to the
maintenance and acquisition of city-owned or proposed city-owned facilities,
infrastructure, lands, trees, and other vegetation; the lease or sale of
facilities, buildings, infrastructure, and lands not needed for municipal
purposes; the maintenance of ditches, catch basins, storm sewers, outfalls,
enclose open ditches; development or subdivision engineering; street and bridge
construction; and all matters relating to streets, bike paths, sidewalks,
planning, zoning, and the maintenance of city buildings, lands, and parks shall
be referred to the Public Service Committee for study, investigation, and
recommendation to Council.
         B.   The Public Service Committee shall oversee all matters pertaining
to the engineering design, construction, repair, maintenance and inspection of
streets, bike paths and sidewalks, street cleaning, street and highway
improvements, grading, assessments, and other matters within the rights-of-way.
         C.   The Public Service Committee shall oversee operations relating to
public services, including, but not limited to:
            1.   Maintaining historic properties and historic districts.
            2.   Recommending the acquisition and replacement of equipment,
vehicles and materials used by the Public Works Department, Recreation
Department, City Engineer, and Community Development Department.
            3.   Maintaining public parks, playgrounds, and beaches.
         D.   The Public Service Committee shall review and monitor the goals
and objectives of the Community Development Department, Engineering Department,
and Public Works Department.
         E.   The Public Service Committee shall oversee matters related to
property inspection, urban forestry, and maintenance codes.
      (6)   Public Safety and Health Committee.
         A.   All ordinances, resolutions and other matters relating to the
Police Department and Fire Department, including, but not limited to,
inspections, railroads, public and senior transportation, traffic regulations,
pedestrian safety, emergency community preparedness, school safety, bike
safety, nuisances and overall public safety within the city, shall be referred
to the Public Safety and Health Committee for study, investigation and
recommendation to Council. In addition, the Public Safety and Health Committee
shall promote safety awareness, review and update procedures, conduct
inspections, and make recommendations to enhance the overall health and safety
of the workplace and community.
         B.   Reviews the Police and Fire Departments' goals and objectives.
         C.   The Public Safety and Health Committee shall organize National
Incident Management System (NIMS) Training for elected officials and conduct a
citywide emergency response practice exercise to ensure all employees are
prepared in the event of an actual emergency.
         D.   The Public Safety and Health Committee shall request that the
Lorain County Emergency Management Agency review and critique the city's
exercise and provide feedback for improvement.
         E.   Works with Homeland Security and the Lorain County Board of
Health on services and health-related issues in the community.
         F.   Reviews and studies all emergency vehicles, emergency
communication matters, emergency response apparatus, and special task forces.
      (7)   Building and Utilities Committee.
         A.   All ordinances, resolutions and other matters relating to the
Communications and Technology Department; the city-owned cable access channels
and studio, including telephones, radios, computer hardware or software, social
media, city website, marketing, technology, community outreach; water,
sanitary, additions, repairs, improvements of sanitary, hydrants, electrical
lines, gas lines, data lines, index of line breaks, sewer assessments and such
matters shall be referred to the Building and Utilities Committee under the
jurisdiction of the city and Avon Lake Regional Water and are the
responsibility of the Building and Utilities Committee for study, investigation
and recommendation to Council.
         B.   Whenever possible, the Chairperson of the Buildings and Utilities
Committee will attend Avon Lake Regional Water public meetings.
         C.   One member of the Building and Utilities Committee shall serve as
an ex officio, non-voting member of the Communications and Technology
Commission.
         D.   Reviews the Building Department’s goals and objectives, including
construction and renovation of buildings, issues pertaining to water, gas,
electrical light and power shall be considered and recommended to Council.
         E.   Reviews city utility contracts with power distribution including
street lights.
         F.   Works with other committees related to renewable energy.
         G.   Oversees issues of informational technology within the Council
Chamber and the city, including network security, radios and all other
communications.
(Ord. 21-2010, passed 2-22-2010; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014; Ord. 196-2017,
passed 12-18-2017; Ord. 21-07, passed 1-25-2021; Ord. 25-116, passed 7-14-2025;
Ord. 25-198R, passed 12-15-2025)
§ 220.06 SPECIAL COMMITTEES.
   Special committees of Council shall be appointed by the Council President,
by general consent.
(Ord. 61-02, passed 3-11-2002; Ord. 25-198R, passed 12-15-2025)
§ 220.07 COMMITTEE MEETINGS.
   (a)   A majority of the committee members shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business. Each committee shall hold its meetings at such a time
and place as fixed by the Chairperson of the respective committee.
   (b)   Each committee or Chairperson may require the attendance at its
meeting of such department heads and city officials as, in its judgment, are
needed to properly study the matters under consideration.
   (c)   A written record of the topics discussed at the committee meeting
shall be maintained by the Clerk of Council.
(Ord. 61-02, passed 3-11-2002; Ord. 25-116, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 220.08 REFERENCE TO MORE THAN ONE COMMITTEE.
   Whenever a matter is referred to more than one committee, each may meet
separately or upon consent of both Chairpersons, they may meet jointly. Each
member of the joint committee shall have one vote.
(Ord. 61-02, passed 3-11-2002)
§ 220.09 COMMITTEE REPORTS.
   Committee reports may be made orally or in writing to Council for its
consideration, discussion, amendment and final action.
(Ord. 61-02, passed 3-11-2002)
§ 220.10 AGENDA.
   (a)   Not later than the Friday immediately preceding each scheduled meeting
of Council, the Clerk of Council shall prepare and distribute to members and
the Administration a copy of the agenda for the next subsequent meeting of
Council and, to the extent possible, copies of proposed new legislation and
communications referred to on such agenda.
   (b)   Legislation not appearing on the agenda may be added to the agenda by
a two-thirds vote of the members of Council.
   (c)   Legislation appearing on the agenda may be removed from the agenda by
a two-thirds vote of the members of Council.
(Ord. 61-02, passed 3-11-2002; Ord. 25-116, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 220.11 ORDER OF BUSINESS AT A COUNCIL MEETING.
   When the members of Council are duly organized for the transaction of
business, the following order shall be observed:
   (a)   Pledge of Allegiance;
   (b)   Roll call of members of Council to determine the presence of a quorum;
   (c)   Excusal of absences:
      (1)   The Presiding Officer may, by general consent, excuse members of
Council absent for good cause.
      (2)   If any member of Council objects to the excusal, the matter shall
be decided by a vote by of the majority members of Council present.
   (d)   Dispensation of Reading and Approval of Minutes. The Presiding Officer
may dispense with the reading and approval of the minutes, provided that:
      (1)   All members of Council present have received a copy of such minutes
in advance of the meeting.
      (2)   No present member of Council objects to dispensing with the
reading.
      (3)   No changes shall be made to the minutes except by:
         A.   A vote of the majority of the members of Council at the meeting
for which the minutes were kept; or
         B.   A vote of three-fourths of the total membership of Council.
   (e)   Presentation of official communications and reading and disposal of
the same. There being no objections, all correspondence received by Council
shall be considered filed;
   (f)   Legislation required for the appointment to office, administration of
the oaths of office, expression of gratitude and issuance of ceremonial
proclamations to be enacted;
   (g)   Public hearing;
   (h)   Public input:
      (1)   Each member of the audience wishing to speak shall be permitted to
speak only once for up to five minutes on any topic.
      (2)   Additional time, not to exceed five additional minutes, may be
granted by a two- thirds vote of the members of Council present.
      (3)   Every speaker shall address the presiding officer and refrain from
personal attacks, indecorous language and becoming boisterous.
   (i)   Reports from the Mayor, the Council President, the Public Works
Director, the Law Director, the Finance Director and any other public official;
   (j)   Reports of standing committees, in the order set forth in § 220.05;
   (k)   Reports of special committees, followed by board and commission
liaison reports;
   (l)   Motions;
   (m)   Unfinished business:
      (1)   Third reading and disposition of ordinances and resolutions;
      (2)   Second reading of ordinances and resolutions;
   (n)   New business. First reading of ordinances and resolutions;
   (o)   Miscellaneous business and announcements; and
   (p)   Adjournment.
   No change shall be made to this order of business, nor shall any part be
omitted, except by a vote of three-fourths of the members of Council at the
meeting.
(Ord. 61-02, passed 3-11-2002; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014; Ord. 25-116,
passed 7-14-2025; Ord. 25-198R, passed 12-15-2025)
§ 220.12 RULES OF THE FLOOR AND DEBATE.
   (a)   Recognition and decorum. Every member of Council desiring to speak
shall address the presiding officer. Upon recognition by the presiding officer,
the member of Council shall confine their remarks to the question under debate
and shall refrain from indecorous language.
   (b)   Interruption and points of order. Once recognized, a member of Council
shall not be interrupted while speaking, except when a call to order, or a
point of order is raised. In such cases, the member of Council shall
immediately cease speaking and may resume only when permitted to do by the
presiding officer.
   (c)   Privilege of the sponsor. The member of Council moving for the
adoption of an ordinance or resolution shall have the privilege of opening and
closing the debate.
   (d)   Record of debate. The Clerk of Council shall record in the official
minutes a synopsis of the discussion of any matter that is formally presented
before Council. If any member of Council requests that a complete written
statement be included in the minutes, and the requesting member provides the
full written text of the statement, the Clerk of Council shall include that
statement in its entirety in the official minutes.
(Ord. 61-02, passed 3-11-2002; Ord. 25-116, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 220.13 MOTIONS.
   When a motion is made, the Council President shall call for discussion on
the question. Before the vote, any motion may be withdrawn by its maker,
provided a majority present gives consent.
(Ord. 61-02, passed 3-11-2002)
§ 220.14 SECONDS.
   No second shall be required for any motion. It is the expressed sense of
members of Council that the practice of seconding of motions is unnecessary and
a superfluous formality.
(Ord. 61-02, passed 3-11-2002; Ord. 25-116, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 220.15 ORDER OF PRECEDENCE OF MOTIONS.
   Whenever a question is before members of Council or under debate, the
following motions shall be ranked in the following order.
   (a)   To adjourn.
      (1)   The motion to adjourn shall always be in order, except when members
of Council are engaged in voting.
      (2)   It shall be decided by a majority vote of the members of Council
without debate.
   (b)   To recess.
      (1)   A recess may be called at any time by the presiding officer, by
general consent, or by motion by any member of Council.
      (2)   This motion is not debatable and can have no other motion applied
to it except to amend as to the length of the recess.
      (3)   This motion shall require a majority vote of members of Council.
   (c)   To lay on the table.
      (1)   A motion to lay on the table is not debatable or amendable and
requires a majority vote of members of Council to adopt.
      (2)   This motion shall only be used to lay a question aside temporarily
at the same meeting.
   (d)   To close debate.
      (1)   A motion to close debate is also known as a motion to move the
previous question.
      (2)   When any member of Council moves to close debate and the motion is
carried by the greater of a two-thirds vote, there shall be no further
amendment or debate.
      (3)   Pending amendments shall be voted in reverse order before voting on
the main question.
      (4)   If less than two-thirds vote to close debate, the main question and
any amendments are open for further discussion.
   (e)   To limit or extend debate.
      (1)   A motion to limit or extend the total debate time on a specific
question requires a motion and approval by a two-thirds vote of members of
Council present.
      (2)   Motion to limit or extend debate are subject to subsequent
amendment.
   (f)   To postpone to a certain time or meeting. This motion shall be used to
postpone legislative action until the next or a subsequent meeting, or until
after a certain report or event (which items may be amended). The postponement
shall require a majority vote.
   (g)   To refer to a committee.
      (1)   Council may by motion refer a matter to either a standing committee
or a special committee of Council to enable the question to be more carefully
studied and investigated and thereby rendered more clarified for members of
Council to consider.
      (2)   This motion is debatable and amendable and requires a majority vote
of members of Council to adopt. It may be reconsidered unless the committee has
begun consideration of the question referred to it.
      (3)   A motion to refer may be made by any member of Council, or the
presiding officer may, by general consent, refer any question to committee.
   (h)   To amend.
      (1)   It shall be in order to amend an ordinance at any time, but if
substantially amended upon the third reading, the reading shall be postponed to
the next meeting or referred to a committee for further study and members of
Council’s final action.
      (2)   An amendment to any question may be in any of the following forms:
         A.   To insert or add at the end;
         B.   To strike out; or
         C.   To substitute.
(Ord. 61-02, passed 3-11-2002; Ord. 25-116, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 220.16 INTRODUCTION OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   Ordinances and resolutions shall be presented and moved for adoption by any
member of Council, who shall be at liberty to make a brief statement of the
object and purposes.
(Ord. 61-02, passed 3-11-2002; Ord. 25-116, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 220.17 THREE READINGS.
   (a)   No ordinance or resolution shall be passed until it has been read on
three different meetings of Council, unless this rule is suspended by a two-
thirds vote of members of Council.
   (b)   All ordinances and resolutions shall be read by title only, unless, by
general consent or a majority vote of members of Council decide to have any
ordinance or resolution read in its entirety.
   (c)   Any proposed legislation which is pending final passage at the end of
any Council’s term, and upon which no action has been taken for the previous
six months, shall be rendered null and void on the last day of any Council’s
term.
(Ord. 61-02, passed 3-11-2002; Ord. 25-116, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 220.18 PASSAGE OR ADOPTION.
   All ordinances and resolutions shall require a majority vote of members of
Council for adoption unless a greater vote is required by law or this chapter.
(Ord. 61-02, passed 3-11-2002; Ord. 25-116, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 220.19 VOTING.
   (a)   During collective committee meetings and work sessions any member of
Council may request an informal poll (voice vote) of Council on any subject
being discussed. No vote taken at a collective committee meeting or work
session shall be considered official or binding.
   (b)   At regular Council meetings every member shall vote by roll call,
either “yes” or “no” on all questions before members of Council. However, when
a member shows a conflict of interest, he or she may be excused on motion and
vote from members of Council. A “yes” vote shall be considered a “yea” vote and
a “no” vote shall be considered a “nay” vote, pursuant to Section 9 of the
Municipal Charter.
   (c)   All voting shall be done by consecutive alphabetical rotation. An
alphabetical list of Council members shall be kept by the Clerk of Council and
the first vote of the first Council meeting of the year shall be cast by the
member of Council whose name is first on the list. The rest of the votes shall
then be cast in alphabetical order. All votes for the meeting shall be cast in
such order. The voting at all subsequent Council meetings shall continue in
rotating alphabetical order until the member of Council whose name is last on
the list has cast the first vote on all issues at the meeting, at which time
the rotation shall begin again. Refusal to vote shall be deemed contempt of
Council, and the member so refusing to vote shall be censured or suspended at
the discretion of Council in separate proceedings or charges in contempt.
(Ord. 61-02, passed 3-11-2002; Ord. 25-116, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 220.20 GENERAL CONSENT.
   (a)   When there is evidently no opposition to a particular question, the
formality of a vote may be waived. In such cases, the Presiding Officer may
state: “If there is no objection,” followed by a clear statement of the
proposed action. If no member of Council voices an objection, the action shall
be considered approved by general consent, and no formal vote will be required.
   (b)   If one member of Council objects to such action or parliamentary
procedure, the presiding officer shall take a majority vote of members of
Council on the question.
(Ord. 61-02, passed 3-11-2002; Ord. 25-116, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 220.21 PUBLIC INPUT.
   (a)   Regular Council meeting.
      (1)   Any person may address members of Council only once during the
public input portion of the meeting on any topic. The speaker shall be allowed
five minutes, unless the time is extended by the presiding officer or the
consent of whichever is greater of two-thirds votes of members of Council.
Members of Council shall be allowed to direct questions to the speaker, through
the presiding officer.
      (2)   All remarks shall be addressed to the presiding officer and not to
any individual member of Council. No person, other than members of Council and/
or the administration and the person having the floor shall be permitted to
enter any discussion, either directly or through a member of Council, without
the permission of the presiding officer. No question shall be asked to member
of Council except through the presiding officer.
      (3)   All persons wishing to address members of Council shall state their
name and city where they reside.
      (4)   No question shall be asked a Council member except through the
presiding officer. An elected official cannot step down from the dais as a
resident to address members of Council
      (5)   No person shall disrupt the meeting of Council.
      (6)   Speakers cannot donate their time to others.
      (7)   Consultants to Council and invited guests may present information
and may be called upon to respond to questions from members of Council, the
administration, or city staff at any point during a meeting, at the discretion
of the presiding officer.
   (b)   Collective committee meeting.
      (1)   At the beginning of the meeting, there shall be public input during
which time any person may address members of Council on any topic. Each speaker
shall address members of Council only once. They shall be allowed five minutes,
unless the time is extended by the presiding officer or the consent of
whichever is greater of two-thirds votes of members of Council. Members of
Council shall be allowed to direct questions to the speaker only through the
presiding officer.
      (2)   All remarks shall be addressed to the presiding officer. No person,
other than members of Council and/or the administration and the person having
the floor, shall be permitted to enter any discussion, either directly or
through a member of Council, without the permission of the presiding officer.
No question shall be asked to a member of Council except through the presiding
officer.
      (3)   All persons wishing to address members of Council shall state their
name and city where they reside.
      (4)   No question shall be asked a Council member except through the
presiding officer. An elected official cannot step down from the dais as a
resident to address members of Council.
      (5)   No person shall disrupt the meeting.
      (6)   Speakers cannot donate their time to others.
      (7)   Consultants to Council and invited guests may present information
and may be called upon to respond to questions from members of Council, the
administration, or city staff at any point during a meeting, at the discretion
of the presiding officer.
   (c)   Work session.
      (1)   Any person may address members of Council only once during the
audience participation portion of the meeting and only on matters specifically
related to the work session topics. The speaker shall be allowed five minutes,
unless the time is extended by the presiding officer or members of Council.
Council shall be allowed to direct questions to the speaker through the
presiding officer.
      (2)   All remarks shall be addressed to Council as a body and not to any
member. No person, other than members of Council and/or the administration, and
the person having the floor, shall be permitted to enter any discussion, either
directly or through a member of Council, without the permission of the
presiding officer. No question shall be asked a Council member except through
the presiding officer.
      (3)   All persons wishing to address members of Council shall state their
name and city where they reside.
      (4)   No question shall be asked a Council member except through the
presiding officer. An elected official cannot step down from the dais as a
resident to address members of Council.
      (5)   No person shall disrupt the meeting.
      (6)   Speakers cannot donate their time to others.
      (7)   Consultants to Council and invited guests may present information
and may be called upon to respond to questions from members of Council, the
administration, or city staff at any point during a meeting, at the discretion
of the presiding officer.
(Ord. 61-02, passed 3-11-2002; Ord. 40-04, passed 2-23-2004; Ord. 146-06,
passed 12-18-2006; Ord. 25-116, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 220.22 RESIGNATION.
   The resignation of a member of Council shall not take effect until accepted
by a majority vote of the members of Council, exclusive of the person tendering
the resignation. Vacancies shall be filled according to Chapter II, Section 6,
of the City Charter.
(Ord. 61-02, passed 3-11-2002)
§ 220.23 PARLIAMENTARY AUTHORITY.
   (a)   Technicalities of parliamentary procedure may not be invoked except
when necessary to avoid or prevent an interruption of the orderly procedure of
business before members of Council.
   (b)   Robert’s Rules of Order Newly Revised may govern the proceedings of
Council, except where the Charter or Council’s adopted, written policies and
rules clearly render them inapplicable.
   (c)   The presiding officer shall adhere to the rules contained in this
chapter and other policies and rules formally adopted by Council prior to the
meeting of the public body.
(Ord. 61-02, passed 3-11-2002; Ord. 25-116, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 220.24 SUSPENSION OF THE RULES.
   The rules contained in this chapter, or any one of them, when not precluded
by statute or the Charter of the city, may be temporarily suspended at any
meeting of Council by a two-thirds majority vote of the members of Council,
except when a greater vote is required by law.
(Ord. 61-02, passed 3-11-2002; Ord. 25-116, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 220.25 AMENDMENT OF THE RULES.
   (a)   The rules contained in this chapter may be amended or new rules
adopted by a two-thirds majority vote of members of Council at any regular or
special meeting.
   (b)   All amendments or new rules adopted by Council shall be attached to
this chapter, together with the effective date of the same.
(Ord. 61-02, passed 3-11-2002; Ord. 25-116, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 220.26 SUBPOENAS.
   Subject to the limitations imposed by §
268.02 of the code of ordinances, members of Council shall have the power to
subpoena witnesses and books, documents, records or other evidence at the
request of any member of Council for the purpose of investigating charges
against an officer or employee. Upon motion adopted by members of Council, the
President of Council or, in his or her absence or unavailability, the President
Pro Tempore shall sign any subpoena to be issued pursuant to this section, and
such subpoena shall be served and executed by any person authorized to serve
subpoenas, and in the manner required, by Rule 45 of the Ohio Rules of Civil
Procedure. The return of such subpoena shall be filed with the Clerk of
Council. The Law Director, the Assistant Law Director, or in their absence or
unavailability, any member of Council may administer the requisite oaths to
witnesses, and members of Council shall have the same power to compel the
giving of testimony by the attending witnesses as is conferred upon courts of
justice. In all such cases, witnesses shall be entitled to the same privileges,
immunities and compensation as are allowed witnesses in civil cases, and the
cost shall be paid from the General Fund of the city. Any person who refuses to
obey a subpoena issued pursuant to this section or to testify in response to
such subpoena shall be guilty of contempt of Council, a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
(Ord. 68-2015, passed 6-8-2015; Ord. 124-2016, passed 9-26-2016; Ord. 25-116,
passed 7-14-2025)
CHAPTER 222: ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
Section
222.01 Posting
222.02 Sale of code of ordinances and component codes
§ 222.01 POSTING.
   All ordinances, resolutions, statements, orders, proclamations, notices and
reports of the city required to be published shall be published by being posted
for a period of not less than 15 days next following action thereon, in the
following places, which are hereby determined by Council to be five of the most
public places in the city, except for notices to bidders for the construction
of public improvements and notices of the sale of bonds, which shall be
published in a newspaper as provided by R.C. § 731.25, for the time provided by
R.C. § 731.22:
   (a)   At the entrance of the Old Firehouse (100 Avon Belden Road);
   (b)   At the entrance of the Avon Lake Public Library;
   (c)   At the entrance of the Post Office Building;
   (d)   At the entrance of the Municipal Building; and
   (e)   At the entrance of Drug Mart (33382 Walker Road).
(Ord. 83-98, passed 5-11-1998; Ord. 113-2017, passed 7-10-2017)
§ 222.02 SALE OF CODE OF ORDINANCES AND COMPONENT CODES.
   (a)   The Clerk of Council shall have custody of the published and printed
copies of the code of ordinances and parts thereof of the city and shall be
responsible for the distribution and sale thereof. The Clerk is hereby
authorized to distribute copies to all municipal officers, employees and
departments as needed in the performance of their official duties, and such
persons and departments shall be charged with the maintenance and safekeeping
thereof, as with other municipal property.
   (b)   The schedule of rates for the sale of the code of ordinances and parts
thereof of the city shall be as set forth in
Chapter 208 - the General Fee Schedule.
   (c)   The Clerk, with the approval of the Mayor, is hereby authorized to
furnish free copies of the code of ordinances to any federal, state, county or
municipal law library or public library which may have a need therefor or which
may hold the same for public inspection on a loan, reduced charge or no charge
basis.
(Ord. 95-74, passed 6-10-1974)
TITLE SIX - Administration
   
Chap. 230. Mayor.
   
Chap. 232. Finance Director.
   
Chap. 234. Employment and Use of Outside Counsel.
   
Chap. 238. Safety Department.
   
Chap. 240. Police Department.
   
Chap. 242. Fire Department.
   
Chap. 244. Public Works Department.
   
Chap. 247. Urban Forester.
   
Chap. 248. Recreation Department.
   
Chap. 249. Communications & Technology Department.
   
Chap. 250. Avon Lake Community Improvement Corporation.
   
Chap. 251. Community Development Department.
   
Chap. 252. Purchasing Procedures.
   
Chap. 254. Conflicts of Interest.
   
Chap. 256. Personnel Administration.
   
Chap. 258. Wage and Salary Administration.
   
Chap. 260. Employees Generally.
   
Chap. 268. Subpoenas.
CHAPTER 230: MAYOR
Section
230.01 Benefits; duties
§ 230.01 BENEFITS; DUTIES.
   (a)   The benefits provided in §
260.04 (Sick Leave), §
260.08 (Holidays), §
260.10 (Health Insurance), §
260.11 (Life Insurance), §
260.19 (Bereavement Leave) and §
260.21 (Jury Duty) shall also be paid and/or provided to the Mayor, effective
January 1, 2000.
   (b)   The Mayor shall also receive an annual vacation of two normal work
weeks with pay as of January 1, 2000. Further, the Mayor shall receive two
personal holidays in addition to the four personal holidays provided in §
260.08(e).
   (c)   The salary and benefits to be paid and provided to the Mayor as set
forth herein and as established by Council from time to time are the total
compensation to be so paid and provided for the performance of the duties of
the Mayor’s office as established by applicable laws. Such duties include, but
are not limited to, the general supervision of the Police Department, Fire
Department and all other departments created from time to time having to do
with the preservation of the safety of persons and property within the city,
until such latter duty is otherwise provided for by Council as provided in
Section 40 of the Avon Lake Charter.
   (d)   The benefits set forth herein shall be effective for the Mayor’s term
of office commencing on January 1, 2000.
(Ord. 10-99, passed 1-25-1999; Ord. 27-2015, passed 3-9-2015)
CHAPTER 232: FINANCE DIRECTOR
Section
232.01 Investment of surplus moneys
232.02 Authority to sign vouchers and checks
232.03 Fixed asset and supply inventories; audits
232.04 Authority for making and redemption of interim deposits
232.05 Reimbursement of capital expenditures from reimbursement bonds;
declarations of official intent required
232.06 Investment policy
232.07 Finance Director
§ 232.01 INVESTMENT OF SURPLUS MONEYS.
   (a)   Whenever there are moneys in the Treasury of the city which are not
required to be used for a period of six months or more, such moneys may, in
lieu of being deposited in a bank or banks, be invested in accordance with R.C.
§§  731.56  through  731.59 . Investments so purchased shall be sold in
accordance with R.C. §  731.57 .
   (b)   Premiums and discounts on investment purchases shall be credited to or
charged against interest. Gains and losses in the sale of investment securities
shall be credited to or paid from interest.
   (c)   All interest earned, net of adjustments required by division (b) of
this section, on present investments and deposits of various interim and
inactive municipal funds, except those funds having the application of earnings
specifically designated by statute or ordinance, shall be credited to the
Improvement Fund as earned.
(Ord. 114-88, passed 6-27-1988)
§ 232.02 AUTHORITY TO SIGN VOUCHERS AND CHECKS.
   (a)   The Mayor or, in his or her absence, the President of Council and the
Finance Director are hereby authorized to sign all vouchers for the payment of
obligations of the city authorized by law.
   (b)   The Finance Director is hereby authorized to use his or her signature
or a facsimile signature on checks hereafter drawn on the City Payroll Account.
   (c)   The designated depository of municipal funds is hereby authorized to
accept orders drawn on city funds when signed by the signatures set forth in
divisions (a) and (b) of this section.
(Res. 114-88, passed 6-27-1988)
§ 232.03 FIXED ASSET AND SUPPLY INVENTORIES; AUDITS.
   (a)   The Finance Department shall maintain a perpetual fixed asset
inventory and accounting system for the following assets owned by the city:
      (1)   All land, improvements and buildings; and
      (2)   All machinery, tools, vehicles and equipment with a cost of $10,000
or more and an estimated useful life of more than one year and all
infrastructure, including, but not limited to, water, sanitary and storm sewer,
bridges, roads, culverts, breakwalls and street lighting for the 2012 Annual
Financial Report and the 2012 Audit and thereafter.
   (b)   The system shall include information sufficient to prepare financial
statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
   (c)   Subsidiary records of detailed information for the assets in the
system shall be maintained in each department, as deemed necessary by the
Finance Director.
   (d)   Annually, on or before December 1, the Director will provide each
department with a listing of its assets in the system. Within 30 days after
receipt, each department head will inform the Director of additions and
disposals not recorded, or other corrections required for the information
listed. Copies of corrected listings shall be provided by the Director to the
department heads.
   (e)   In addition to the fixed assets inventory and accounting system, the
Finance Department will compile and retain separate purchase records for
buildings, vehicles, machinery, tools and equipment with a cost equal to or
more than $5,000 but less than $9,999.99 and an estimated useful life of more
than one year.
   (f)   An annual inventory of consumable supplies and repair or replacement
parts in each department shall be taken under the direction of the Finance
Director. It will include items with a cost of $500 or more.
   (g)   All department heads shall provide an accounting, on forms prescribed
by the Director, of all moneys received or disbursed by his or her department.
Such funds shall be subject to an audit which may be made by the Director, and
the results thereof shall be reported to the Mayor and the Finance Committee.
(Ord. 114-88, passed 6-27-1988; Ord. 110-2013, passed 7-8-2013; Ord. 115-2013,
passed 8-26-2013)
§ 232.04 AUTHORITY FOR MAKING AND REDEMPTION OF INTERIM DEPOSITS.
   (a)   The following city officials, in the order indicated, are hereby
authorized to act with full power to make and redeem interim deposits in public
depositories selected by the city and to execute and deliver any instrument
necessary to effectuate the authority hereby conferred:
      (1)   Finance Director;
      (2)   Mayor;
      (3)   Council President (in the Mayor’s absence); and
      (4)   Law Director.
   (b)   The making and redeeming of interim deposits encompass activities such
as depositing, withdrawing, rolling over, closing and designating the
disposition of funds, including giving instructions to wire transfer funds.
   (c)   Withdrawals shall be limited to those whereby the proceeds are
remitted only to nonpayroll checking, savings or investment accounts maintained
by the city in either its selected public depositories or with the State
Treasury Asset Reserve of Ohio (STAR OHIO).
   (d)   Those public depositories selected by the city are hereby authorized
to honor personal, telephonic, telegraphic or written instructions received
from any one of the city officials authorized in division (a) of this section
to act on behalf of the city in making and redeeming interim deposits.
(Res. 72-88, passed 3-28-1988)
§ 232.05 REIMBURSEMENT OF CAPITAL EXPENDITURES FROM REIMBURSEMENT BONDS;
DECLARATIONS OF OFFICIAL INTENT REQUIRED.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AUTHORIZED OFFICER. The Finance Director as fiscal officer or any person
designated for the purpose by the fiscal officer.
      BONDS. Includes bonds, notes, certificates and other obligations included
in the meaning of the term BOND as defined in § 150 of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986, 26 U.S.C. § 150, as amended.
      DECLARATION OF OFFICIAL INTENT. A declaration of intent, in the form,
manner and time contemplated in the reimbursement regulations, as defined in
this division (a), that the advances for expenditures referred to in the
declaration are reasonably expected to be reimbursed from the proceeds of
reimbursement bonds to be issued after the expenditure is paid.
      REIMBURSEMENT or REIMBURSE. The restoration to the city of money
temporarily advanced from its other funds and spent for capital expenditures
(and certain other types of expenditures qualifying under the reimbursement
regulations, including any issuance costs for reimbursement bonds) before the
issuance of the reimbursement bonds, evidenced in writing by an allocation on
the city’s books and records that shows the use of the proceeds of the
reimbursement bonds to restore the money advanced for the original expenditure.
The term REIMBURSEMENT or REIMBURSE generally does not include the refunding or
retiring of bonds previously issued and sold to, or borrowings from, unrelated
entities.
      REIMBURSEMENT BONDS. Bonds, the proceeds of which are to be used for
reimbursement.
      REIMBURSEMENT REGULATIONS. Treasury Regulations § 1.150-2, and any
amendments thereto or superseding regulations, whether in proposed, temporary
or final form, as at the time applicable, prescribing conditions under which
the proceeds of reimbursement bonds, when allocated or applied to a
reimbursement, will be treated as expended for all or any purposes of §§ 103
and 141 to 150 of the Internal Revenue Code, 26 U.S.C. §§ 103 and 141 to 150.
   (b)   Authority of authorized officer; declarations. Each authorized officer
is authorized to:
      (1)   Prepare and sign declarations of official intent with respect to
capital and other expenditures to which the reimbursement regulations apply
(including any costs of issuance of reimbursement bonds) to be made from money
temporarily available and which are reasonably expected to be reimbursed (in
accordance with applicable city authorizations, policies and practices) from
the proceeds of reimbursement bonds;
      (2)   Make appropriate reimbursement and timely allocations from proceeds
of reimbursement bonds to reimburse such prior expenditures; and
      (3)   Take any other actions as may be appropriate, all at the times and
in the manner required under the reimbursement regulations, to satisfy the
requirements for the reimbursement to be treated as an expenditure of such
proceeds for purposes of §§ 103 and 141 to 150 of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986, as amended.
   No advance from any fund, account or order for payment may be made for
expenditures (other than expenditures excepted from such requirement under the
reimbursement regulations) that are to be reimbursed subsequently from proceeds
of reimbursement bonds unless a declaration of official intent with respect
thereto is made within the time required by the reimbursement regulations. All
declarations of official intent heretofore made on behalf of the city are
hereby ratified and adopted.
(Ord. 163-93, passed 11-22-1993)
§ 232.06 INVESTMENT POLICY.
   (a)   Scope.
      (1)   The investing authority shall reside with the Finance Director in
accordance with this investment policy. This policy is designed to cover all
moneys and financial assets under the control of the city and those that
comprise the core investment portfolio. These funds are accounted for in the
city’s annual general purpose finance statements and include any new funds
created by the Council, unless specifically exempted. Notwithstanding the
policies detailed below, R.C. Chapter 135, Chapters V and X of the Charter, and
this
Chapter 232 of this code of ordinances will be adhered to at all times.
      (2)   The Finance Director is authorized to pool cash balances from the
several different funds of the city and the city’s municipal utilities
(“municipal utilities”) for investment purposes. Unless otherwise restricted,
all investment earnings will be apportioned between the city and municipal
utilities based on month-end cash balances. The investment earnings of the city
will be credited to the improvement fund of the city and the investment
earnings of the municipal utilities will be credited to the appropriate
accounts of the municipal utilities.
   (b)   Objectives and guidelines.
      (1)   The following investment objectives will be applied in the
management of city funds.
         A.   The primary objective shall be the preservation of capital and
protection of principal while earning investment income.
         B.   In investing public funds, the Finance Director will strive to
achieve a fair and safe average market rate of return on the investment
portfolio over the course of budgetary and economic cycles, taking into account
state law, safety considerations, and cash flow.
         C.   The investment portfolio shall remain sufficiently liquid to
enable the Finance Director to meet all operating requirements that may be
reasonably anticipated.
         D.   Investments shall be made with the degree of judgment and care,
under circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and
intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for
speculation but for investment, considering the probable safety of their
capital as well as the probable income to be derived.
      (2)   The standard of prudence to be used by the Finance Director shall
be the “prudent person” standard and shall be applied in the context of
managing the overall portfolio. Acting in accordance with this investment
policy and exercising due diligence will relieve the Finance Director of any
personal responsibility for an individual security’s credit risk or market
price changes, provided deviations from expectation are reported in a timely
fashion to the Finance Committee of Council and appropriate action is taken to
control adverse developments.
   (c)   Delegation of authority. Management responsibility for the investment
is delegated to the Finance Director, who shall establish written procedures
for the operation of the investment program consistent with this investment
policy. No person may engage in an investment transaction except as provided
under the terms of this policy and the procedures established by the Finance
Director. The Finance Director is responsible for all transactions undertaken
and shall establish a system of controls to regulate the activities of
subordinate officials.
   (d)   Ethics and conflicts of interest.
      (1)   Officers and employees involved in the investment process shall
refrain from personal business activity that could conflict with the proper
execution and management of the investment program or that could impair their
ability to make impartial decisions. Employees and Council members shall
disclose any material interest in financial institutions with which they
conduct business. They shall further disclose any material personal financial/
investment positions to the Finance Committee of Council that could be related
to the performance of the investment portfolio. Employees and officers shall
refrain from undertaking personal investment transactions with the same
individual or firm with whom business is conducted on behalf of the city.
      (2)   The above supplements the applicable provisions of Ohio ethics
laws.
   (e)   Authorized financial institutions and dealers.
      (1)   U.S. Treasury and Agency securities purchased outright shall be
purchased only through financial institutions located within the State of Ohio
or through primary securities dealers as designated by the Federal Reserve
Board. Repurchase agreements shall be transacted only through banks located
within the state with which the Finance Director has signed a master repurchase
agreement as required in R.C. Chapter 135.
      (2)   Certificates of deposit shall be transacted through commercial
banks or savings and loans, Members of FDIC or FSLIC which are located within
the state and qualify as eligible financial institutions under R.C. Chapter
135.
      (3)   A list of authorized institutions and dealers shall be maintained
with the Finance Director. Additions and deletions to this list shall be made
when deemed in the best interest of the city. Priority shall be given to those
financial institutions who maintain a presence within the city’s boundaries. No
out of state entities shall be utilized for investment purposes.
   (f)   Maturity.
      (1)   To the extent possible, the Finance Director will attempt to match
investments with anticipated cash flow requirements. Unless matched to specific
cash flow requirements, the Finance Director will not directly invest in
securities maturing more than five years from the date of purchase.
      (2)   Securities shall not be sold prior to maturity with the following
exceptions:
         A.   A declining credit security could be sold early to minimize loss
of principal;
         B.   A security swap would improve the quality, yield or target
duration in the portfolio; or
         C.   Liquidity needs of the portfolio require that the security be
sold.
   (g)   Prohibited investments. The following types of investments are
prohibited:
      (1)   Investments in derivatives and stripped principal or interest
obligations of eligible obligations. A derivative means a financial instrument
or contract or obligation whose value or return is based upon or linked to
another asset or index, or both, separate from the financial instrument,
contract or obligation itself;
      (2)   Leveraging of current investments as collateral to purchase other
assets;
      (3)   The issuance of taxable notes for the purpose of arbitrage; or
      (4)   Investing in a fund established by another public body for the
purpose of investing public money of other subdivisions, except for STAR Ohio,
STAR Plus and any federally insured cash account offered by the State Treasurer
of Ohio.
   (h)   Authorized investments.
      (1)   The Finance Director may invest in any instrument or security
authorized in R.C. Chapter 135 as amended, and only at a price not exceeding
its fair market value. The city is authorized to invest in the following types
of securities:
         A.   U.S. government obligations, U.S. government agency obligations
and U.S. government instrumentality obligations, or any other security issued
by the United States Treasury or any other obligation guaranteed as to
principal and interest by the United States (not including “stripped” principal
or interest obligations);
         B.   Repurchase agreements secured by such obligations as listed in
division (h)(1)A. of this section, provided that:
            1.   All such investments under this section shall be made with a
bank or savings and loan associations eligible to be a depository for public
funds of Ohio subdivision; and
            2.   Any such fund meets the requirements of R.C. Chapter 135
(including the requirement that the fund not contain any investments in
“derivatives”).
         C.   Certificate of deposit;
         D.   Bonds and other obligations of the state;
         E.   Investments through an eligible institution in no loan money
market mutual funds consisting exclusively of securities described in division
(h)(1)A. above;
         F.   STAR Ohio, STAR Plus and any federally funded cash account
offered by the State Treasurer of Ohio;
         G.   City of Avon Lake, Ohio notes and bonds;
         H.   Interim deposits in duly authorized depositories of the city,
provided those deposits are properly insured or collateralized as required by
law;
         I.   Bonds, notes, debentures or other obligations or securities
issued by any federal government agency or instrumentality, including but not
limited to the Federal National Mortgage Association, Federal Home Loan Bank,
Federal Farm Credit Bank, Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, Government
National Mortgage Association and Student Loan Marketing Association. All such
securities must be direct issuances of federal government agencies or
instrumentalities;
         J.   Overnight or term (not exceeding 30 days) repurchase agreements
meeting the requirements of R.C. § 1351.4(e), with:
            1.   A bank or savings and loan associations eligible to be a
depository of public funds of Ohio subdivision; or
            2.   An NASD member.
         K.   Up to 25% of interim moneys available for investment in either of
the following:
            1.   Commercial paper notes issued by an entity that is defined in
R.C. § 1706.01(K) and that has assets exceeding $500,000,000 to which all of
the following apply:
               a.   The notes are rated at the time of purchase in the highest
classification established by at least two nationally recognized standard
rating services;
               b.   The aggregate value of the notes does not exceed 10% of the
aggregate value of outstanding commercial paper of the issuing corporation; or
               c.   The notes mature not later than 180 days after purchase.
            2.   Bankers acceptances of bands that are insured by the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation and to which both of the following apply:
               a.   The obligations are eligible for purchase by the Federal
Reserve System; and
               b.   The obligations mature not later than 180 days after
purchase.
      No investment shall be made pursuant to this section unless the Finance
Director has completed additional training for making the investments
authorized by this section. The type and amount of additional training shall be
approved by the Auditor of State and may be conducted by or provided under the
supervision of the Auditor of State.
      (2)   All security transactions where applicable will be executed by
delivery vs. payment (DVP). This ensures that securities are deposited in the
eligible financial institution prior to the release of funds. Securities will
be held by a third party custodian as evidenced by safekeeping receipts. The
DVP requirement applies to all transactions except those repurchase items
occurring with an eligible financial institution.
   (i)   Diversification. To avoid incurring unreasonable risks inherent in
over-investing in specific instruments, individual financial institutions,
dealers or maturities, the Finance Director will diversify the active portfolio
as follows:
 
Instrument                                Maximum Percent of City’s Active
                                          Portfolio
U.S. Treasury Obligations                 100 %
Authorized U.S. Federal Agency Securities 50%
Certificates of deposit                   25%
STAR Ohio and Star PLUS                   90%
Repurchase agreements                     40%
Commercial paper or bankers acceptances   25%
 
   (j)   Collateral. All deposits shall be collateralized pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 135. Repurchase agreements must be collateralized with securities
authorized within this investment policy. The market value of such securities
must exceed the value of the agreement by at least 2% and must be marked to
market daily.
   (k)   Inventory of investments; reporting. The Finance Director shall
establish and maintain an inventory of obligations and securities. The
inventory shall include a description of the security, type, cost, par value,
maturity date, settlement date and coupon rate. The Finance Director shall
produce a monthly portfolio report detailing the current inventory of all
obligations and securities, and all transactions during the month, detailing
income received and investment expenses paid, and the names of any persons
effecting transactions on behalf of the city. The reports will be submitted to
the Finance Committee of Council no later than 60 days following the end of a
calendar year.
   (l)   Acknowledgment. Pursuant to R.C. Chapter 135, all brokers, dealers and
financial institutions initiating transactions with the city by giving advice
or making investment policy, or executing transactions initiated by the Finance
Director, must acknowledge their agreement to abide by the investment policy’s
content by having a principal representative sign a copy of this policy.
   The Institution below, by signing, indicates it has read and acknowledges
this investment policy, and agrees to abide by its content.
(Ord. 1-97, passed 1-13-1997; Ord. 67-08, passed 5-12-2008; Ord. 129-2013,
passed 10-28-2013)
§ 232.07 FINANCE DIRECTOR.
   (a)   General responsibilities. Under the direction of the Mayor and
Council, the Finance Director shall be the Chief Fiscal Officer of the city. He
or she shall carry out all powers and duties as provided in the City Charter
and as may be provided by ordinance. He or she shall supervise and keep all
financial records and accounts of the city and municipal utilities and the
several departments thereof. He or she shall maintain accurate accounts of all
taxes, assessments, all moneys due, all receipts and disbursements by the city
and municipal utilities. He or she shall maintain a record of all
appropriations and transfer of funds made by Council. He or she shall examine
and approve, if in proper form, the payroll, bills and other claims upon the
city and municipal utilities. He or she shall advise the Mayor and Council in
the preparation of estimates, budgets and appropriations. He or she shall
maintain a liaison with Avon Lake Regional Water in the reconciliation of bank
statements. He or she shall be responsible for the preparation of documents
such as notes for loans within fund balances approved by City Council. He or
she shall execute all other related duties as assigned by the City Council.
   (b)   Qualifications and specific duties. Qualifications and specific duties
of the Finance Director are enumerated.
(Ord. 80-08, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 22-159, passed 10-24-2022)
CHAPTER 234: EMPLOYMENT AND USE OF OUTSIDE COUNSEL
Section
234.01 Contracts
234.02 Retention of outside counsel for legal services
234.03 Existing use of outside counsel
234.04 Approval of fees by outside counsel
234.05 Disbursement of funds for fees by outside counsel
234.06 Assistant Law Director
234.07 Conflicts of interest
Editor’s note:
   The city provides by ordinance, from time to time, for the services of an
attorney, who is designated the Law Director. The city also provides,
periodically by ordinance, for the services of attorneys who are designated
Prosecutor and Assistant to the Law Director. Duties and compensation for such
positions are contained in such ordinances. Copies of all relevant legislation
may be obtained, at cost, from the Clerk of Council.
§ 234.01 CONTRACTS.
   All contracts, bonds and other instruments in writing in which the city is
concerned, including contracts, bonds and other instruments to be executed on
behalf of the Board of Municipal Utilities, must be prepared by the Law
Director or his or her designee, or by outside legal counsel approved by the
Law Director or otherwise retained by the city in accordance with §
234.07.
(Ord. 35-2018, passed 3-12-2018)
§ 234.02 RETENTION OF OUTSIDE COUNSEL FOR LEGAL SERVICES.
   (a)   Outside legal counsel may be employed by the city, or any officer,
employee, department, board or commission of the city, if the Law Director
determines that specialized expertise is necessary or if the legal matter
requires additional support, such as, but not limited to, litigation,
employment relations, environmental advice or bond work. Outside counsel also
may be employed to act on behalf of the city or any officer, employee,
department, board or commission of the city if one or more of the circumstances
set forth in §
234.07(b) arise.
   (b)   Except as provided in §
234.07, an officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city,
including the Board of Municipal Utilities, shall not retain outside legal
counsel for any matter unless the contract, agreement, engagement or retention
letter with such outside legal counsel has been approved by the Law Director.
   (c)   Except as provided in §
234.07, all outside legal counsel retained to represent the city, or any
officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city, must report to
and consult with the Law Director, and the Law Director shall be included in or
copied on all communications between the officer, employee, department, board
or commission and such outside counsel, as the Law Director may require.
(Ord. 35-2018, passed 3-12-2018)
§ 234.03 EXISTING USE OF OUTSIDE COUNSEL.
   As of the effective date of this section, any continued representation by
outside legal counsel currently representing the city, or any officer,
employee, department, board or commission of the city, must be confirmed by the
Law Director.
(Ord. 35-2018, passed 3-12-2018)
§ 234.04 APPROVAL OF FEES BY OUTSIDE COUNSEL.
   The Law Director shall review and approve all billing statements or invoices
of outside counsel prior to payment.
(Ord. 35-2018, passed 3-12-2018)
§ 234.05 DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS FOR FEES BY OUTSIDE COUNSEL.
   The Finance Director is prohibited from disbursing municipal funds, issuing
any warrants or making any payments of any nature whatsoever (including but not
limited to payments of invoices, credit card statements or any other
statements) for services of outside legal counsel that is representing the
city, or any officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city,
including the Board of Municipal Utilities, in any manner whatsoever, in
violation of the Charter or any municipal ordinance or law, including, but not
limited to,
Chapter 234.
(Ord. 35-2018, passed 3-12-2018)
§ 234.06 ASSISTANT LAW DIRECTOR.
   During the absence or illness of the Law Director, or when so directed by
the Mayor or the Law Director, the Assistant Law Director shall perform the
duties of the Law Director, and shall have all rights, privileges and powers
conferred upon the Law Director by the Charter,
Chapter 234, or any other state or municipal law.
(Ord. 35-2018, passed 3-12-2018)
§ 234.07 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   (a)   In the event that the Law Director has a conflict of interest under
the Ohio Rules of Professional Conduct, or if the Law Director determines that
he or she cannot represent the city or any officer, employee, department, board
or commission of the city for any other reason, then the Assistant Law Director
shall perform the duties of the Law Director, and shall have all rights,
privileges and powers conferred upon the Law Director by the Charter,
Chapter 234, or any other applicable state laws or municipal ordinances.
    (b)   If both the Law Director and the Assistant Law Director have a
conflict of interest under the Ohio Rules of Professional Conduct, or if one or
more of the following circumstances arise:
      1.   Both the Law Director and the Assistant Law Director cannot
represent the city, or any officer, employee, department, board or commission
of the city, due to illness, absence or incapacity; or
      2.   Both the Law Director and Assistant Law Director determine that they
cannot represent the city, or any officer, employee, department, board or
commission of the city, for any other reason, then the Mayor may appoint
outside legal counsel to represent the city, or any officer, employee,
department, board or commission of the city, subject to the approval of City
Council.
   Such outside counsel shall report directly to the Mayor and/or to any
officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city that may be
designated by the Mayor. In this capacity, the Mayor or his or her designee
shall review and approve all contracts, agreements, engagement or retention
letters with outside counsel, and all billing statements or invoices of outside
counsel, prior to payment.
(Ord. 35-2018, passed 3-12-2018)
CHAPTER 238: SAFETY DEPARTMENT
Section
238.01 City of Avon Lake disaster plan
§ 238.01 CITY OF AVON LAKE DISASTER PLAN.
   (a)   Council hereby accepts and approves the City of Avon Lake Disaster
Plan, a copy of which is attached to Ordinance 25-36 and made a part hereof by
reference.
   (b)   The City of Avon Lake Disaster Plan shall be reviewed by the Public
Safety and Health Committee no later than March of each calendar year to
determine revisions recommended by the Safety Director and said Committee.
Additional revisions may be considered and made, as necessary, as determined by
the Safety Director and said Committee.
   (c)   A current copy of the City of Avon Lake Disaster Plan shall be kept on
file in the office of the Clerk of Council. Copies of the plan shall also be
provided by the Safety Director, through the Fire Chief, to all persons listed
on the organizational chart contained in the City of Avon Lake Disaster Plan.
(Ord. 112-93, passed 9-13-1993; Ord. 25-35, passed 3-24-2025; Ord. 25-36,
passed 3-24-2025)
CHAPTER 240: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
240.01 Composition of Department
240.02 Division of school crossing guards
240.03 Animal control/community service officer
240.04 Law Enforcement Trust Fund
Editor’s note:
   The city executes labor agreements from time to time with the Fraternal
Order of Police, Lodge 25/Avon Lake Division and Ohio Labor Council
Incorporated, which agreements provide for wages, benefits and conditions of
employment. The city also has mutual aid agreements for police protection with
neighboring municipalities. Copies of all relevant legislation and of such
agreements may be obtained, at cost, from the Clerk of Council.
§ 240.01 COMPOSITION OF DEPARTMENT.
   (a)   The Police Department shall consist of:
 
Police Chief Department         1
Lieutenant of Police Department 4
Sergeant of Police Department   5
Police officer                  22
Dispatcher/Records Clerk        4
Administrative Assistant        1
 
   (b)   Whenever an anticipated vacancy or vacancies occur in the rank of
Police Chief, Lieutenant, Sergeant or police officer, the authorized number of
members designated in division (a) of this section shall be increased by the
number of such anticipated vacancies for only so long as such vacancy or
vacancies continue. It is the intent of this section to provide for a temporary
increase in complement of the Police Department in order that a new member
begin training in anticipation of a vacancy in the Police Department, at which
time the complement shall revert to the number provided for under division (a)
of this section.
(Ord. 1233, passed 11-24-1958; Ord. 24-111, passed 8-26-2024)
§ 240.02 DIVISION OF SCHOOL CROSSING GUARDS.
   (a)   There is hereby established in the Police Department a school crossing
guard program which will be known as the Division of School Crossing Guards for
the city.
   (b)   The school crossing guards shall be appointed as part-time temporary
employees of the Division by the Mayor upon the recommendation of the Police
Chief and a person designated by the Board of Education.
   (c)   The school guards shall be trained and directed by the Chief who shall
prescribe their uniform duties and responsibilities. The Chief or his or her
designated agent shall be responsible for the training and discipline of school
guards.
   (d)   School crossing guards shall comply with and be subject to ordinances
of the city and laws of the state relating to school crossing guards and in
particular to §§
404.01,
416.01 and
416.03 of this code of ordinances. Such school crossing guards shall not bear
any arms and shall make no arrests for violations, but shall report violations
to duly designated police officers for further disposition.
   (e)   This school crossing guard program has been established in cooperation
with the Board of Education which shall coordinate, through its designated
representative, with the Police Chief, so that the program is operated in an
efficient and effective manner.
   (f)   The position of school crossing guard is not subject to the civil
service regulations.
(Ord. 155-73, passed 9-10-1973)
§ 240.03 ANIMAL CONTROL/COMMUNITY SERVICE OFFICER.
   (a)   On the recommendation of the Police Chief and subject to confirmation
by Council, the Mayor shall appoint an individual, whose duties shall relate to
the enforcement of this section and Chapter 618 of the General Offenses Code,
and who may be referred to as the Animal Control/Community Service Officer.
While on duty, he or she shall be readily identifiable in order to designate
his or her authority Animal Control/Community Service Officer as to perform the
duties as set forth in division (d) of this section.
   (b)   The salary of the Animal Control/Community Service Officer the shall
be fixed from time to time by ordinance of Council.
   (c)   Suitable accommodations shall be provided for impounded animals under
the direction of the Police Chief.
   (d)   In general, the duties of the Animal Control/Community Service Officer
shall be as follows:
      (1)   When directed by the Police Chief or his or her designee, the
Animal Control/Community Service Officer shall patrol such sections of the city
as are designated for the purpose of apprehending stray dogs or other animals
running at large.
      (2)   The Animal Control/Community Service Officer shall seize and
impound all dogs which are required by law to be licensed and which are found
within the city and are not properly licensed. The Animal Control/Community
Service Officer shall also seize and impound any licensed dogs found running at
large within the city under conditions likely to endanger the public health,
peace or safety.
      (3)   The Animal Control/Community Service Officer shall make accurate
reports, in writing, to the Police Chief or his or her designee, regarding all
activities he or she performs related to his or her position.
      (4)   The Animal Control/Community Service Officer shall confine all
animals seized by him or her in suitable accommodations, and he or she shall
make adequate provisions for feeding and watering all animals so confined. An
animal seized and placed in confinement may be claimed upon payment according
to the Fee Schedule of Avon Lake, §
208.01 of this code of ordinances, within three days after being seized and
impounded. The fee is required in order to cover the expense of enforcing this
section and
Chapter 618 of the General Offenses Code.
      (5)   Any animal seized by the Animal Control/Community Service Officer
and not reclaimed as provided in this section within a period of three days may
be delivered to the County Dog Warden or be adopted or disposed of according to
the law.
      (6)   The Animal Control/Community Service Officer shall be responsible
for the trapping of animals as required for the public health and safety.
(Ord. 152-66, passed 12-27-1966; Ord. 162-97, passed 8-25-1997; Ord. 38-99,
passed 3-8-1999; Ord. 45-00, passed 2-14-2000; Ord. 22-01, passed 2-12-2001;
Ord. 29-02, passed 2-11-2002; Ord. 46-2011, passed 5-23-2011)
§ 240.04 LAW ENFORCEMENT TRUST FUND.
   (a)   There is hereby established a Law Enforcement Trust Fund.
   (b)   If contraband is sold, the proceeds accruing to the city and remaining
after reduction for payments having precedence under shall be distributed to
the Law Enforcement Trust Fund.
   (c)   The proceeds distributed under division (b) of this section shall be
allocated only to the Police Department and shall be expended only to pay the
costs of protracted or complex investigations or prosecutions, to provide
reasonable technical training or expertise, to provide matching funds to obtain
federal grants to aid law enforcement or for such other law enforcement
purposes that Council determines to be appropriate.
(Prior Code, § 240.08) (Ord. 33-87, passed 3-9-1987)
CHAPTER 242: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
242.01 Composition of Department
Editor’s note:
   The city executes labor agreements from time to time with the International
Association of Fire Fighters, Local 1361, which agreements provide for wages,
benefits and conditions of employment. The city also has mutual aid agreements
for fire protection with neighboring municipalities. Copies of all relevant
legislation and of such agreements may be obtained, at cost, from the Clerk of
Council. A set of rules and regulations for the Fire Department was approved by
Resolution 83-72, passed June 26, 1972. Copies may be obtained, at cost, from
the Clerk of Council.
§ 242.01 COMPOSITION OF DEPARTMENT.
   The Fire Department shall consist of a Fire Chief and such full-time and
part-time employees or volunteers as may be authorized by Council. The
organizational structure was amended by Ordinance 23-74, passed 5-9-2023.
 
Chief of Fire Department           1
Assistant Chief of Fire Department 1
Captain serving as Fire Marshall   1
Captain of Fire Department         3
Lieutenant of Fire Department      3
Firefighter/Paramedic              27
Administrative Assistant           1
 
(Ord. 1233, passed 11-24-1958; Ord. 23-74, passed 5-9-2023)
CHAPTER 244: PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
Section
244.01 Public Works Director
244.02 Assistant Public Works Director
§ 244.01 PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.
   The Public Works Director shall be the chief administrative officer of the
Department of Public Works, and shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
concurrence of a majority of the members of Council. The Public Works Director
shall serve for a term not longer than the term of the Mayor who appoints him
or her. The salary or rate of compensation of the Public Works Director shall
be fixed and his duties shall be prescribed by Council.
(Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014)
§ 244.02 ASSISTANT PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.
   (a)   The Assistant Public Works Director shall work under the direction of
the Public Works Director and will assume the responsibility(s) of the Public
Works Director during their absence or as assigned.
   (b)   This position will have direct responsibility for the maintenance of
city streets and properties, drainage ditches and waterways, parks and grounds
maintenance, public buildings and lands; with preeminent responsibility for the
maintenance and oversight of all equipment maintained by the Public Works
Department or being used by the Department in day-to-day operations in the
delivery of city services. Part of said duties may also include project
management for city-authorized projects or endeavors.
   (c)   This exempt position shall work overtime (outside of normal business
hours) as directed by the Public Works Director and/or by seasonal property
demands. The Assistant Public Works Director shall directly supervise all of
the employees within the Public Works Department on a day to day basis. The
Assistant Public Works Director will be responsible for the preparation and
execution of daily task assignment for the public works staff. This includes
initial job assignments, re-assignments and point-of-service directives.
   (d)   The Assistant Public Works Director shall be responsible for the
planning, direction, monitoring and evaluations (annually) of the Public Works
staff members. The Assistant Public Works Director will be responsible for the
management of attendance records, payroll and timekeeping records, and will
handle/recommend discipline as situations warrant within the constructs of the
city policies and collective bargaining agreements.
(Ord. 26-2020, passed 3-23-2020)
CHAPTER 247: URBAN FORESTER
Section
247.01 Urban Forester
§ 247.01 URBAN FORESTER.
   (a)   The Urban Forester shall develop and promulgate rules and regulations
under the authority of city ordinances, rules and regulations established for
the care of the city’s tree and greens planting and maintenance program within
the city’s jurisdiction.
   (b)   The Urban Forester shall:
      (1)   Plan, organize, contract and direct the installation and
maintenance of public trees in the city right-of-way, bike paths, parks, public
green spaces and municipal facilities as necessary to implement the city’s
master urban forest plan;
      (2)   Provide guidance and direction to any assigned employees,
contractors and volunteers supporting this work and is directly responsible for
the planting, removal, pruning, watering, health, care, protection and
maintenance of street trees and other public trees. Supervises city personnel
in the execution of urban forestry and arboriculture duties and other matters
relative to landscape maintenance;
      (3)   Provide staff support for the Tree Commission and assists in
cultivating their skills and contributions to the city by attending monthly
meetings, attending educational programs together, communicating regularly, and
requesting input about budgets, specifications and the urban forestry program.
Works with the Tree Commission to develop, maintain, annually review and update
the city’s urban forest management plan, Tree Commission Ordinance, and Tree
Ordinance;
      (4)   Establish tree planting, pruning, removal and care specifications
and standards for use with municipal trees for both public crews and
contractors. Assist with the contract development, bidding, specifications and
oversight for contractual work related to all public tree care activity;
      (5)   Organizes, schedules and oversees the city’s tree care maintenance
program, performed by public crews or contract, with coordination from
Engineering with the Street Tree Program. Must be able to inspect and directly
supervise all tree-related work, particularly for special projects, volunteer
work and engineering activity;
      (6)   Must be skilled in tree identification, pest and disease diagnosis
and management, tree risk assessment and reporting on field observations for
the Tree Commission, direct supervisor, City Council and the Mayor. The Urban
Forester must work with various civic and professional organizations in
coordination with the Tree Commission marketing efforts. The Urban Forester
must attend department and public meetings, presenting information regarding
urban forestry and arboriculture issues. Coordinate with various departments
for all work that impacts trees and the city’s urban forest. Provide guidance
to city personnel and contractors on landscaping issues for development and
construction areas within the city;
      (7)   Maintain computerized survey data and inventory to ensure accuracy
and safety of all municipal trees on public rights-of-way and utility
easements. Organize and oversee all urban forest management recordkeeping and
interfaces with the Tree Commission, Administration, City Council and other
city officials on a regular basis;
      (8)   Maintain recordkeeping including correspondence, inventories,
purchases, vendor communication, management plans, policies, contracts, tree
care activity and time keeping. Maintain tree inventories as requested by city
officials and tracks such inventories in a database utilizing appropriate
technologies. Keep all records and official documents for the city’s Tree City
USA;
      (9)   Receive, track and respond to emergency work following all
requirements for emergency work as outlined in the current collective
bargaining agreement;
      (10)   Responsible for development of annual department budget; oversees
purchases of materials, equipment, and supplies, monitors expenditures; and
      (11)   Search and recommend grants for submittal pertaining to tree
maintenance, planting, inventory and tree education programs.
(Ord. 23-77, passed 4-24-2023)
Cross-reference:
   Tree Commission, see
Ch. 288
   Trimming of trees, plants and shrubbery along public streets and sidewalks,
see §
668.01
CHAPTER 248: RECREATION DEPARTMENT
Section
248.01 Recreation Director
§ 248.01 RECREATION DIRECTOR.
   The Recreation Director shall be the chief administrative officer of the
Recreation Department and, as such, shall be under the direct supervision and
control of the Mayor. The Director shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall be
confirmed by Council. He or she shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and
Council for a term not exceeding the duration of the elective term of the Mayor
and Council which appointed him or her. Council, with the advice of the Mayor
shall fix the rate and basis of compensation of the Director.
(Ord. 29-63, passed 3-11-1963)
CHAPTER 249: COMMUNICATIONS & TECHNOLOGY DEPARTMENT
Section
249.01 Purpose and intent
249.02 Communications & Technology Director
249.03 Budget and operations plan
249.04 Monthly operations statements
249.05 Personnel
§ 249.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (a)   The purpose of the Communications & Technology Department is to
communicate with both an external and internal audience, the public and city
staff, and to provide technical support and communication needs for all city
departments.
   (b)   The Department shall keep current with the latest technologies,
determine which will bring value to the city, and implement them for continuous
improvement of both communication needs and city staff workflow efficiencies.
The Department shall oversee all the vendors who maintain city hall networks;
cable access channels; and studio, website, and telecommunication services.
§ 249.02 COMMUNICATIONS & TECHNOLOGY DIRECTOR.
   The Communications & Technology Director shall be the chief administrative
officer of the Communications & Technology Department and, as such, shall be
under the direct supervision and control of the Mayor. The Director shall be
appointed by the Mayor and shall be confirmed by Council. The Director shall
serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council for a term not exceeding the
duration of the elective term of the Mayor which appointed the Director.
Council, with the advice of the Mayor, shall fix the rate and basis of
compensation of the Director.
§ 249.03 BUDGET AND OPERATIONS PLAN.
   The Communications & Technology Director shall prepare and submit to the
Mayor an annual budget for the operation of the Communications & Technology
Department and an annual plan of proposed operations for the ensuing and future
years. The Mayor shall make such changes in the proposed budget and plan as he
or she sees fit and submit them to Council at such time as Council is preparing
its budget for the year. The annual operations plan shall also include
recommendations the Director wishes to make for Department personnel.
§ 249.04 MONTHLY OPERATIONS STATEMENTS.
   The Communications & Technology Director shall submit to the Mayor and
Council detailed monthly statements showing expenditures, receipts, and other
pertinent financial information. The Director shall also keep and make
available to Mayor and Council all records and reports relative to
administrative actions.
§ 249.05 PERSONNEL.
   On an annual basis, the Communications & Technology Director shall prepare
and submit to the Mayor the number of personnel required for the Communications
& Technology Department as approved each year by Council and shall also include
recommendations as to wage and salary rates and job classifications. The Mayor
shall cause to be employed, through the Director, the necessary personnel for
the department within the restrictions of budgetary limitations.
CHAPTER 250: AVON LAKE COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT CORPORATION
Section
250.01 Designation of corporation
250.02 Agreement between city and corporation
250.03 Membership of the corporation
§ 250.01 DESIGNATION OF CORPORATION.
   Council hereby finds and determines that it is the policy of the city to
promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of its citizens through
the designation of a community improvement corporation as the agency and
instrumentality of the city for economic development generally, and lakefront
redevelopment specifically within the city. The Avon Lake Community Improvement
Corporation, once organized as a corporation not-for-profit in the manner
provided in the R.C. Chapter 1724, is hereby designated as the city’s agency
for that purpose.
(Ord. 22-106, passed 7-11-2022)
§ 250.02 AGREEMENT BETWEEN CITY AND CORPORATION.
   The Mayor is authorized by the Council to enter into an agreement approved
by the Law Director for economic development generally, and lakefront
redevelopment specifically with the Avon Lake Community Improvement Corporation
pursuant to the requirements of R.C. § 1724.10.
(Ord. 22-106, passed 7-11-2022)
§ 250.03 MEMBERSHIP OF THE CORPORATION.
   Not less than two-fifths of the governing board of the Avon Lake Community
Improvement Corporation shall be appointed or elected officers of the city and
the governing board shall consist of seven members. Four of the members shall
be neither elected officials nor employees of the city, and these members will
be appointed by City Council. One member shall be the Mayor. One member shall
be the Community Development Director. One member shall be a representative of
City Council. The governing board shall meet annually in the month of January
and from time to time as business requires, and action taken shall be by
majority vote. Membership on the governing board of the Corporation does not
constitute the holding of public office or employment within the meaning of
R.C. §§ 731.02 and 731.12 or any other section of the Revised Code.
(Ord. 22-106, passed 7-11-2022)
CHAPTER 251: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
Section
251.01 Purpose
251.02 Community Development Director
251.03 Budget and operations plan
251.04 Monthly operations statements
251.05 Personnel
§ 251.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Community Development Department is to ensure that
development and re-development of the city adheres to the city’s planning and
is in compliance with the city’s zoning laws. The Department contains the
planning, zoning and economic development functions of the city. The Department
oversees and administers the review procedures as identified in
Chapter 1214, including the operations of Planning Commission and Zoning Board
of Appeals.
(Ord. 22-172, passed 12-12-2022)
§ 251.02 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.
   The Community Development Director shall be the chief administrative officer
of the Community Development Department and, as such, shall be under the direct
supervision and control of the Mayor. The Director shall be appointed by the
Mayor and his or her appointment shall be confirmed by Council. He or she shall
serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council for a term not exceeding the
duration of the elective term of the Mayor and Council which appoint him or
her. Council, with the advice of the Mayor, shall fix the rate and basis of
compensation of the Director.
(Ord. 22-172, passed 12-12-2022)
§ 251.03 BUDGET AND OPERATIONS PLAN.
   The Community Development Director shall prepare and submit to the Mayor an
annual budget for the operation of the Community Development Department and an
annual plan of proposed operations for the ensuing and future years. The Mayor
shall make such changes in the proposed budget and plan as he or she sees fit
and submit them to Council at such time as Council is preparing its budget for
the year. The annual operations plan shall also include recommendations the
Director wishes to make for personnel.
(Ord. 22-172, passed 12-12-2022)
§ 251.04 MONTHLY OPERATIONS STATEMENTS.
   The Community Development Department shall submit to the Mayor and Council
detailed monthly statements showing expenditures, receipts and other pertinent
financial information. He or she shall also keep and make available to Mayor
and Council all records and reports relative to administrative actions.
(Ord. 22-172, passed 12-12-2022)
§ 251.05 PERSONNEL.
   The Community Development Director shall prepare and submit to the Mayor the
number of personnel required for the Community Development Department as
approved each year by Council. He or she shall also include recommendations as
to wage and salary rates and job classifications. The Mayor shall cause to be
employed, through the Director, the necessary personnel for the program within
the restrictions of budgetary limitations.
(Ord. 22-172, passed 12-12-2022)
CHAPTER 252: PURCHASING PROCEDURES
Section
252.01 Application of rules
252.02 Purchases under $24,999.99
252.03 Purchases between $25,000 and $49,999.99
252.04 Purchases over $50,000 and below R.C. § 9.17 threshold
252.041 Purchases over R.C. § 9.17 threshold
252.05 Purchases of recycled materials
252.06 Participation in contracts with the Ohio Department of Transportation
(ODOT)
252.07 Procurement policy for federal funds
§ 252.01 APPLICATION OF RULES.
   The following rules and regulations are adopted for all city departments,
except the Board of Municipal Utilities, with respect to the purchase of goods
and services with city funds.
(Ord. 254-87, passed 12-14-1987; Ord. 25-177, passed 11-24-2025)
§ 252.02 PURCHASES UNDER $24,999.99.
   Department heads may initiate purchases in amounts under $24,999.99 without
Council or other approval if funds have been appropriated in the budget and are
available for such purposes and the unencumbered balance of the account is
sufficient to include the cost of the item.
(Ord. 196-96, passed 11-11-1996; Ord. 73-2010, passed 6-28-2010; Ord. 22-30,
passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 25-177, passed 11-24-2025)
§ 252.03 PURCHASES BETWEEN $25,000 AND $49,999.99.
   (a)   Department heads may initiate purchases in amounts of $25,000 or more,
up to and including $49,999.99 if funds have been appropriated in the budget
and the unencumbered balance of the account is sufficient to include the cost
of the item and the department head has presented a requisition for said
purchase to the Finance Director.
   (b)   Written and public specifications shall be first prepared and placed
on file and then competitive quotations shall be secured either by the
department head or the Finance Director.
   (c)   Insofar as possible and practical, such competitive quotations shall
be secured, in writing, from at least three parties and shall be submitted by
the department head to the Finance Director with a requisition for the item to
be purchased unless procured using an approved cooperative purchasing contract,
or quotes are waived by the Finance Director due to reasonable and practical
considerations. The requisition shall include the specifications, a list of the
quotations received, the quotation that the department head wishes to accept
and, if the quotation to be accepted is not the lowest price for the item, the
reason why it is the best purchase for the cost. If the necessary three or more
written quotations were not received, the requisition shall specify good and
sufficient reasons why they were not so taken.
   (d)   The department head shall prepare an abstract of the quotations and
present it with such requisitions and other accompanying data to the Finance
Director and Mayor. The Finance Director shall issue a purchase order if money
required for the expenditure or contract is in the treasury, or is in the
process of collection, to the credit of the fund from which it is to be drawn
and not appropriated for any other purpose.
   (e)   All requisitions submitted shall be retained on file by the Finance
Director.
(Ord. 254-87, passed 12-14-1987; Ord. 196-96, passed 11-11-1996; Ord. 215-04,
passed 10-11-2004; Ord. 74-2010, passed 6-28-2010; Ord. 22-30, passed 4-11-
2022; Ord. 25-177, passed 11-24-2025)
§ 252.04 PURCHASES OVER $50,000 AND BELOW R.C. § 9.17 THRESHOLD.
   (a)   Department heads may initiate purchases in amounts of $50,000 and
below R.C. § 9.17 threshold if funds have been appropriated in the budget and
the unencumbered balance of the account is sufficient to include the cost of
the item and the department head has presented a requisition for said purchase
to the Finance Committee or the appropriate project committee, or within a
collective committee meeting, or within a Council meeting for its
authorization.
   (b)   Written and public specifications shall be first prepared and placed
on file and then competitive quotations shall be secured either by the
department head or the Finance Director.
   (c)   Insofar as possible and practical, such competitive quotations shall
be secured, in writing, from at least three parties and shall be submitted by
the department head to the Finance Director with a requisition for the item to
be purchased unless procured using an approved cooperative purchasing contract.
The requisition shall include the specifications, a list of the quotations
received, the quotation that the department head wishes to accept and, if the
quotation to be accepted is not the lowest price for the item, the reason why
it is the best purchase for the cost. If the necessary three or more written
quotations were not received, the requisition shall specify good and sufficient
reasons why they were not so taken.
   (d)   The department head shall prepare an abstract of the quotations and
present it with such requisitions and other accompanying data to the Finance
Committee or the appropriate project committee, or within a collective
committee meeting, or within a Council meeting for its authorization. The
Finance Director shall issue a purchase order if money required for the
expenditure or contract is in the treasury, or is in the process of collection,
to the credit of the fund from which it is to be drawn and not appropriated for
any other purpose.
   (e)   All requisitions submitted shall be retained on file by the Finance
Director.
(Ord. 254-87, passed 12-14-1987; Ord. 104-04, passed 5-10-2004; Ord. 75-2010,
passed 6-28-2010; Ord. 22-30, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 25-177, passed 11-24-2025)
§ 252.041 PURCHASES OVER R.C. § 9.17 THRESHOLD.
   All purchases exceeding the threshold established in R.C. § 9.17 shall be
made in accordance with the Ohio Revised Code.
(Ord. 25-177, passed 11-24-2025)
§ 252.05 PURCHASES OF RECYCLED MATERIALS.
   (a)   The city, through its employees and agents, shall purchase and use
products made from recycled materials whenever such purchase is possible and
the price is comparable to other available products on the market.
   (b)   The parties responsible for purchasing products for the city shall
obtain price comparisons for recycled material products and non-recycled
material products and shall purchase the recycled material products when
economically possible.
(Prior Code, § 252.06) (Res. 181-94, passed 9-26-1994)
§ 252.06 PARTICIPATION IN CONTRACTS WITH THE OHIO DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
(ODOT).
   (a)   The Mayor hereby requests authority in the name of the city to
participate in the Ohio Department of Transportation (ODOT) contracts for the
purchase of machinery, materials, supplies or other articles which the
Department has entered into pursuant to R.C. § 5513.01(B).
   (b)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to agree in the name of the city to be
bound by all terms and conditions as the Director of Transportation prescribes.
   (c)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to agree in the name of the city to
directly pay vendors, under each such contract of ODOT in which the city
participates, for items it receives pursuant to the contract.
   (d)   The city hereby agrees to hold the Director of Transportation and ODOT
harmless for any claim or dispute arising out of participation in a contract
pursuant to R.C. 5513.01(B).
(Prior Code, § 252.08) (Res. 13-99, passed 1-25-1999)
§ 252.07 PROCUREMENT POLICY FOR FEDERAL FUNDS.
   Any purchases that utilize federal funds shall be made in compliance with 2
C.F.R. part 200 and this purchasing policy.
   (a)   General procurement standards.
      (1)   Procurements by the City of Avon Lake (the “city”) when utilizing
federal funds shall conform to applicable federal law and the standards
identified in this policy.
      (2)   The city will maintain oversight to ensure that contractors perform
in accordance with the terms, conditions and specifications of their contracts
or purchases.
      (3)   No employee, officer or agent of the city may participate in the
selection, award or administration of a contract supported by a federal award
if he or she has a real or apparent conflict of interest. Such a conflict of
interest would arise when the employee, officer or agent, any member of his or
her immediate family, his or her partner, or an organization which employs or
is about to employ any of the parties indicated herein, has a financial or
other interest in or a tangible personal benefit from a firm considered for a
contract. The officers, employees and agents of the city may neither solicit
nor accept gratuities, favors, or anything of monetary value from contractors
or parties to subcontracts. Any employee determined to be in violation of this
section, could be subject to discipline action up to and including termination.
Any elected official determined to be in violation of this section, could be
subject to prosecution and or recall of such official’s position.
      (4)   The city will consider consolidating or breaking out procurements
to obtain a more economical purchase. Where appropriate, an analysis will be
made of lease versus purchase alternatives, and any other appropriate analysis
to determine the most economical approach.
      (5)   The city, to the extent possible, shall utilize state and local
intergovernmental agreements or inter-entity agreements where appropriate for
procurement or use of common or shared goods and services.
      (6)   The city, to the extent possible, shall utilize federal excess and
surplus property in lieu of purchasing new equipment and property whenever such
use is feasible and reduces project costs.
      (7)   The city, to the extent possible, shall utilize use value
engineering clauses in contracts for construction projects of sufficient size
to offer reasonable opportunities for cost reductions. Value engineering is a
systematic and creative analysis of each contract item or task to ensure that
its essential function is provided at the overall lower cost.
      (8)   The city, to the extent possible, shall award contracts only to
responsible contractors possessing the ability to perform successfully under
the terms and conditions of a proposed procurement. Consideration will be given
to such matters as contractor integrity, compliance with public policy, record
of past performance, and financial and technical resources. See also 2 C.F.R. §
200.214, Suspension and Debarment.
      (9)   The city, to the extent possible, shall maintain records sufficient
to detail the history of procurement. These records will include, but are not
necessarily limited to, the following: rationale for the method of procurement,
selection of contract type, contractor selection or rejection, and the basis
for the contract price.
      (10)   The city, to the extent possible, shall utilize a time and
materials type contract only after a determination that no other contract is
suitable and if the contract includes a ceiling price that the contractor
exceeds at its own risk. Time and materials type contracts are defined as a
contract whose cost to the city is the sum of:
         A.   The actual cost of materials; and
         B.   Direct labor hours charged at fixed hourly rates that reflect
wages, general and administrative expenses, and profit.
      (11)   The city, to the extent possible, shall, in accordance with good
administrative practice and sound business judgment, provide for the settlement
of all contractual and administrative issues arising out of procurements. These
issues include, but are not limited to, source evaluation, protests, disputes
and claims.
   (b)   Competition.
      (1)   All procurement transactions must be conducted in a manner
providing full and open competition consistent with the standards of this
section. To ensure objective contractor performance and eliminate unfair
competitive advantage, contractors that assist the city in the development or
drafting of specifications, requirements, statements of work or invitations for
bids or requests for proposals must be excluded from competing for such
procurements. Some of the situations considered to be restrictive of
competition include, but are not limited to:
         A.   Placing unreasonable requirements on firms for them to qualify to
do business;
         B.   Requiring unnecessary experience and excessive bonding;
         C.   Noncompetitive pricing practices between firms or between
affiliated companies;
         D.   Noncompetitive contracts to consultants that are on retainer
contracts;
         E.   Organizational conflicts of interest;
         F.   Specifying only a “brand name” product instead of allowing “an
equal” product to be offered and describing the performance or other relevant
requirements of the procurement; and
         G.   Any arbitrary action in the procurement process.
      (2)   The city shall conduct procurements in a manner that prohibits the
use of statutorily or administratively imposed state, local or tribal
geographical preferences in the evaluation of bids or proposals, except in
those cases where applicable federal statutes expressly mandate or encourage
geographic preference. Nothing in this section preempts state licensing laws.
When contracting for architectural and engineering (A/E) services, geographic
location may be a selection criterion provided its application leaves an
appropriate number of qualified firms, given the nature and size of the
project, to compete for the contract.
      (3)   The city ensures that all solicitations:
         A.   Incorporate a clear and accurate description of the technical
requirements for the material, product or service to be procured. Such
description must not, in competitive procurements, contain features which
unduly restrict competition. The description may include a statement of the
qualitative nature of the material, product or service to be procured and, when
necessary, must set forth those minimum essential characteristics and standards
to which it must conform if it is to satisfy its intended use. Detailed product
specifications should be avoided if at all possible. When it is impractical or
uneconomical to make a clear and accurate description of the technical
requirements, a “brand name or equivalent” description may be used as a means
to define the performance or other salient requirements of procurement. The
specific features of the named brand which must be met by offers must be
clearly stated; and
         B.   Identify all requirements which the offerors must fulfill and all
other factors to be used in evaluating bids or proposals.
      (4)   The city shall ensure that all prequalified lists of persons, firms
or products which are used in acquiring goods and services are current and
include enough qualified sources to ensure maximum open and free competition.
Also, the city shall not preclude potential bidders from qualifying during the
solicitation period.
   (c)   Methods of procurement to be followed. The city shall use one of the
following methods of procurement when purchasing items with federal funds.
      (1)   Procurement by micro-purchases. Procurement by micro-purchase is
the acquisition of supplies or services, the aggregate dollar amount of which
does not exceed the micro-purchase threshold of $10,000. To the extent
practicable, the city shall distribute micro-purchases equitably among
qualified suppliers. Micro-purchases may be awarded without soliciting
competitive quotations.
      (2)   Procurement by small purchase procedures. Small purchase procedures
are those relatively simple and informal procurement methods for securing
services, supplies or other property that do not cost more than the simplified
acquisition threshold $250,000. If small purchase procedures are used, price or
rate quotations must be obtained from an adequate number of qualified sources.
      (3)   Procurement by sealed bids (formal advertising). Bids are publicly
solicited, and a firm fixed price contract (lump sum or unit price) is awarded
to the responsible bidder whose bid, conforming to all the material terms and
conditions of the invitation for bids, is the lowest in price. The sealed bid
method is the preferred method for procuring construction, if the conditions in
division (c)(3)A. of this section apply.
         A.   For sealed bidding to be feasible, the following conditions
should be present:
            1.   A complete, adequate and realistic specification or purchase
description is available;
            2.   Two or more responsible bidders are willing and able to
compete effectively for the business; and
            3.   The procurement lends itself to a firm fixed price contract
and the selection of the successful bidder can be made principally based on
price.
         B.   If sealed bids are used, the following requirements apply:
            1.   Bids must be solicited from an adequate number of known
suppliers, providing them sufficient response time prior to the date set for
opening the bids, for local, and tribal governments, the invitation for bids
must be publicly advertised;
            2.   The invitation for bids, which will include any specifications
and pertinent attachments, must define the items or services for the bidder to
properly respond;
            3.   All bids will be opened at the time and place prescribed in
the invitation for bids, and for local and tribal governments, the bids must be
opened publicly;
            4.   A firm fixed price contract award will be made in writing to
the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. Where specified in bidding
documents, factors such as discounts, transportation cost and life cycle costs
must be considered in determining which bid is lowest. Payment discounts will
only be used to determine the low bid when prior experience indicates that such
discounts are usually taken advantage of; and
            5.   Any or all bids may be rejected if there is a sound documented
reason.
      (4)   Procurement by competitive proposals. The technique of competitive
proposals is normally conducted with more than one source submitting an offer,
and either a fixed price or cost-reimbursement type contract is awarded. It is
generally used when conditions are not appropriate for the use of sealed bids.
If this method is used, the following requirements apply:
         A.   Requests for proposals must be publicized and identify all
evaluation factors and their relative importance. Any response to publicized
requests for proposals must be considered to the maximum extent practical;
         B.   Proposals must be solicited from an adequate number of qualified
sources;
         C.   The non-federal entity must have a written method for conducting
technical evaluations of the proposals received and for selecting recipients;
         D.   Contracts must be awarded to the responsible firm whose proposal
is most advantageous to the program, with price and other factors considered;
and
         E.   The non-federal entity may use competitive proposal procedures
for qualifications-based procurement of architectural/engineering (A/E)
professional services whereby competitors’ qualifications are evaluated, and
the most qualified competitor is selected, subject to negotiation of fair and
reasonable compensation. The method, where price is not used as a selection
factor, can only be used in procurement of A/E professional services. It cannot
be used to purchase other types of services though A/E firms are a potential
source to perform the proposed effort.
      (5)   Procurement by noncompetitive proposals. Procurement by
noncompetitive proposals is procurement through solicitation of a proposal from
only one source and may be used only when one or more of the following
circumstances apply:
         A.   The item is available only from a single source;
         B.   The public exigency or emergency for the requirement will not
permit a delay resulting from competitive solicitation;
         C.   The federal awarding agency or pass-through entity expressly
authorizes noncompetitive proposals in response to a written request from the
non-federal entity; or
         D.   After solicitation of several sources, competition is determined
inadequate.
   (d)   Contracting with small and minority businesses, women’s business
enterprises, and labor surplus area firms.
      (1)   The city shall take all necessary affirmative steps to assure that
minority businesses, women’s business enterprises and labor surplus area firms
are used when possible.
      (2)   Affirmative steps must include:
         A.   Placing qualified small and minority businesses and women’s
business enterprises on solicitation lists;
         B.   Assuring that small and minority businesses, and women’s business
enterprises are solicited whenever they are potential sources;
         C.   Dividing total requirements, when economically feasible, into
smaller tasks or quantities to permit maximum participation by small and
minority businesses, and women’s business enterprises;
         D.   Establishing delivery schedules, where the requirement permits,
which encourage participation by small and minority businesses, and women’s
business enterprises;
         E.   Using the services and assistance, as appropriate, of such
organizations as the Small Business Administration and the Minority Business
Development Agency of the Department of Commerce; and
         F.   Requiring the prime contractor, if subcontracts are to be let, to
take the affirmative steps listed in divisions (d)(2)A. through (d)(2)E. of
this section.
   (e)   Contract cost and price.
      (1)   The city shall perform a cost or price analysis in connection with
every procurement action in excess of the simplified acquisition threshold
$250,000 including contract modifications. The method and degree of analysis is
dependent on the facts surrounding the particular procurement situation, but as
a starting point, the city shall make independent estimates before receiving
bids or proposals.
      (2)   The city shall negotiate profit as a separate element of the price
for each contract in which there is no price competition and, in all cases,
where cost analysis is performed. To establish a fair and reasonable profit,
consideration must be given to the complexity of the work to be performed, the
risk borne by the contractor, the contractor’s investment, the amount of
subcontracting, the quality of its record of past performance, and industry
profit rates in the surrounding geographical area for similar work.
      (3)   Costs or prices based on estimated costs for contracts under the
federal award are allowable only to the extent that costs incurred, or cost
estimates included in negotiated prices would be allowable for Bush Volunteer
Fire Department.
      (4)   The cost plus a percentage of cost and percentage of construction
cost methods of contracting must not be used.
   (f)   Federal awarding agency or pass-through entity review.
      (1)   The city shall make available, upon request of the federal awarding
agency or pass-through entity, technical specifications on proposed
procurements where the federal awarding agency or pass-through entity believes
such review is needed to ensure that the item or service specified is the one
being proposed for acquisition. This review generally will take place prior to
the time the specification is incorporated into a solicitation document.
      (2)   The city shall make available upon request, for the federal
awarding agency or pass-through entity pre-procurement review, procurement
documents, such as requests for proposals or invitations for bids, or
independent cost estimates, when:
         A.   The non-federal entity’s procurement procedures or operation
fails to comply with the procurement standards in this part;
         B.   The procurement is expected to exceed the simplified acquisition
threshold and is to be awarded without competition or only one bid or offer is
received in response to a solicitation;
         C.   The procurement, which is expected to exceed the simplified
acquisition threshold, specifies a “brand name” product;
         D.   The proposed contract is more than the simplified acquisition
threshold and is to be awarded to other than the apparent low bidder under a
sealed bid procurement; or
         E.   A proposed contract modification changes the scope of a contract
or increases the contract amount by more than the simplified acquisition
threshold.
      (3)   The city is exempt from the pre-procurement review in division (f)
(2) of this section if the federal awarding agency or pass-through entity
determines that its procurement systems comply with the standards of this part.
         A.   The city may request that its procurement system be reviewed by
the federal awarding agency or pass-through entity to determine whether its
system meets these standards for its system to be certified. Generally, these
reviews must occur where there is continuous high-dollar funding, and third-
party contracts are awarded on a regular basis; and
         B.   The city may self-certify its procurement system. Such self-
certification must not limit the federal awarding agency’s right to survey the
system. Under a self-certification procedure, the federal awarding agency may
rely on written assurances from the city that it is complying with these
standards. The city must cite specific policies, procedures, regulations or
standards as being in compliance with these requirements and have its system
available for review.
   (g)   Bonding requirements. For construction or facility improvement
contracts or subcontracts exceeding the simplified acquisition threshold, the
federal awarding agency or pass-through entity may accept the bonding policy
and requirements of the city provided that the federal awarding agency or pass-
through entity has made a determination that the federal interest is adequately
protected. If such a determination has not been made, the minimum requirements
must be as follows:
      (1)   A bid guarantee from each bidder equivalent to 5% of the bid price.
The “bid guarantee” must consist of a firm commitment such as a bid bond,
certified check or other negotiable instrument accompanying a bid as assurance
that the bidder will, upon acceptance of the bid, execute such contractual
documents as may be required within the time specified.
      (2)   A performance bond on the part of the contractor for 100% of the
contract price. A PERFORMANCE BOND is one executed in connection with a
contract to secure fulfillment of all the contractor’s obligations under such
contract.
      (3)   A payment bond on the part of the contractor for 100% of the
contract price. A PAYMENT BOND is one executed in connection with a contract to
assure payment as required by law of all persons supplying labor and material
in the execution of the work provided for in the contract.
   (h)   Contract provisions. All city contracts utilizing federal funds must
contain the applicable provisions described in Appendix II to Part 200-Contract
Provisions for non-federal entity contracts under federal awards, attached to
Resolution 21-151 and hereby adopted by reference as if set forth in full
herein.
(Prior Code, § 252.10) (Res. 21-151, passed 10-25-2021)
CHAPTER 254: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
Section
254.01 Conflicts of interest prohibited
254.02 Representing private interests before city agencies
254.03 Representing private interests before courts
254.04 Disclosure by elected officials of interest in legislation
254.05 Disclosure by appointed official or employee of interest in legislation
254.06 Gifts and favors
254.07 Disclosure of confidential information
254.08 Investments in conflict with official duties
254.09 Future employment
254.10 Appearances before city agencies of former officers or employees
254.99 Penalty
§ 254.01 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST PROHIBITED.
   No elected or appointed city official or employee, whether paid or unpaid,
shall engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other
private interest, directly or indirectly, which is in conflict with the
discharge of his or her official duties.
(Ord. 129-65, passed 12-27-1965)
§ 254.02 REPRESENTING PRIVATE INTERESTS BEFORE CITY AGENCIES.
   No elected or appointed city official or employee whose salary is paid in
whole or in part from the City Treasury shall appear on behalf of private
interests before any agency of the city. However, a member of Council may
appear without compensation on behalf of constituents or in the performance of
public or civic obligations. No person serving the city without compensation
shall appear, either directly or indirectly, on behalf of private interests in
matters involving the agency which he or she serves or before any agency of the
city affecting matters involving the agency in which he or she serves. This
section is not intended to prohibit appearances in the Avon Lake Municipal
Court on matters in which the city or any agency thereof is not a party.
(Ord. 129-65, passed 12-27-1965)
§ 254.03 REPRESENTING PRIVATE INTERESTS BEFORE COURTS.
   No elected or appointed city official or employee whose salary is paid in
whole or in part from the City Treasury shall represent private interests in
any action or proceeding against the interests of the city in any litigation to
which the city, the state or any agency of the city or state is a party, or in
any action or proceeding in the Avon Lake Municipal Court involving any kind of
criminal charge in which the city, the state or any agency of the city or
state, or any officer or employee thereof, in the course of his or her official
duties, is a complainant.
(Ord. 129-65, passed 12-27-1965)
§ 254.04 DISCLOSURE BY ELECTED OFFICIALS OF INTEREST IN LEGISLATION.
   Any elected city official who has a direct or indirect financial or other
private interest in any proposed legislation by Council or official action by
the Board of Municipal Utilities shall publicly disclose, on the official
records of Council or the Board, as the case may be, the nature and extent of
such interest.
(Ord. 129-65, passed 12-27-1965)
§ 254.05 DISCLOSURE BY APPOINTED OFFICIAL OR EMPLOYEE OF INTEREST IN
LEGISLATION.
   An appointed city official or employee, whether paid or unpaid, who has a
direct or indirect financial or other private interest in any legislation, and
who participates in discussion before or gives official opinion to Council, the
Board of Municipal Utilities or the Mayor, shall publicly disclose on the
official record the nature and extent of such interest.
(Ord. 129-65, passed 12-27-1965)
§ 254.06 GIFTS AND FAVORS.
   No elected or appointed city official or employee, whether paid or unpaid,
shall accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing or
promise, or any other form, from any person who, to his or her knowledge, is
interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in business
dealings with the city.
(Ord. 129-65, passed 12-27-1965)
§ 254.07 DISCLOSURE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   No elected or appointed city official or employee, whether paid or unpaid,
shall disclose confidential information concerning the property, government or
affairs of the city, nor shall he or she use such information to advance the
financial or other private interest of himself or herself or others.
(Ord. 129-65, passed 12-27-1965)
§ 254.08 INVESTMENTS IN CONFLICT WITH OFFICIAL DUTIES.
   No elected or appointed city official or employee, whether paid or unpaid,
shall invest or hold any investment, directly or indirectly, in any financial,
business, commercial or other private transaction which creates a conflict with
his or her official duties.
(Ord. 129-65, passed 12-27-1965)
§ 254.09 FUTURE EMPLOYMENT.
   No elected or appointed city official or employee, whether paid or unpaid,
shall solicit, negotiate for or promise to accept employment by any person with
whom he or she or his or her agency is engaged on behalf of the city in the
transaction of business or who is or may be affected by his or her official
action.
(Ord. 129-65, passed 12-27-1965)
§ 254.10 APPEARANCES BEFORE CITY AGENCIES OF FORMER OFFICERS OR EMPLOYEES.
   No person who has served as an elected or appointed city official or
employee shall, within a period of two years after termination of such service
or employment, appear before any agency of the city or receive compensation for
any services rendered on behalf of any person in relation to any case,
proceeding or application with respect to which such person was directly
concerned, or in which he or she personally participated during the period of
his or her service or employment, or which was under his or her active
consideration or with respect to which knowledge or information was made
available to him or her during the period of such service or employment.
(Ord. 129-65, passed 12-27-1965)
§ 254.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter, in addition to any other penalty provided under the City Charter, is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than
$500 or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both, for each offense.
CHAPTER 256: PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
Section
256.01 Title and purpose
256.02 Permanent status
256.03 Recruitment and selection
256.04 Eligible lists
256.05 Promotions
256.06 Certifications and appointments
256.07 Temporary appointments
256.08 Probation
256.09 Discipline
256.10 Types of disciplinary action
256.11 Procedure in disciplinary action
256.12 Civil Service Commission as Appeals Board
256.13 Reductions and layoffs
256.14 Employee organization
256.15 Fact-finding procedures
256.16 Anti discrimination and harassment
256.17 Workplace violence prevention
256.18 Procedure for consideration of unclassified employee grievances
256.19 Striking prohibited by law enforcement and first responders
256.20 Amendment procedure
256.21 Human Resources Director
§ 256.01 TITLE AND PURPOSE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Personnel Administration Chapter and is
to augment the provisions of
Chapter 278 relating to personnel in the classified positions of the city.
(Ord. 21-147, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 256.02 PERMANENT STATUS.
   When this chapter becomes effective, all persons then holding positions not
included among those exempted by §
276.04 shall have a permanent status if:
   (a)   They were employed in such positions when this chapter becomes
effective; or
   (b)   They serve a probationary period of one year, or such other period as
may be prescribed by this chapter, the Rules of the Civil Service Commission,
or other labor agreement as may be applicable for the position held.
(Ord. 21-147, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 256.03 RECRUITMENT AND SELECTION.
   (a)   Original appointments to vacancies occurring after this chapter
becomes effective shall be based upon merit as determined by competitive
examinations, except where competitive examinations for particular vacancies
may be dispensed with as provided by this chapter. Requirements as to
citizenship, residence, age, physical qualifications and sex may be provided by
rules established by the Civil Service Commission and approved by Council.
   (b)   The Civil Service Commission shall determine the time and place of
examinations and shall advertise for applications in such media as it deems
expedient. It shall prescribe the form of the application and shall conduct
such investigations as it deems necessary as to the truth of the statements
made therein and as to the qualifications of the applicant. It may exclude from
the examination any applicant whose application discloses that he, she or they
does not possess the minimum qualifications established in the classification
plan for the position sought.
   (c)   Examinations shall be in such form as will fairly test the abilities
and aptitudes of the candidates to perform the duties of the position sought.
The Civil Service Commission shall determine the nature of the examination and
the weight to be attributed to each part. It shall grade the examinations,
taking care to preserve the anonymity of competitors in the written portion
until grading is completed.
(Ord. 21-147, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 256.04 ELIGIBLE LISTS.
   Candidates who qualify for employment shall be placed upon an original
appointment eligible list for the appropriate class of position, in the rank
order of grades they obtain on the examinations. Eligible lists shall be
effective for not less than one year from the date of the certification of such
list. Eligibility lists may be extended for one additional year at the
discretion of the Civil Service Commission.
(Ord. 21-147, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 256.05 PROMOTIONS.
   (a)   Vacancies in positions above police officer and firefighter/paramedic
in the Police Department and the Fire Department shall be filled pursuant to
the Rules of the Civil Service Commission.
   (b)   Vacancies in other classified positions in the city service, above the
entrance level, shall be filled pursuant to the Rules of the Civil Service
Commission.
(Ord. 21-147, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 256.06 CERTIFICATIONS AND APPOINTMENTS.
   Whenever a vacancy exists for an original appointment, the appointing
authority shall ask the Civil Service Commission to certify the names of
persons eligible for appointment. The names of the five persons standing
highest on the eligible list shall be certified to the appointing authority and
he, she or they shall appoint one of the five so certified, using his, her or
their sound judgment as to the candidate whose appointment will be in the best
interest of the city. The appointing authority shall make his, her or their
appointment, notifying the Civil Service Commission so that the person
appointed may be placed upon the payroll and the persons not appointed may be
restored to the eligible list.
(Ord. 21-147, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 256.07 TEMPORARY APPOINTMENTS.
   Whenever urgent reasons exist which requires that a vacancy be filled at
once in order to maintain public services, the appointing authority may appoint
any qualified person temporarily to perform the duties of the position.
However, no such appointment shall be for a period longer than 120 days and
such appointment shall not be renewed.
(Ord. 21-147, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 256.08 PROBATION.
   Employees appointed from original appointment eligible lists and from
promotional eligible lists shall be subject to a probationary period of one
year, except for original appointments in the Police and Fire Departments. In
the case of original appointments in the Police and Fire Departments, the
probationary period shall be one year after the person is first placed on solo
patrol or solo assignment. The work and conduct of probationary employees shall
be subject to close scrutiny and evaluation and, if found to be below standards
satisfactory to the appointing authority, the appointing authority may remove
the probationary employee or demote such employee at any time during the
probationary period. Such removal or demotion shall not be subject to review or
appeal. An employee shall be retained beyond the end of the probationary period
and granted permanent status unless the appointing authority removes or demotes
such employee within the 12-month period.
(Prior Code, § 256.09) (Ord. 21-147, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 256.09 DISCIPLINE.
   (a)   Except as otherwise set forth in a collective bargaining agreement or
the Rules of the Civil Service Commission, as applicable, the tenure of every
officer (sworn or non-sworn) or employee in the classified service of the city
shall be during good behavior and efficient service, but any such employee may
be removed or disciplined for incompetency, inefficiency, dishonesty,
drunkenness, immoral conduct, insubordination, discourteous treatment of the
public, neglect of duty, violation of the ordinances of the city or laws of the
state or of the United States, or of the rules of the Civil Service Commission,
other failure of good behavior or any act of misfeasance, malfeasance or
nonfeasance in office.
   (b)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the right of the
city to lay off or separate from the service any officer (sworn or non-sworn)
or employee if any position becomes unnecessary and is abolished or by reason
of lack of funds.
(Prior Code, § 256.10) (Ord. 21-147, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 256.10 TYPES OF DISCIPLINARY ACTION.
   Except as otherwise expressly provided for in a collective bargaining
agreement or the Rules of the Civil Service Commission, as applicable, the
following shall apply:
   (a)   Disciplinary action shall consist of one or more of the following:
      (1)   Informal reprimand;
      (2)   Formal written reprimand which becomes a part of the employee’s
record;
      (3)   Suspension from duty without pay;
      (4)   Demotion in rank and salary; and/or
      (5)   Dismissal.
   The head of the department concerned shall be primarily responsible for the
discipline of employees within the department and he, she or they may take
disciplinary action as provided in divisions (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section
no later than 14 calendar days after the date the department head becomes aware
of the action or conduct which is the subject of such disciplinary action.
   (b)   The department head may recommend to the appointing authority that
disciplinary action more severe than that provided for in divisions (a)(1) and
(a)(2) of this section be taken, and the appointing authority, with or without
such a recommendation, shall have the ultimate duty and discretion to take
disciplinary action provided for in divisions (a)(3), (a)(4) and (a)(5) of this
section, and shall be the sole judge of its necessity, subject to the
provisions for an appeal as provided in this chapter.
   (c)   Any disciplinary action provided for in divisions (a)(3), (a)(4) and
(a)(5) of this section may be commenced by written recommendation from the
department head to the appointing authority no later than 30 calendar days
after the date the department head becomes aware of the action or conduct which
is the subject of such recommended disciplinary action. A copy of such written
recommendation shall be delivered simultaneously to the involved employee by
the department head.
   (d)   Within ten calendar days after receipt of such written recommendation,
the appointing authority may take whatever disciplinary action, as set forth
herein, if any, is deemed appropriate under the facts and circumstances of the
situation, and as provided in §
256.11.
   (e)   However, in the event the appointing authority decides to take
disciplinary action which is deemed appropriate under the facts and
circumstances of the situation without such written recommendation from the
department head, such action shall be taken as provided in §
256.11 and no later than 40 calendar days after the date the appointing
authority becomes aware of the action or conduct which is the subject of such
disciplinary action.
(Prior Code, § 256.11) (Ord. 21-147, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 256.11 PROCEDURE IN DISCIPLINARY ACTION.
   (a)   In all cases of suspension from duty without pay for more than three
days, of demotion in rank and salary and of dismissal, the appointing authority
shall furnish the employee with a copy of the order of suspension, demotion, or
dismissal, with his, her or their reasons for the same, within the time limits
set forth in §
256.10(d) or (e), whichever is applicable. Copies thereof shall be filed with
the Civil Service Commission. The order may be made effective immediately or
from a later time and date set forth in the order.
   (b)   The employee shall be given a reasonable time, set forth in the order,
in which to make and file a written explanation. A copy of such written
explanation, if any, shall be filed with the Commission. The filings required
in this section with the Commission shall be for informational purposes only
and shall be made as soon as reasonably practical, but the effective date of
any disciplinary action shall not be affected by the date of filing of such
copies with the Commission.
(Prior Code, § 256.12) (Ord. 21-147, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 256.12 CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION AS APPEALS BOARD.
   (a)   Any officer or employee of the classified service may request a
hearing in all cases of suspension from duty without pay for more than three
days, of demotion in rank and salary and of dismissal before the Civil Service
Commission sitting as an Appeals Board. The employee or officer must submit a
written request to the secretary of the Commission or with a member of the
Commission within ten days from the date when such officer or employee is given
a written order of the disciplinary action complained of.
   (b)   The Commission shall promptly set a date and time for a hearing on
such an appeal, and at such hearing the appellant may appear in person or by
counsel and the appointing authority and/or department head may likewise appear
in person or by counsel, and each may offer such evidence upon the matter as
may be pertinent and relevant.
   (c)   Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Commission may affirm, disaffirm
or modify the judgment of the appointing authority as to any disciplinary
action involving suspension without pay for more than three days, demotion or
dismissal.
(Prior Code, § 256.13) (Ord. 21-147, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 256.13 REDUCTIONS AND LAYOFFS.
   (a)   At any time that the appointing authority deems it necessary, in the
interests of the city, by reason of lack of funds or by reason of a position no
longer being necessary, he, she or they may dismiss or lay off any officer or
employee, either indefinitely or for a period of time.
   (b)   In the event of the abolition of any position in the Police Department
or the Fire Department, filled by an officer permanently appointed, the least
tenured officer in point of service holding a position of such rank as that
abolished shall be demoted to the next lower rank, and the least tenured in the
next lower rank shall be demoted, and so on down until the least tenured in
point of service has been reached, who shall be laid off. As to any other
position outside the Police Department or the Fire Department, in the case of
layoff or abolition of a position where there are two or more like positions
existing, the least tenured in point of time in service shall be laid off.
(Prior Code, § 256.14) (Ord. 21-147, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 256.14 EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION.
   (a)   EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION, as used in this section, means any lawful
association, fraternal order, labor organization, federation, council or
brotherhood having as its primary purpose the improvement of working conditions
of public employees. The term does not include any organization:
      (1)   Which discriminates with regard to the terms and conditions of
membership because of race, color, creed or national origin; and
      (2)   Which, in the opinion of Council, is so subject to corrupt
influences or influences opposed to basic democratic principles that
recognition would be inconsistent with the objectives of this chapter.
   (b)   To be recognized as an employee organization with the right to
represent municipal employees in the manner prescribed in this chapter, any
such organization shall be prepared to establish, to the satisfaction of
Council, that it represents a majority of employees in an employment unit in
the city, the appropriateness of which unit has been determined by Council.
   (c)   Council hereby recognizes the United Steel, Paper and Forestry,
Rubber, Manufacturing, Energy, Allied-Industrial and Service Workers
International Union AFL-CIO and CLC Locals 1-865, 836, and 836-1; the
International Association of Firefighters Local 1361; and the Fraternal Order
of Police Lodge 25/Avon Lake Division, as covered by the Ohio pension laws
below the rank of sergeant, as being valid employee organizations as having
entered into separate collective bargaining agreements with the city.
(Prior Code, § 256.16) (Ord. 21-147, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 256.15 FACT-FINDING PROCEDURES.
   Except as otherwise set forth in a collective bargaining agreement or the
Rules of the Civil Service Commission as applicable, the following shall apply.
   (a)   If employees or the employee organizations involved are unwilling to
accept the recommendations made to Council by the Special Employee Committee,
they may so advise the Mayor and Council, in writing, of their objections to
such recommendations and request fact finding. Council shall, within five days,
designate one person as the city’s member of a fact- finding authority and
shall advise the objecting employee or employee organization of the name of
such member. The objecting party shall, within five days, designate one person
as the employee member of the fact-finding authority, and shall advise the
Mayor and the President of Council, in writing, of the name of such member. The
two designated members shall meet within five days of their designation and
shall attempt to agree upon an impartial third person as Chairperson of the
fact-finding authority. They shall thereupon jointly serve, in writing, upon
the Mayor, Council and the objecting party, the name of the Chairperson so
selected. If they are unable to agree upon an impartial Chairperson, they shall
jointly or separately request a panel of five names from the American
Arbitration Association. The representatives of the city and of the objecting
employee or employee organization involved will alternately strike names from
the list until one name remains. The remaining name shall be the Chairperson of
the fact-finding authority. Council shall, by ordinance, provide for the
payment of one-half of compensation and reimbursement for expenses as may be
appropriate under the circumstances for members of the fact-finding authority.
The objecting employee or employee organization shall provide for and secure
payment of the other half.
   (b)   The Chairperson shall convene the fact-finding authority as soon after
his, her or their appointment as possible. Thereafter, a representative of the
city and a representative of the objecting employee or employee organization
involved shall submit his, her or their respective positions to the fact-
finding authority for its review and recommendations. The fact-finding
authority shall, within 15 days, if possible, issue, in writing, a fact-finding
report. This report shall be served upon the Chairperson of the Committee, upon
the objecting employee or employee organization involved and upon the Mayor and
the President of Council. As soon after receipt of such report as possible, the
Committee and the objecting employee or employee organization shall meet again
and seek to reach an agreement. If a subsequent agreement is reached, it will
be submitted to Council as a joint recommendation for appropriate action. If an
agreement is not reached within 15 days of the issuance of the report (unless
the parties mutually agree to extend the 15-day period), the fact-finding
report will be submitted by the President of Council, together with the
respective positions of the city and the objecting employee or employee
organization involved, to Council for its final decision.
(Prior Code, § 256.17) (Ord. 21-147, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 256.16 ANTI DISCRIMINATION AND HARASSMENT.
   (a)   Policy. The city is committed to providing a working environment free
from discrimination, and to prohibit harassment of its employees and
applicants, including harassment and/or discrimination because of gender/sex,
gender identity or expression, sexual preference, race, religion, color,
national origin/ancestry, disability, military status, or age. Anyone violating
this policy is subject to discipline, up to and including termination.
   (b)   Sexual harassment. It is the policy of the city not to tolerate sexual
harassment of any type. Each city employee has the responsibility to maintain a
work environment that is free from sexual harassment.
      (1)   For the purposes of this section, SEXUAL HARASSMENT includes, but
is not limited to, any unwelcome or unwanted sexual advances, requests for
sexual favors, or other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature from
someone in the workplace that creates discomfort and/or interferes with an
employee’s job.
      (2)   Conduct constitutes harassment when:
         A.   Submission to such conduct is made, either explicitly or
implicitly, a term or condition of an individual’s employment;
         B.   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is
used as the basis for employment decisions and/or retaliation; or
         C.   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably
interfering with an individual’s work performance or creating an intimidating,
hostile or offensive working environment.
      (3)   Sexual harassment may take many forms, including:
         A.   Verbal conduct, such as epithets, derogatory comments or slurs,
or unwanted sexual advances, invitations, or comments;
         B.   Visual conduct, such as derogatory posters, cartoons, drawings,
or gestures;
         C.   Physical conduct, such as assault, blocking normal movement or
interference with work because of sex;
         D.   Threats or demands to submit to sexual requests in order to
maintain employment or avoid some other loss, and offers of job benefits in
return for sexual favors; and/or
         E.   Retaliation for having reported harassment.
   (c)   Other forms of harassment or discrimination. It is the policy of the
city to prevent discrimination and harassment of any kind. Each city employee
has the responsibility to maintain a work environment that is free from
discrimination and harassment.
      (1)   Discrimination occurs when an employment action is taken based on
the employee or applicants’ status as a member of a protected class. There are
two forms of discrimination:
         A.   Disparate treatment. Disparate treatment occurs when an employer
intentionally treats an employee differently because of their protected class;
and
         B.   Disparate impact. Disparate impact occurs when an employment
policy, although neutral on its face, adversely impacts persons in a protected
class.
      (2)   Harassment occurs when it is directed at an individual based on
their inclusion in a protected class. Harassment can be verbal and/or physical
and can include name calling, slurs, jokes, gestures, leering, stalking,
grabbing and/or assault. This is not an exhaustive list of all harassing
behaviors. Harassment is unlawful where:
         A.   Enduring the offensive conduct becomes a condition of continued
employment (quid pro quo); or
         B.   The conduct is severe or pervasive enough to create a work
environment that a reasonable person would consider intimidating, hostile or
abusive (hostile work environment).
   (d)   Procedure.
      (1)   Any employee who feels that they have been subjected to harassment
or discrimination is encouraged to affirmatively discourage the offender in an
effort to stop the offensive behavior and may report the conduct to the
affected employee’s department head.
      (2)   Any employee who feels that they have been subjected to sexual
harassment must immediately report any incident to that employee’s department
head in accordance with the provisions set forth in § 256.18(a).
      (3)   Any employee who is aware of harassing or discriminatory conduct
affecting another employee is encouraged to report such conduct to the
department head of such affected employee.
      (4)   In the event the conduct in question involves a department head,
the affected employee or one reporting such behavior directed towards the
affected employee shall proceed as set forth in §
256.18(b) and contact the Mayor in written form. The process shall go forward
as otherwise provided by §
256.18 if the issue is not resolved pursuant to §
256.18(a) or (b).
   (e)   Anti-retaliation. No employee shall be subjected to adverse employment
action in retaliation for any good faith report of harassment or discrimination
or for participating in an investigation about harassment or discrimination.
(Prior Code, § 256.195) (Ord. 21-147, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 256.17 WORKPLACE VIOLENCE PREVENTION.
   (a)   Policy. The city is committed to providing a safe workplace for all
employees free from the risk of violence, threats and intimidation.
   (b)   Violent, threatening or intimidating behavior. The city does not
tolerate any type of workplace violence committed by or against its employees.
Employees are prohibited from making threats or engaging in violent,
threatening or intimidating behavior. This list of behavior includes, but is
not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Causing physical injury to another person;
      (2)   Making threatening remarks;
      (3)   Displaying aggressive or hostile behavior that creates a reasonable
fear of injury to another person or subjects another individual to emotional
distress;
      (4)   Intentionally damaging city property or property of another
employee;
      (5)   Possessing an unauthorized weapon during working hours while on
city-owned property or while occupying a city-owned vehicle; and
      (6)   Committing acts motivated by, or related to, sexual harassment or
domestic violence.
   (c)   Reporting. Any employee who is the victim of any threatening or
harassing conduct, any witness to such conduct, or anyone receiving a report of
such conduct, whether the perpetrator is a city employee or a non-employee,
shall immediately report the incident to any of the following. (There is no
need to follow the chain of command).
      (1)   Immediate supervisor;
      (2)   Any supervisor or manager within or outside of the department;
      (3)   Department head; or
      (4)   Director of Human Resources.
   (d)   Seek safety; report. Any employee who is the victim of any threat of
violence or violent contact with an employee or non-employee shall immediately
seek safety and report the incident.
   (e)   Reporting procedure.
      (1)   Emergency situations. If possible, distance yourself from the
perpetrator, then call 9-1-1. The report should include your name, location,
the name of the perpetrator, the nature of the problem and whether weapons are
involved. Try to remain calm.
      (2)   Non-emergency situations. Call dispatch at 440-933-4567 or notify
your department head. Reports can be made anonymously; and
      (3)   Investigation. All reported incidents will be investigated. Reports
or incidents warranting confidentiality will be handled appropriately, and
information will be disclosed to others only on a need-to-know basis. All
parties involved in a situation will be counseled, and the results of
investigations will be discussed with them.
   (f)   Protective order. Any employee who has received a court protective
order (e.g., emergency protective order, restraining order or injunction)
against another individual or individuals, based upon fear or threat of
physical harm by a third party, should, immediately upon returning to work,
provide a copy of such order to his, her or their direct supervisor and the
Director of Human Resources and provide a physical description of the person(s)
that is (are) the subject of such order. The employee should carry a certified
copy of the order on his or her person at all times. This information may be
shared on a need-to-know basis to ensure safety and security, including
providing such information to those who work at entrances to city buildings or
facilities (e.g., front counter staff).
   (g)   Due process. Any employee, reported to be a perpetrator, will be
afforded due process and an opportunity to obtain representation prior to an
administrative interview or in the event city disciplinary action is taken.
   (h)   When law enforcement is called. In the event the city fears for the
safety of the perpetrator or the safety of others, law enforcement will be
called.
   (i)   Warning signs. All employees are encouraged to be familiar with and
know how to recognize the warning signs of workplace violence, including:
      (1)   The person is unusually argumentative or uncooperative;
      (2)   The person exhibits extreme or bizarre behavior;
      (3)   The person displays obvious changes in work patterns such as
tardiness, absenteeism or poor work performance, emotional swings; and
      (4)   The person talks about guns or other weapons or violent acts.
   (j)   Notification; supervisor. Any employee, supervisor or department head
who perceives a potentially volatile situation should notify his, her or their
supervisor, department head or the Director of Human Resources and take
appropriate steps to warn others of the potential threat immediately.
   (k)   Security and assessment. A work site analysis may be conducted to
identify existing conditions, operations and conditions that might create or
contribute to potential workplace violence issues. Employees may request a work
site analysis by contacting the Human Resources Manager at 440-930-4127. Work
site analyses will be coordinated with the department and Police Department
personnel and a report outlining recommendations will be submitted to the
appropriate department head and Mayor.
   (l)   Violation of this policy.
      (1)   Any employee engaging in violent acts is in violation of this
policy and will be subject to disciplinary action up to and including
termination.
      (2)   Reporting of a violent occurrence is mandatory and failure to do so
could result in disciplinary action up to and including termination.
   (m)   Retaliation or harassment. Retaliation or harassment against any
person acting in good faith that initiates a complaint or reports an incident
under this policy will not be tolerated by the city and will subject any
employee engaging in such harassment or retaliation to discipline, up to and
including termination.
(Prior Code, § 256.196) (Ord. 21-147, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 256.18 PROCEDURE FOR CONSIDERATION OF UNCLASSIFIED EMPLOYEE GRIEVANCES.
   (a)   Employee grievances shall, in the first instance, be discussed between
the individual employee involved and his, her or their department head.
   (b)   If an employee grievance cannot be resolved by such discussion with
the department head, or if the grievance is as a result of acts or omissions by
the department head, the employee may submit such grievance, in written form,
to the Mayor for his, her or their consideration and evaluation. A copy shall,
at the same time, be provided to the department head involved, and the Mayor
shall, within 15 days after receipt of such a request for his, her or their
review, arrange for a meeting with the parties involved and shall attempt to
resolve the dispute.
   (c)   If such grievance in question is not resolved within 15 days after its
submission to the Mayor, either the employee or the department head may submit
the grievance in question to the Human Resources Committee with a request for
its consideration. Such a request shall be made in writing and delivered to the
Chairperson of the Committee. It shall set forth, as clearly and concisely as
possible, the nature of the grievance involved and the facts necessary to show
it has properly been presented through the preliminary steps required by this
section. A copy of such request shall be delivered to both the opposing party
and the Mayor, and each shall also be given the opportunity to submit to the
Committee a written memorandum of his, her or their views on the request.
Within 15 days after receipt of such a request for review, the Committee shall
arrange for a meeting with the parties involved for an oral presentation of the
question. Following such a meeting, and within 15 days thereafter, the
Committee shall decide the question and reduce its decision to writing. Copies
shall be provided to all parties involved, including Council. Any time limit
specified in this section may be extended with the consent of all parties
concerned.
   (d)   The decision of the Committee shall be final insofar as the department
head is concerned. The decision of the Committee shall be reduced to writing
and a copy delivered to the employee concerned. The employee may, if he, she or
they submit the matter in dispute to the fact-finding authority as provided for
in §
256.15.
   (e)   This section shall apply to only those employees not covered by a
collective bargaining agreement or civil service rules. All other employees
shall be subject to collective bargaining agreements and/or civil service rules
as applicable.
   (f)   Compliance with the procedures set forth herein is a prerequisite to
filing any legal proceeding with a court or a charge with an administrative
agency.
(Prior Code, § 256.20) (Ord. 21-147, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 256.19 STRIKING PROHIBITED BY LAW ENFORCEMENT AND FIRST RESPONDERS.
   Except as otherwise provided for by an applicable collective bargaining
agreement or the Ohio Revised Code, nothing in this chapter shall constitute a
grant to members of law enforcement, Fire Department or other first responders
the right to strike and such strikes are prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 256.21) (Ord. 21-147, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 256.20 AMENDMENT PROCEDURE.
   If Council considers amending or rescinding all or any portion of this
chapter, it shall only do so after a three-reading consideration with advance
notice to municipal employees and a full opportunity for them to be heard.
(Prior Code, § 256.23) (Ord. 21-147, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 256.21 HUMAN RESOURCES DIRECTOR.
   (a)   General responsibilities. Under the direction of the Mayor and
Council, this employee shall recommend and develop the Human Resources
Department goals, plans and priorities. This employee shall recommend, develop
and implement various human resources policies and procedures in areas
including personnel selection, evaluation, training, compensation, record
keeping, compliance and other areas as needed. This employee shall coordinate
various human resources procedures such as selection, evaluation and training.
This employee shall assist the Mayor and Council as needed in employee and
labor relations matters including, but not limited to, grievances,
arbitrations, and negotiations. This employee shall perform various other human
resources functions as needed.
   (b)   General qualifications and specific duties. General qualifications and
specific duties shall be as enumerated as provided for by Council by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 256.24) (Ord. 21-147, passed 12-13-2021)
CHAPTER 258: WAGE AND SALARY ADMINISTRATION
Section
258.01 Title and purpose
258.02 Definitions
258.03 Enforcement by Human Resources Committee
258.04 Powers and duties of Human Resources Committee
258.05 Pay ranges
258.06 Job performance evaluations
258.07 Rules and regulations
Editor’s note:
   This chapter, previously titled Job Evaluation, Wage and Salary
Administration, was re-enacted in its entirety by Ordinance 137-87, passed June
8, 1987. Ordinance 137-87 was repealed and this chapter was re-enacted in its
entirety by Ordinance 113-88, passed June 27, 1988. Ordinance 113-88 was
repealed and this chapter was re-enacted by Ordinance 21-148, passed December
13, 2021.
   Because of the frequency of change, provisions relating to job descriptions
are not codified. Copies of the latest relevant legislation may be obtained, at
cost, from the Clerk of Council.
§ 258.01 TITLE AND PURPOSE.
   This chapter shall be entitled the Wage and Salary Administration chapter
and shall be determinative of the procedures and standards to be followed in
setting wage and salary guidelines for employees of the city, except as may be
otherwise provided in present and future collective bargaining agreements
entered into with employee representatives.
(Ord. 113-88, passed 6-27-1988; Ord. 21-148, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 258.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANNIVERSARY DATE. The date any full-time city employee was initially
employed or the latest date of re-employment as a full-time city employee.
   APPOINTING AUTHORITY. Either the Mayor, Council, department heads or the
Board of Municipal Utilities, having the right of appointment of any particular
city employee.
   BASE SALARY OR WAGE. The minimum salary or hourly rate of pay for the
classification to which an employee may be hired.
   CLASSIFICATION. A specific job title and specifications for that job.
   INITIAL PAY. The step of the classification an employee is assigned.
   JOB CLASSIFICATION PLAN. A system of classifications and pay range
assignments.
   PAY PERIOD. The period of time during which a payroll is determined by the
Finance Director.
   PAY RANGE. A division of compensation scheduling to which classifications of
positions are assigned. A PAY RANGE shall have a minimum and maximum pay.
   PROBATIONARY PERIOD. The initial testing or trial period of between six
months to one year, as determined by the job classification or applicable
collective bargaining agreement, which is immediately following the employment
of a new employee or the promotion of a current employee into a new position,
during which the employee’s suitability for the position is evaluated.
   PROMOTIONAL EMPLOYEE. An employee in a position, the classification for
which carries a higher pay range than that previously held.
   REASSIGNMENT. The changing of the job classification assigned to an
individual.
   RECLASSIFICATION. The act of changing the classification of an existing
position.
   SPECIFICATION. A particular description of a job classification specifying
or giving examples of the responsibilities and duties to be performed by
employees holding positions included in such classification, which description
may include the classification number, a statement of job functions and a group
of task statements by job duties.
   TRANSFER. The act of changing an employee from one job classification to
another with a different department or discipline. The TRANSFER may be a
demotion in classification, a lateral in classification or a promotion in
classification.
(Ord. 113-88, passed 6-27-1988; Ord. 75-2013, passed 6-10-2013; Ord. 21-148,
passed 12-13-2021)
§ 258.03 ENFORCEMENT BY HUMAN RESOURCES COMMITTEE.
   This chapter shall be administered by the Human Resources Committee of
Council.
(Ord. 113-88, passed 6-27-1988; Ord. 21-148, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 258.04 POWERS AND DUTIES OF HUMAN RESOURCES COMMITTEE.
   The Human Resources Committee, when it is deemed necessary, shall recommend
to Council any revision or repeal of the wage classification plan for all
classified positions.
(Ord. 200-95, passed 11-27-1995; Ord. 8-2011, passed 2-28-2011; Ord. 43-2014,
passed 4-14-2014; Ord. 21-148, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 258.05 PAY RANGES.
   The Human Resources Director shall develop an evaluation form for evaluating
department heads and/or non-bargaining employees.
(Ord. 113-88, passed 6-27-1988; Ord. 21-148, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 258.06 JOB PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS.
   (a)   Main purposes. The main purposes of job performance evaluations are
to:
      (1)   Develop job expectations for each position of employment and a
standard from which to measure employee performance;
      (2)   Recognize employees for performance and develop ways to improve the
performance of employees;
      (3)   Identify and develop action and training plans and establish goals
within the defined period;
      (4)   Act as a forum for individual career development issues;
      (5)   Provide historical data for consideration in promotional
opportunities where permissible and not in violation of Civil Service Rules;
and
      (6)   Provide a formal time and place for all of the above to occur.
   (b)   Evaluation form. Each department head shall use the designated
performance evaluation form available in the Human Resources Department.
Additional information may be attached on a separate sheet of paper.
   (c)   Procedures. The procedures set forth in this division (c) shall be
used in completing job performance evaluations.
      (1)   All employees (except seasonal hires) shall be evaluated at least
annually between 45 to 60 days prior to their anniversary date. To be eligible
for pay or step increases, an employee’s evaluations must be up to date.
      (2)   Each employee shall be evaluated by his or her immediate supervisor
or supervisors. If an employee has been reassigned to a new supervisor within
90 days prior to the evaluation date, the new supervisor shall consult with the
previous supervisor in completing the job performance evaluation. If an
employee receives approximately equal supervision from more than one
supervisor, the supervisors shall jointly submit one evaluation of that
employee’s job performance.
      (3)   Completed reviews shall be examined and signed off by the
department head prior to submission to the Human Resources Department.
      (4)   After completion of an employee’s job performance evaluation, the
employee and the evaluator shall meet to review the employee’s job performance
evaluation. During such review meeting, the employee’s rating in each of the
applicable general factor criteria shall be discussed. The signature of the
employee on the form denotes that the employee has seen the job evaluation
report. The employee shall be afforded the right to comment in writing on his
or her job performance evaluation within 30 days of receipt of such job
evaluation report.
   (d)   Highest rating level.
      (1)   An employee receiving this rating may be recommended for a
promotional step increase or raise where no steps exist.
      (2)   If a step increase or a raise is recommended a formal written
request along with a copy of the performance evaluation shall be forwarded to
the Human Resources Committee of City Council for appropriate review and
sponsorship 45 days before the employee’s anniversary date.
   (e)   Ratings less than highest level.
      (1)   An employee receiving below or mid-range levels shall not be
recommended for a promotional step increase or raise.
      (2)   Additionally, such employee shall participate in developing written
objectives and confer with the evaluator to help improve his or her job
performance and appraisal rating.
      (3)   The employee shall be evaluated again within 60, days and if the
employee does not improve, the administration and the employee shall be so
advised by the employee’s department head for further action.
   (f)   Probationary employee. Employees shall be considered probationary
until completion of one year of service to the city or the expiration of their
probationary period as defined in the applicable collective bargaining
agreement, if such exists under the original appointment. Probationary
employees shall be evaluated a minimum of two times during their probationary
period. Probationary employees shall be evaluated after completing six months
of service and prior to the end of their probationary period. Upon the
completion of their probationary period, the department head shall indicate on
the evaluation form whether the employee has successfully completed the period
and whether the employee shall be retained. The department head may extend the
probationary period by submitting a written request detailing the necessity of
such a measure to the Human Resources Director.
   (g)   Promotional employees.
      (1)   Employees being promoted to a higher job classification shall serve
a one-year probationary period (unless the applicable collective bargaining
agreement defines a lesser probationary period) in their new classification.
      (2)   Promotional employees shall have a minimum of two job performance
evaluations during their probationary period. One shall be six months after
their latest evaluation, and the second job performance evaluation shall be
completed at least 45 days before the termination of the probationary period.
If a promotional employee serving a probationary period receives two low job
performance evaluation ratings, the employee may be returned to their previous
position.
      (3)   In a case where the appointment is promotional reclassification or
transfer, the employee shall be placed at the pay step of the new
classification which is immediately greater than the employee’s present rate of
pay. When it is a non-promotional/lateral transfer, the employee shall be
placed in the pay step closest in pay to the employee’s present rate of pay, or
the employee may be kept at the same rate of pay, provided the rate of pay is
less than the highest step of the new classification. After the one-year
probationary period for the transfer, the employee may be granted a raise or
step increase to the nearest step of the classification which increases the
employee’s pay rate, and provided the performance appraisals are up to date.
   (h)   Probational period. The period of time - usually between six months
and one year, or such other time as set forth in the applicable collective
bargaining agreement - during which new or promotional employees are exempt
from certain contractual items of the relevant CBA to allow both the employee
and the department head to evaluate the employee’s suitability for the
position.
(Ord. 209-04, passed 10-11-2004; Ord. 21-148, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 258.07 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   Council shall adopt rules and regulations to implement this chapter,
including, but not be limited to, the job classification plan.
(Ord. 113-88, passed 6-27-1988; Ord. 21-148, passed 12-13-2021)
CHAPTER 260: EMPLOYEES GENERALLY
Section
260.01 Purpose and intent
260.02 Bonds
260.03 Vacations
260.04 Sick leave
260.05 Part-time sick leave policy
260.06 Hours of work
260.07 Overtime compensation and compensation time
260.08 Holidays
260.09 Uniform allowances
260.10 Health insurance
260.11 Life insurance
260.12 Longevity compensation
260.13 Leaves of absence
260.14 Family and medical leave policy
260.15 Employee records; responsibilities of department heads
260.16 Educational incentive compensation
260.17 Use of city vehicles by city employees
260.18 Deferred compensation
260.19 Bereavement leave
260.20 City pick-up of employee contributions to Ohio Public Employees
Retirement System and Ohio Police and Fire Pension Fund
260.21 Jury and witness duty
260.22 Drug free workplace policy
260.23 Drug and alcohol testing policy
260.24 Unauthorized leaves
260.25 Compensation time
260.26 Ethics and outside employment
260.27 Nepotism
260.28 Cybersecurity program
Editor’s note:
   The city executes labor agreements from time to time with the Avon Lake
Municipal Employees Association, which agreements provide for wages, benefits
and conditions of employment for personnel in the Service Department and Avon
Lake Regional Water. The city executes similar agreements with recognized
representatives of Police and Fire Department personnel. The provisions of this
chapter, therefore, apply only to those officers and employees of the city, and
to those subjects, not otherwise provided for in such agreements. Copies of the
latest relevant legislation and of such agreements may be obtained, at cost,
from the Clerk of Council.
   Because of the frequency of change, provisions relating to regular
compensation are not codified. Copies of the latest relevant legislation may be
obtained, at cost, from the Clerk of Council. See also
Chapter 258 for job evaluation, wage and salary administration.
§ 260.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   Unless otherwise specifically stated, the sections in this chapter shall be
construed so as to be applicable solely to those city employees who may be
specifically designated therein and who are not included in a collective
bargaining unit and who receive no benefit from any collective bargaining
agreement between the City of Avon Lake and an employee organization. At the
sole discretion of Council, sections of this chapter may provide for terms and
conditions of public employment not otherwise provided for in any collective
bargaining agreement which may be applicable to any specified city employee or
employees as designated in any such section.
(Prior Code, § 260.001) (Ord. 22-108, passed 7-11-2022)
§ 260.02 BONDS.
   (a)   The following officers and employees of the city shall, before
entering upon the duties of their respective offices, give a good and
sufficient surety bond to the city, to the satisfaction of and subject to the
approval of Council, and conditioned upon the faithful performance and
discharge of their respective duties, handling of firearms and for proper
application and payment of all money or property coming into their hands by
virtue of their offices, in the following amounts:
 
City Officer or Employee                                          Surety Bond
Mayor                                                             $50,000
Finance Director                                                  $200,000
Police Chief                                                      $25,000
Building Inspector                                                $25,000
Municipal Court Clerk                                             $25,000
Municipal Court Bailiff                                           $25,000
Municipal Deputy Court Clerks and Bailiffs                        $25,000
Board of Municipal Utilities employees having moneys belonging to $25,000
the Board in their custody and control
All other officers and employees of the city or any department
thereof, having moneys belonging to the funds of the city or any  $5,000
department thereof in their possession or control as a customary
incident of their office or employment
 
   (b)   Council may permit and authorize blanket bonds from any duly
authorized corporate surety, within the limitations of the City Charter and
R.C. § 3.06.
   (c)   Whenever an officer or employee of the city is required to furnish
bond to ensure faithful performance of the duties of his, her or their office
or employment, the bond premium or cost of the bond shall be paid from the
general funds of the city if he, she or they is an officer or employee of the
city generally, or from the funds of the Board of Municipal Utilities if he,
she or they is an officer or employee of the Board. Any such bonds furnished to
the city shall be in the custody of the Finance Director, except that the bond
of the Finance Director shall be in the custody of the Mayor. Proof of bonding
shall be forwarded to the Clerk of Council.
(Prior Code, § 260.01) (Ord. 22-108, passed 7-11-2022)
§ 260.03 VACATIONS.
   (a)   All regular full-time non-bargaining employees of the city who have
been in the continuous employment of the city for 12 months or more preceding
January 1, whether employed on a monthly salary basis or at an hourly rate of
pay, shall be allowed an annual vacation, with pay, of two normal work weeks.
All regular full-time employees who have been employed for less than 12 months
preceding January 1, will receive one full day of vacation for each full month
of employment during the previous year up to a maximum of two normal work
weeks.
   (b)   The basis of computing the compensation of an employee who works on an
hourly rate of pay, for the period of his, her or their respective vacation,
shall be the normal straight time earnings of the particular employee working a
full week at the hourly rate fixed for his, her or their employment in the
particular city department where employed.
   (c)   Each person having charge of a department of the city wherein there
are other employees under the supervision of such person, shall arrange a
schedule of vacations as nearly as possible to conform with the proper
functioning of the particular department, as well as to suit the convenience of
the respective employees. In any event, vacations shall be taken subject to the
review of such determination by the Mayor or the Board of Municipal Utilities.
   (d)   All full-time (2,080 hours), permanent, non-bargaining employees who
have been in the employment of the city shall be granted vacation as follows
(with continuous service):
      (1)   After their five-year anniversary = three weeks’ vacation;
      (2)   After their ten-year anniversary = four weeks’ vacation;
      (3)   After their 20-year anniversary = five weeks’ vacation.
   All earned vacation shall become effective January 1 after their attainment
of the employee’s date of hire.
   (e)   Vacations may not be accumulated and shall be taken not later than the
end of the subsequent year of service for which the vacation was earned, unless
an extension is authorized by Council.
   (f)   A non-bargaining employee whose employment with the city is
terminated, or upon retirement, shall be paid for vacation time earned the
previous year but not yet taken, and for vacation time earned but not yet taken
in the year of termination or retirement. Compensation shall be calculated by
dividing the employee’s bi-weekly wage by the number of hours normally worked
bi-weekly, times the unused hours of vacation, provided that the employee has
12 months or more continuous service.
   (g)   The payment of any vacation allowance for a deceased employee shall be
calculated pursuant to division (f) above and shall be paid to the next of kin
or to the executor or administrator of the estate of such a deceased employee.
   (h)   (1)   In the year of the fifth, tenth and twentieth anniversary date
of employment, and only in those years, full-time non-bargaining employees not
covered by a collective bargaining agreement shall be granted one additional
day of paid vacation for each two full months of employment between their
anniversary date and December 31. The employee shall be allowed use of this
prorated additional paid vacation time only on or after his, her or their
employment anniversary date. This pro rata paid vacation shall be taken prior
to December 31 and cannot be carried over into the next year.
      (2)   Full-time non-bargaining employees shall be eligible to “cash-in”
up to ten vacation days (80 hours) per year at the employees’ appropriate
hourly rate. Reimbursement for unused vacation days shall be in full day (eight
hours) or half day (four hours) increments. The employee shall receive payment
for the “cashed-in” vacation days on the next payday after “cashing-out”.
   (i)   (1)   Pursuant to the current standing provisions in the multiple
CBA’s currently in effect the following shall apply to non-bargaining, full-
time, employees:
         A.   Non-bargaining full-time employees who have had prior service
(full- or part- time) with the City of Avon Lake and/or any other municipal
agency(ies) with the state, shall be credited such time for the purposes of
calculating vacation time; such calculations shall equal the provisions of the
current collective bargaining agreements. Such credit shall be restricted to
the past ten years as outlined union CBA.
         B.   Non-bargaining, full-time employees, who have served in any
branch of the United States military and who have received an honorable
discharge, shall receive credit for vacation time calculated (above). Active-
duty time will be used for the basis of such calculations and such time shall
be restricted to the past ten years in keeping with the intent of division (a)
above. Active duty will be defined for these purposes as time listed on the
official DD 214 discharge paperwork itemized as “active duty”.
         C.   Additional credit for prior municipal (Ohio) and/or military
service shall not have a greater benefit than current unionized employees.
      (2)   Pursuant to the current standing provisions in the municipal
utilities CBA currently in effect the following shall apply to non-bargaining,
full-time, employees:
         A.   Non-bargaining full-time municipal utilities employees shall be
entitled to vacation credit or prior service credit for tenure with another
county appointing authority, the state, or other political sub-division of the
state. Proof of prior employment by another employer shall be in the form of a
notarized letter from the employer stating service dates or certified service
credit report from Ohio Public Employee Retirement System (OPERS); and
         B.   Such credit shall be restricted to the previous 20 years of
service.
(Prior Code, § 260.02) (Ord. 22-108, passed 7-11-2022; Ord. 23-34, passed 2-27-
2023)
§ 260.04 SICK LEAVE.
   Sick leave shall be provided to each full-time non-bargaining employee in
accordance with state law and this section.
   (a)   Sick leave accumulation.
      (1)   Each full-time non-bargaining employee shall be advanced five days
(40 hours) of immediate sick leave credit which will be charged against the
first four months of his, her or their accumulation of sick leave. Sick leave
shall be accumulated at the 4.6 hours for every 80 hours worked.
      (2)   The accumulation of sick leave is unlimited.
      (3)   Any full-time non-bargaining employee who has been employed with
another public agency or political subdivision shall be credited with the
unused balance of his, her or their accumulated sick leave from such public
agency or subdivision with written documentation.
      (4)   The previously accumulated sick leave of a full-time non-bargaining
employee who has been separated from public service shall be placed to his, her
or their credit upon his, her or their reemployment, provided that his, her or
their employment takes place within ten years of the date on which the employee
was last terminated from public service, unless the employee has elected to
receive termination pay for such sick leave.
   (b)   Granting of sick leave.
      (1)   Each non-bargaining employee shall furnish a written and signed
statement on forms prescribed by department head and/or HR Department to
justify the use of sick leave. Such form will be made available by the
department head and shall be submitted to the department head when completed by
the employee.
      (2)   Sick leave may be used due to personal illness, pregnancy, injury,
and exposure to contagious disease which could be communicated to others, and
for absence due to illness, injury or death in the employee’s immediate family.
As used in this division (b)(2), IMMEDIATE FAMILY means the father, mother,
brother, sister, husband, wife, child, grandparent of the employee and/or his,
her or their spouse, grandchild, step parent, step child, step brother, and
step sister. It does not provide extended leave for chronic illness within the
immediate family; those cases fall under FMLA provisions.
      (3)   If medical attention is required, or if the absence exceeds five
consecutive days, a certificate stating the nature of the illness from a
licensed physician may be required to justify the use of sick leave. The
appointing authority or his, her or their designee in the employee’s department
may request such certificate.
      (4)   In the case of pregnancy and/or childbirth of the employee and/or
spouse, the employee may utilize a maximum of five days without a certificate
from a licensed obstetrician gynecologist, midwife, obstetric or gynecological
nurse practitioner. If the employee, spouse, or child develops medical
complications associated with the pregnancy, childbirth, or recovery from said
pregnancy, additional days of sick leave may be used upon the filing of a
medical excuse signed by a licensed obstetrician, gynecologist, midwife,
obstetric or gynecological nurse practitioner that details the nature of the
illness, complications or incapacitation associated with said pregnancy and/or
birth. Medical information provided by the employee will be consistent with
state and federal laws concerning personal medical information.
   (c)   Payment for unused sick leave upon retirement.
      (1)   A full-time non-bargaining employee, at the time of acceptance for
retirement by the Public Employees Retirement System, the police pension, or
the fire pension, if he, she or they has/have ten or more years of full-time
service as an employee of the city, and if his, her or their retirement is
within 90 days of his, her or their last day of service with the city, may
elect to receive termination pay.
      (2)   Each full-time non-bargaining employee who qualifies shall receive
50% of his, her or their accumulated sick leave credit up to a maximum of 180
days. Payment shall be based on the daily rate of pay at the time of retirement
and shall not exceed 90 days (720 hours) of accumulated unused sick leave.
      (3)   Each full-time non-bargaining unit employee in Avon Lake Regional
Water who qualifies shall receive 50% of his, her or their accumulated sick
leave credit up to a maximum of 960 hours. Payment shall be based on his, her
or their daily rate of pay at the time of retirement and shall not exceed 480
hours of accumulated unused sick leave.
      (4)   Payment under this division (c) shall eliminate all sick leave
credit.
      (5)   No employee shall receive more than one such payment.
      (6)   If termination is because of death, such remaining accumulated sick
leave pay shall be paid to the surviving spouse or dependent children in the
order named or to the executor or administrator of the estate.
   (d)   Employer unused sick leave buy back.
      (1)   Any full-time non-bargaining employee may elect each year to have
the employer buyback a maximum of 120 hours of sick time for the current year.
A written request must be completed by the employee to do so and be submitted
to the employer no later than December 31 of the year of the actual conversion.
The employee shall specify in writing the number of sick days (or hours) to be
converted. The rate of conversion will be one day (eight hours) of pay at the
employee’s regular rate for each two days (16 hours) of sick leave converted.
The conversion will result in the employee having his, her or their sick leave
account reduced by the number of sick leave days converted. Converted hours
will not count as “hours worked” in the week paid out for the purpose of
calculating overtime, and the leave converted under this program is done on the
last in, first out basis.
      (2)   The employee will receive the payout no later than second full pay
period the following year. No employee shall be permitted to convert any more
leave than he, she or they would otherwise earn in a calendar year less any
leave earned and used in the calendar year.
   (e)   Payment for unused sick leave upon retirement. In lieu of a portion of
the maximum severance pay allowed in §
260.03(a) through (d), full-time, non-bargaining unit employees with either a
total of 26 years of PERS-accepted credit time, or who are eligible for PERS
pension on the date of their proposed retirement, may request to convert their
current awarded sick leave hours to paid wages.
      (1)   Sick leave shall be limited to a maximum annual accumulation of 120
days of sick leave per year.
      (2)   Any sick leave utilized during this program will be deducted from
the employee's past bank of accumulated hours, if applicable on a first-in-
first-out (FIFO) basis.
      (3)   The payment for the accumulated hours shall be made on the last pay
of December, except that the final payment shall be made at the time of
retirement.
      (4)   The hourly rate used to calculate the amount of the payment shall
be 100% of the employee's prevailing rate of pay at the time of the payment,
with the current appropriate amount of pension deduction for employee and
employer shares of pension contributions. All sick leave hours converted to
payment shall be deducted from the maximum allowed under § 260.03(a) through
(d).
      (5)   By submitting the request to participate in this sick leave buyout
plan, the employee acknowledges that his, her or their final sick leave
balance, upon retirement for severance calculation pursuant to § 260.03(a)
through (d), will be reduced by the amount paid (maximum of 120 hours
annually). At no point shall the payment received exceed the maximum number of
sick days allowed to be paid out upon retirement pursuant to §
260.03(a) through (d) in order to ensure no additional costs to the city. If
the employee fails to execute retirement or withdraws from the program, he, she
or they:
         A.   Must repay any amounts received under the program in order to re-
enroll; or
         B.   Will only be eligible for future severance payments to the
maximum allowed, less any time previously paid under this plan.
      (6)   The employee must submit a request in writing to the department
head, with a copy to the Finance Director, asking for enrollment in this plan.
A copy of the employee's most recent PERS service credit statement must be
attached to the request.
         A.   Within 90 days, the Finance Director will notify the employee of
his, her or their correct sick leave balance, and the number of hours to be
paid at the last pay of December.
         B.   The employee then has 30 days within which to dispute any balance
in question.
      (7)   The arrangement is not a guarantee of employment, and the city
reserves the right to terminate this plan at the end of any given calendar
year.
(Prior Code, § 260.03) (Ord. 22-108, passed 7-11-2022; Ord. 25-32, passed 3-10-
2025)
§ 260.05 PART-TIME SICK LEAVE POLICY.
   All part-time (fewer than 2,080 hours), non-seasonal, non-bargaining
employees who have been in the employment of the city for at least six
continuous months, shall be paid sick leave as follows:
   (a)   Part-time employees will earn sick leave at the rate of 4.6 hours pay
per 80 hours of completed service, in accordance with R.C. § 124.38.
   (b)   Sick leave for part-time employees will accumulate without limit
beginning on January 1, 2003.
   (c)   Sick leave for part-time employees may be utilized upon approval of
the responsible administrative officer and department head for an absence due
to personal illness, pregnancy, injury, exposure to contagious disease which
could be communicated to other employees, and for absence due to illness,
injury, or death in the employee’s immediate family. IMMEDIATE FAMILY consists
of father, mother, brother, sister, husband, wife, child and grandparent of the
employee and his, her or their spouse.
   (d)   If medical attention is required or if the absence exceeds five
consecutive days, a certificate stating the nature of the illness from a
licensed physician may be required to justify the use of sick leave. The
appointing authority or his, her or their designee in the employee’s department
may request such certificate.
(Prior Code, § 260.035) (Ord. 22-108, passed 7-11-2022)
§ 260.06 HOURS OF WORK.
   Hours of work shall be as normal industry standard of Monday through Friday,
with City Hall office hours as 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Non-bargaining, full time
employees of the Fire, Police and Municipal Court shall establish customary
business hours of operation.
(Prior Code, § 260.04) (Ord. 22-108, passed 7-11-2022)
§ 260.07 OVERTIME COMPENSATION AND COMPENSATION TIME.
   (a)   A full-time, non-bargaining city employee, whether compensated on a
salary or hourly basis, who, upon the request of his, her or their department
head, works in excess of the normal hours of work specified in §
260.06, shall receive financial compensation for such overtime work on the
basis of one and one-half times his, her or their hourly rate or equivalent
hourly rate for salaried personnel. The basic hourly rate shall be determined
by dividing the employee’s bi-weekly wage by 80 hours.
   (b)   In lieu of receiving financial compensation as set forth in division
(a) above, employees may accumulate up to 120 hours per year of compensation
time at a rate of one and one-half times the hours worked beyond a 40-hour work
week. The department head shall have sole discretion in compensation time
usage. As employees use compensation time, they may add time to the accumulated
time as long as the total accumulated time does not exceed 120 hours.
   (c)   Compensation time off shall not be carried or credited beyond the
calendar year in which it was earned. Such compensation time off shall be used
during the calendar year in which it was earned within a reasonable time after
the request, provided that such use would not unduly disrupt the operations of
the department, as determined by the department head.
   (d)   If any compensation time off is not used during the calendar year in
which it was earned, the employee shall be provided financial compensation for
the unused time as set forth in division (a) above within 31 days after the end
of such calendar year.
   (e)   The department head shall maintain a continuing written record of
compensation time which has been permitted and earned and shall have such
records available for inspection and information by and for the Finance
Director.
   (f)   Neither financial overtime compensation nor compensation time shall
apply to heads of departments or Assistant Fire Chief(s) unless otherwise
provided by Council. Seasonal and part-time employees shall be compensated for
overtime work in compliance with applicable law.
   (g)   In computing a 40-hour week basis for allowance of financial overtime
compensation or compensation time, time taken off during the week by an
employee shall be deducted unless such time is for authorized leave.
(Prior Code, § 260.05) (Ord. 22-108, passed 7-11-2022)
§ 260.08 HOLIDAYS.
   (a)   Full-time non-bargaining members of the Fire Department who work a 40-
hour week shall be entitled to the following holidays:
 
New Year’s Day Labor Day
Good Friday      Thanksgiving Day
Memorial Day     Day after Thanksgiving Day
Independence Day Christmas Day
Four personal holidays after the first anniversary of employment
 
   (b)   Full-time non-bargaining members of the Police Department who work a
40-hour week shall be entitled to the following holidays:
 
New Year’s Day Labor Day
Good Friday      Thanksgiving Day
Memorial Day     Day after Thanksgiving Day
Independence Day Christmas Day
Four personal holidays after the first anniversary of employment
 
   (c)   All other full-time non-bargaining employees shall be entitled to the
following holidays:
 
New Year’s Day Labor Day
Good Friday      Thanksgiving Day
Memorial Day     Day after Thanksgiving Day
Independence Day Christmas Day
Four personal holidays after the first anniversary of employment
 
   (d)   All other full-time non-bargaining municipal utilities employees shall
be entitled to the following holidays:
 
New Year’s Day Labor Day
Good Friday      Thanksgiving Day
Memorial Day     Day after Thanksgiving Day
Independence Day Christmas Eve
Christmas Day     
Five personal holidays after the first anniversary of employment
 
   (e)   The Mayor shall receive two personal holidays in addition to the four
personal holidays provided in this division.
   (f)   For employees included in divisions (a), (b), (c), and (d) of this
section, if a holiday falls on a Sunday, the following Monday shall be the
holiday. If a holiday falls on a Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be the
holiday.
   (g)   Personal holidays.
      (1)   A PERSONAL HOLIDAY, as authorized and allowed in this section, is
defined as time off similar to other holidays in which the employee may
designate the day or time off as a holiday. Such personal holiday is authorized
only when the employee has given his, her or their supervisor at least 72
hours’ notice prior to the taking of such holiday. The department head may, at
his, her or their discretion, schedule such personal holidays in a manner which
will maintain effective and efficient operation of the department. Such
personal holidays may not be accumulated, with the exception of the non-
bargaining unit employees in Avon Lake Regional Water.
      (2)   Non-bargaining unit employees shall be compensated for all personal
holidays not taken prior to December 31 of each year no later than the end of
January immediately following at the rate of pay in effect the preceding
December.
   (h)   Upon retirement or termination of employment with the city, a non-
bargaining employee shall be compensated for any unused holiday time and
personal holiday time. Compensation shall be at an hourly rate, computed by
dividing the employee’s bi-weekly wage by the number of hours normally worked
biweekly, times the number of unused holiday or personal holiday hours
accumulated. In the case of a deceased employee, holiday pay shall be paid to
the next of kin or to the executor or administrator of the estate. In addition
to the above, all shift non-bargaining employees shall be compensated at a rate
of 200% of their hourly rate of pay when they work Thanksgiving Day or
Christmas Day, and 150% of their hourly rate for the remaining six holidays.
(Prior Code, § 260.06) (Ord. 22-108, passed 7-11-2022; Ord. 23-34, passed 2-27-
2023; Ord. 25-32, passed 3-10-2025)
§ 260.09 UNIFORM ALLOWANCES.
   (a)   Police Department. The Police Chief shall receive a clothing allowance
of $1,700 for the purchase and maintenance of regulation uniforms and clothing
to be paid in two installments of $850 each on the scheduled pay days
immediately preceding April 1 and October 1.
   (b)   Fire Department. The Fire Chief shall receive a uniform allowance of
$200 more than the current allotment in the effective collective bargaining
agreement between the city and the Avon Lake IAFF; the Assistant Chiefs shall
receive $150 more than the current allotment (as noted above) and the Fire
Chief’s Secretary (Administrative Assistant, if ordered to wear non-civilian
clothing) shall receive $100 less than the current collective bargaining
agreement rate. All clothing allowances will be paid two equal installments on
or before April 1 and October 1 of each calendar year. All of these effected
employees must have served their probationary period prior to receiving this
benefit unless otherwise allowed by city hiring ordinance(s).
   (c)   Public Works and Building Department. Non-bargaining full time
employees in the Public Works and Building Department shall receive a boot or
safety/work shoe allowance of $200 annually (paid on April 1); other non-
bargaining employees and/or supervisors may also receive this allowance via
their hiring ordinance or as enacted by City Council. In addition to a boot
allowance these same employees shall be entitled to a work clothing allowance
of $750 per year following the same provision as the boot allowance.
(Prior Code, § 260.07) (Ord. 22-108, passed 7-11-2022; Ord. 25-32, passed 3-10-
2025)
§ 260.10 HEALTH INSURANCE.
   Health insurance shall be provided in such amounts and under such terms as
the city shall obtain and shall be governed by the terms contained within such
policy/policies.
(Prior Code, § 260.08) (Ord. 22-108, passed 7-11-2022)
§ 260.11 LIFE INSURANCE.
   The city shall provide full premium payment for $50,000 of life insurance
coverage per full-time employee, upon availability, for the group term life
insurance contract, subject to reduction and/or cancellation in accordance with
the terms of such contract.
(Prior Code, § 260.09) (Ord. 22-108, passed 7-11-2022)
§ 260.12 LONGEVITY COMPENSATION.
   (a)   (1)   The following longevity compensation plan is hereby established
for all full-time, non- bargaining unit employees. Eligible full-time, non-
bargaining unit employee(s) shall be paid longevity compensation equal to the
rate negotiated in the current collective bargaining agreement of that
department.
      (2)   Non-bargaining unit employees with more than one collective
bargaining agreement in their department shall be paid according to the
longevity scale with the higher beginning dollar value. Employees working in a
department without a bargaining unit will be paid in accordance with the scale
below:
 
Consecutive Full Years of Service Amount of Annual Pay
6                                 $600
7                                 $700
8                                 $800
9                                 $900
10                                $1,000
11                                $1,100
12                                $1,200
13                                $1,300
14                                $1,400
15                                $1,500
16                                $1,600
17                                $1,700
18                                $1,800
19                                $1,900
20                                $2,000
21                                $2,100
22                                $2,200
23                                $2,300
24                                $2,400
25                                $2,500 per year until terminated
 
      (3)   Non-bargaining unit municipal utilities employees with more than
one collective bargaining agreement in their department shall be paid according
to the longevity scale with the higher beginning dollar value. Employees
working in a department without a bargaining unit will be paid in accordance
with the scale below:
 
Consecutive Full Years of Service  Amount of Annual Pay
5                                    $500
6                                    $600
7                                    $700
8                                    $800
9                                    $900
10                                   $1,000
11                                   $1,100
12                                   $1,200
13                                   $1,300
14                                   $1,400
15                                   $1,500
16                                   $1,600
17                                   $1,700
18                                   $1,800
19                                   $1,900
20                                   $2,000
21                                   $2,100
22                                   $2,200
23                                   $2,300
24                                   $2,400
25                                   $2,500
                                     Per year until terminated
 
   (b)   Longevity compensation shall be paid to eligible full-time non-
bargaining employees on the scheduled pay day immediately preceding November 1
of each eligible year.
   (c)   Any full-time non-bargaining employee receiving longevity compensation
as set forth in division (a) of this section shall, in addition thereto, be
required to be employed and work not less than1,800 hours during the 12 months
preceding the computation of such compensation.
   (d)   Longevity compensation rates shall be computed on continuous years of
employment service and not upon any wage or salary rate. Service for purposes
of longevity compensation is defined as a full-time position of trust or
employment in the service of the city involving not less than 1,800 hours of
work per 12-month period from December 1 until December 1 of the following
year.
   (e)   HOURS OF WORK is defined as working or duty hours, including hours
paid for vacations, sick leave or other paid authorized absences. Overtime
hours worked will not be counted or computed in determining the 1,800 hour
basic computation requirement for an eligible service year.
   (f)   For full-time non-bargaining employees who leave the service of the
city, for reasons other than discharge or resignation, the following provisions
for longevity compensation shall apply.
      (1)   In cases of separation from public service because of death or
permanent disability, longevity compensation will be prorated and paid as of
the time of separation. In the case of a deceased employee, longevity
compensation shall be paid to the next of kin or executor or administrator of
the estate.
      (2)   Any non-bargaining employee retiring before December 1 of the
calendar year shall receive longevity compensation on a pro rata basis as
determined on the date of his, her or their retirement, payable at the time of
retirement.
   (g)   In computing longevity compensation for the first eligible year, the
employee shall be compensated on a pro rata month-to-month basis, determined by
the number of months (an eligible month for pro rata being 20 or more days)
between the employee’s sixth anniversary date of employment and the next
December 1. Such pro rata compensation shall be added to the first entitlement
of longevity compensation.
   (h)   The monetary value of proration as described in this section shall be
determined by the following formula: eligible months divided by 12, times the
entitlement amount as set forth in division (a) of this section.
(Prior Code, § 260.10) (Ord. 22-108, passed 7-11-2022; Ord. 25-32, passed 3-10-
2025)
§ 260.13 LEAVES OF ABSENCE.
   (a)   Three months restriction. With the consent of the Civil Service
Commission, an appointing officer may grant a leave of absence, without
compensation, for a definite or an indefinite period, not to exceed three
months. Such an absence may be granted for good causes, among which the
following are deemed proper: military service, temporary physical disability or
study or training of value in connection with city service. A leave of absence
shall be promptly referred to the Commission for approval in order that the
civil service status of such absentee may be protected.
   (b)   Consent. The consent of the Civil Service Commission shall not be
required for leaves taken pursuant to the Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA), 29
U.S.C. §§ 2611 et seq. See also §
260.14, Family and Medical Leave Policy.
   (c)   Reinstatement upon return. An employee returning after a leave of
absence without pay shall be reinstated in his, her or their former position.
However, if the appointing officer, during such absence, found it necessary to
fill the position and notified the absent employee to this effect, and if,
further, the latter refused, in writing, to curtail his, her or their leave and
return to work, or failed to respond to his, her or their notification, then it
is not required that such employee be reinstated in his, her or their former
position.
   (d)   Military service. All classified employees of the city returning from
the armed services of the United States and applying for reinstatement shall be
governed by applicable provisions of the Ohio Revised Code and the Uniformed
Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA), 38 U.S.C. §§ 4301
through 4335.
   (e)   Extension of leave. Where an employee has been injured in the line of
duty, an appointing authority may, with the approval of the Commission, grant
one 90-day extension.
(Prior Code, § 260.11) (Ord. 22-108, passed 7-11-2022)
§ 260.14 FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE POLICY.
   (a)   Purpose. In accordance with the 1993 Family and Medical Leave Act
(FMLA), 29 U.S.C. §§ 2611 et seq., the city will provide eligible employees
with unpaid, job-protected leave for specified family and medical reasons, with
continuation of group health insurance coverage under the same terms and
conditions as if the employee had not taken leave.
   (b)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEE. A full-time or part-time employee of the city who has
completed one full year of service consisting of at least 1,250 hours during
the 12 months preceding the request for leave. An ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEE does not
include workers who contract to provide services to the city are not employees
of the city.
      FMLA LEAVE. The leave provided for by this policy and pursuant to 29
U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq. and implementing regulations (29 C.F.R. part 825), as
amended from time to time.
      HEALTH CARE PROVIDER. A doctor of medicine, osteopathy, podiatry,
dentistry, psychology, optometry or chiropractic medicine (limited to treatment
consisting of manual manipulation of the spine to correct a subluxation as
demonstrated by X-ray to exist); or a nurse practitioner, nurse midwife,
clinical social worker and physician assistant who is licensed and authorized
to practice in his, her or their medical or professional field and who is
performing such practice within the scope of their practice as defined by the
state in which such provider practices.
      INCAPACITY. An inability to work or perform other regular daily
activities due to the serious health condition, treatment therefore, or
recovery therefrom.
      INPATIENT CARE. An overnight stay in a hospital, hospice or residential
medical care facility, including any period of incapacity as defined in 29
C.F.R. § 825.113(b), or any subsequent treatment in connection with such
inpatient care.
      SERIOUS HEALTH CONDITION. An illness, injury, impairment or physical or
mental condition that involves inpatient care in a hospital, hospice, or
residential medical care facility or continuing treatment by a licensed health
care provider. Conditions for which cosmetic treatments are administered (such
as most treatments for acne or plastic surgery) are not serious health
conditions unless inpatient care is required or unless complications develop.
Restorative dental or plastic surgery after an injury or removal of cancerous
growths are serious health conditions provided all the other conditions of this
section are met. Mental illness or allergies may be serious health conditions,
but only if all the conditions of this section are otherwise met.
      SERIOUS INJURY OR ILLNESS. An injury or illness sustained or incurred
while on active duty by the eligible employee’s spouse, daughter, son, or
parent who is a “covered service member” in the U.S. Armed Forces as defined in
29 U.S.C. § 2611(18).
      TREATMENT. Means, but is not limited to, examinations to determine if a
serious health condition exists and includes related evaluations and therapies
requiring special equipment or course of prescription medication, but does not
include routine physical examinations, eye examinations, dental examinations,
over-the-counter medications, bed-rest (other than as prescribed for a serious
health condition), drinking fluids, exercise, and other similar activities that
can be initiated without a visit to a health care provider.
   (c)   Family/medical leave. All eligible employees shall be entitled to take
up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave during a rolling 12-month period for:
      (1)   The birth or pending birth of the eligible employee’s child and to
care for the newborn child birth.
      (2)   The placement with the eligible employee of a child for adoption or
foster care and to care for the newly placed child within one year after the
adoption or placement.
      (3)   To care for the eligible employee’s spouse, child or parent who has
a serious health condition.
      (4)   The eligible employee’s own serious health condition that makes the
employee unable to perform the essential functions of the employee’s job.
      (5)   A qualifying exigency arising out of the fact that the spouse, son,
daughter, or parent of the eligible employee is on “covered active-duty” or
been notified of an impending call or order to “covered active duty” as set
forth in 29 U.S.C. § 2612(a)(1)(E) and 29 C.F.R. § 825.126.
   (d)   Military caregiver leave. An eligible employee shall be entitled to
take up to 26 weeks of leave during a rolling 12-month period to care for a
covered service member of the Armed Forces, including a member of the National
Guard or Reserves, with a serious injury or illness if the eligible employee is
the service member’s spouse, son, daughter, parent, or next of kin of the
covered service member and as set forth in 29 C.F.R. § 825.127.
   (e)   Type of leave.
      (1)   Continuous. Leave taken because of a birth of the eligible
employee’s child or placement of a child for adoption or foster care with the
eligible employee must be taken in one continuous period of time and
entitlement to such leave expiring at the end of the 12-month period beginning
on the date of such birth or placement.
      (2)   Intermittent. Leave taken when needed to care for a sick family
member or for the eligible employee’s own serious health condition may be taken
intermittently or on a reduced schedule only when that type of leave is
medically necessary. To accommodate the FMLA leave request, the city may
require the eligible employee to transfer temporarily to an available
alternative position for which the employee is qualified and which better
accommodates the employee’s requested leave. The alternative position will have
equivalent pay and benefits, although it may not have equivalent duties.
      (3)   Combined leave. Any eligible employee taking FMLA leave for a
combination of family/medical leave and military caregiver leave is entitled
only to a total of 26 weeks of leave during a single 12-month period.
   (f)   Pay and benefits during FMLA leave.
      (1)   Leave taken under this policy is unpaid. However, the city may, and
in most cases will, require that unused vacation or sick time be substituted
for unpaid leave as part of the 12 weeks of leave permitted under this policy.
All qualifying events will be recorded under FMLA; therefore, employees are
required to designate the reason for sick time when utilizing it. During FMLA
leave, the employee will be able to continue participation in the benefits
program, including medical, dental and prescription benefits. If the employee
is enrolled in family coverage, the employee must make arrangements with
payroll to continue paying the employee’s portion of the health care cost.
      (2)   If the employee fails to return to work after the employee’s leave
entitlement has been exhausted or expires, the city may recover its share of
benefit plan premiums paid during the period of FMLA leave unless the reason
the employee does not return is due to:
         A.   The continuation, recurrence or onset of either a serious health
condition of the employee or the employee’s family member, or a serious injury
or illness of a covered service member, which would otherwise entitle the
employee to FMLA leave as substantiated by a medical certification; or
         B.   Other circumstances beyond the employee’s control and at the
city’s discretion. For purposes of this section, an employee who returns to
work for at least 30 calendar days, transfers directly from taking FMLA leave
to retirement, or retires during the first 30 days after the employee returns
to work is considered to have returned to work.
   (g)   Notice, reporting and medical certification.
      (1)   Absent circumstances beyond the employee’s control, the employee
must provide the city at least 30 days advance notice before FMLA leave is to
begin and whenever possible, must consult with the employee’s department head
to schedule the treatment so as to minimize disruption to the city’s
operations.
      (2)   If 30 days advance notice cannot be given due to circumstances
beyond the employee’s control, for example, an unexpected change in
circumstances or a medical emergency, the employee must give notice “as soon as
practicable”. (“As soon as practicable” generally means at least verbal notice
to the employer within one or two business days of learning of the need to take
FMLA leave.)
      (3)   Notice of a request for FMLA leave must be submitted in writing and
include the following information:
         A.   The reason(s) for the requested leave;
         B.   The anticipated duration of the leave; and
         C.   The anticipated start of the leave.
      (4)   If the employee requests leave due to a serious health condition
(of employee or family member), the request must comply with the following.
         A.   Initial request. Within 15 calendar days after the request for
FMLA leave, the employee must provide to the employee’s department head a
complete and sufficient medical certification that contains, at a minimum, the
following information:
            1.   Contact information for the health care provider providing
treatment for the person who has the serious health condition;
            2.   The date the serious health condition began and how long it is
expected to last;
            3.   Appropriate medical facts about the serious health condition;
            4.   If the request pertains to the employee’s own serious health
condition, information showing that the employee cannot perform the essential
functions of the job or, if leave is to care for a family member, a statement
of the care needed; and
            5.   If intermittent leave is requested, information showing the
medical necessity for intermittent or reduced schedule leave and either the
dates of any planned leave or the estimated frequency and duration of expected
incapacity due to the condition.
   Any failure to provide all of the requested information or the certification
within 15 calendar days may result in a denial of the request for leave.
         B.   Recertification. If the employee’s need for FMLA leave lasts
beyond a single 12-month period, the employer may require the employee to
provide a new medical certification in each new FMLA leave year.
Recertification may also be requested every 30 days if the employee remains
absent during that time, or within 30 days if any of the following occur:
            1.   The employee requests an extension of leave;
            2.   The circumstances described in the previous certification have
significantly changed; or
            3.   The employee’s department head receives credible information
that casts doubt upon the employee’s stated reason for leave or the continuing
validity of the existing medical certification. A medical certification form
will be provided to the employee, if required.
      (5)   If the employee requests leave because of a qualifying exigency,
the employee must provide a copy of the military member’s active-duty orders or
other documentation issued by the military which indicates that the military
member is on covered active duty or call to covered active-duty status, and the
dates of the military member’s covered active-duty service and supported by the
information set forth in 29 C.F.R. § 825.309.
      (6)   If the employee requests leave due to a serious injury or illness,
a certification supplying information from a health care provider as set forth
in 29 C.F.R. § 825.310.
      (7)   While the employee is on FMLA leave, the employee must make
periodic reports to the employee’s department head or other designated city
representative(s) concerning the employee’s status and the employee’s intent to
return to work.
   (h)   Return to work.
      (1)   Except as otherwise set forth in the rules of the Civil Service
Commission or a collective bargaining agreement, if the employee’s leave is
taken as a result of the employee’s own serious health condition, the employee
must present certification from his, her or their health care provider that the
employee is able to resume work before the employee will be permitted to do so.
      (2)   When the employee’s FMLA leave ends, the employee is entitled to
return to the same position the employee held when the leave began, or to an
equivalent position with equal benefits, pay and other terms and conditions of
employment.
      (3)   Circumstances under which the employee may not be reinstated to
employment may include, but are not limited to, the following:
         A.   If the employee would otherwise not have been employed at the
time for reinstatement (e.g., if there has been a layoff which would have
affected the employee if the employee had been working), the employee is not
entitled to be;
         B.   If employee is a qualified “key employee” and such action is
necessary to prevent substantial and grievous economic injury to the city’s
operations. If the city determines that the employee is such a “key employee”,
the employee will be so notified, either when the employee applies for the FMLA
leave, or as soon thereafter as the city has made its good faith determination
based on the circumstances of the particular case;
         C.   If the employee fraudulently obtained FMLA leave; or
         D.   If the employee is unable to perform an essential function of the
position because of a physical or mental condition, including the continuation
of a serious health condition or an injury or illness covered by workers’
compensation.
   (i)   Further information. Any questions regarding this policy should be
directed to the Director of Human Resources for the city.
(Prior Code, § 260.12) (Ord. 22-108, passed 7-11-2022)
§ 260.15 EMPLOYEE RECORDS; RESPONSIBILITIES OF DEPARTMENT HEADS.
   All department heads shall provide holiday, sick leave and vacation
information with each payroll. Time off requests covering sick leave shall also
be submitted with the bi-weekly payroll. Documentation of time charged in
processing payroll (i.e., vacation, sick) are the responsibilities of the
department heads.
(Prior Code, § 260.14) (Ord. 22-108, passed 7-11-2022; Ord. 25-32, passed 3-10-
2025)
§ 260.16 EDUCATIONAL INCENTIVE COMPENSATION.
   To address the increasing needs for diversified services throughout the
city, the educational incentive compensation program is provided to encourage
employees to obtain education above the minimum level necessary for their job
position. These payments shall be made following the collective bargaining
agreement schedules or as determined by the Finance Department and payroll
processes.
   (a)   Eligibility.
      (1)   The Fire Chief and any Assistant Fire Chief shall receive
compensation equal to the education incentive rate in the current International
Association of Firefighters Local 1361 bargaining agreement.
      (2)   The Police Chief shall receive compensation equal to the
educational incentive rate in the current bargaining agreement for the FOP
Lodge #25, Avon Lake Division.
      (3)   All full-time, non-bargaining employees who have completed a
minimum of six months of full-time, continuous employment with the city and who
complete additional education directly related to the job the employee is
performing, as determined by the Mayor and the Human Resources Director.
   (b)   Exclusions.
      (1)   Education levels required for the employee’s position are not
eligible for education incentive compensation.
      (2)   Employees who leave the city’s employment prior to completion of
their new employee probationary period may be required to reimburse the city
for any educational incentive compensation received under this program.
   (c)   Payment.
      (1)   Upon meeting the eligibility requirements, payment of the education
incentive shall be made on an annual basis at the same time as similar payments
are made pursuant to the collective bargaining agreement applicable to the
department in which the employee is employed.
      (2)   Payment is determined based upon the highest degree earned above
the minimum education level required for the employee’s position and may not be
stacked with other degrees earned or earned for more than one degree per level
of education attained.
      (3)   Except for the Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chief, and Police Chief,
incentive payment shall be made at the following levels:
 
Associate’s Degre$450
Bachelor’s Degree$500
Master’s Degree  $750
Doctorate Degree   $1,000
 
   (d)   Documentation. To be eligible for the education incentive, employee
must furnish to employee’s department head a certificate from an accredited
educational institution evidencing that the employee has satisfactorily
completed all requirements necessary to be granted a degree by said educational
institution. Copies of said certificates shall be forwarded to the Finance
Department and shall be filed with the employee’s permanent records.
(Prior Code, § 260.15) (Ord. 22-108, passed 7-11-2022)
§ 260.17 USE OF CITY VEHICLES BY CITY EMPLOYEES.
   The use of city vehicles by city employees shall be regulated by the heads
of the various departments for regular working hours and after hours as
necessary and as follows.
   (a)   Current regulations. The Finance Director shall notify the department
heads of all current federal and state regulations concerning the use of city
vehicles.
   (b)   General provisions.
      (1)   If recommended by an administrative head and approved by Council,
an individual using his, her or their own personal vehicle for city business
shall be compensated for mileage at the current rate as established by the
Internal Revenue Service. Documentation for such use must be provided to the
city.
      (2)   Only city vehicles may use the city gas pumps and maintenance,
regardless of the use of personal vehicles as stated in division (b)(1) of this
section.
      (3)   Personal use of city vehicles is permitted where such personal use
is de minimis and incidental to the employee's use of the city vehicle and does
not result in:
         A.   A significant deviation from the course of travel on city
business;
         B.   Exposure of the city vehicle to substantial additional risk or
loss or damage; or
         C.   Exposure of the city to substantial additional risk of liability.
      (4)   Non-employees and non-business passengers (i.e. family and friends)
are prohibited from riding in city vehicles, except for when personal use is de
minimis.
(Prior Code, § 260.16) (Ord. 22-108, passed 7-11-2022; Ord. 25-32, passed 3-10-
2025)
§ 260.18 DEFERRED COMPENSATION.
   The city hereby adopts a plan under the Ohio Public Employees Deferred
Compensation Program and extends to all eligible employees the opportunity to
join.
(Prior Code, § 260.17) (Ord. 22-108, passed 7-11-2022)
§ 260.19 BEREAVEMENT LEAVE.
   Except as otherwise provided in the Rules of the Civil Service Commission or
a collective bargaining agreement, as applicable, bereavement leave is provided
as follows.
   (a)   Employees shall be allowed bereavement leave with pay in the event of
the death of a member of the employee’s or the employee’s spouse’s “immediate
family.” The term IMMEDIATE FAMILY means father, mother, brother, sister,
husband, wife, child, and grandparents of the employee and/or his, her or their
spouse.
   (b)   Full-time, non-bargaining employees shall be allowed bereavement leave
with pay for a period not to exceed three work days for each death, including
travel, within the state, and five days for each death, including travel time,
outside the state.
(Prior Code, § 260.18) (Ord. 22-108, passed 7-11-2022)
§ 260.20 CITY PICK-UP OF EMPLOYEE CONTRIBUTIONS TO OHIO PUBLIC EMPLOYEES
RETIREMENT SYSTEM AND OHIO POLICE AND FIRE PENSION FUND.
   (a)   The city’s method of payment of salary and its provision of fringe
benefits to all non- bargaining unit employees who are members of the Public
Employees Retirement System (PERS) or the Ohio Police and Fire Pension Fund
(OPFP) and are not covered by Ordinances 132-87 or 133-87 are hereby modified
as follows, in order to provide for a salary reduction pick-up of employee
contribution to PERS or OPFP, in accordance with Internal Revenue Code § 414(h)
(2) and the rulings thereunder.
   (b)   The total annual salary and salary per pay period for each such
employee shall be the salary otherwise payable under the city policies. Such
total annual salary and salary per pay period of each employee shall be payable
by the city in two parts: deferred salary and cash salary. An employee’s
deferred salary shall be equal to that percentage of said employee’s total
annual salary or salary per pay period which is required, from time to time by
PERS or OPFP, to be paid by an employee and shall be paid by the city to PERS
or on behalf of said employee as a pick-up and in lieu of the PERS or OPFP
employee contribution otherwise payable by said employee. An employee’s cash
salary shall be equal to said employee’s total annual salary or salary per pay
period less the amount of the pick-up for said employee and shall be payable,
subject to the applicable payroll deductions, to said employee. The city shall
compute and remit its employer contributions to PERS or OPFP based upon an
employee’s total annual salary or salary per pay period, including the
aforesaid pick-up. The city’s total combined expenditures for such employees’
total salaries otherwise payable under the applicable city policies (including
pick-up amounts) and its employer contribution to PERS or OPFP shall not be
greater than the amounts it would have paid for those items had this provision
not been in effect.
   (c)   The pick-up shall be included in the employee’s total annual salary
for the purpose of computing daily rate of pay, for determining paid salary
adjustments to be made due to absence, or for any other similar purpose.
   (d)   The city shall fulfill its income tax reporting and withholding
responsibilities for each employee in such manner as is required by applicable
federal, state and local laws and regulations as they may exist at the time of
such reporting and withholding, it being the city’s understanding that federal
and state income tax laws and regulations presently require it to report as an
employee’s gross income his, her or their total annual salary less the amount
of the pick-up, while applicable municipal income tax laws require it to report
as an employee’s gross income his, her or their total annual salary including
the amount of the pickup.
   (e)   The Mayor, or his, her or their designee, is hereby directed to take
all acts necessary and appropriate to initiate implementation of the provisions
of this section, including, but not limited to, making applications to the
Internal Revenue Service and the boards administering the PERS or OPFP programs
to determine the requirements of the boards in connection with such pick-up
plan.
   (f)   The pick-up plan shall apply to all eligible employees who qualify
under this section and the plan shall commence with the first PERS or OPFP pay
period, whichever shall apply to a covered non-bargaining unit employee, which
begins after the passage and approval of this section.
(Prior Code, § 260.20) (Ord. 22-108, passed 7-11-2022)
§ 260.21 JURY AND WITNESS DUTY.
   In the event a city employee (full-time employees and/or those classified as
non-seasonal), is called for jury duty or is required to testify as a witness
pursuant to subpoena or court order issued by any court of record and of
competent jurisdiction, or by Council or any Board or Commission of the city,
the city shall pay to such employee such compensation as the said employee was
to receive as pay from the city based on his, her or their pay rate for the
regularly scheduled work time lost in fulfilling the jury duty or witness call
responsibility, if any, and excluding overtime. Such employee must provide
adequate evidence to prove to the satisfaction of the city that he, she or they
is entitled to such regular compensation. Notwithstanding the provisions of
this section, no city employee shall receive such jury duty or witness
compensation as called for herein if such employee is also entitled to receive
any benefit or compensation for jury duty or serving as a witness during
regularly scheduled work time by virtue of the terms of a collective bargaining
agreement with the city in effect at the time involved.
(Prior Code, § 260.22) (Ord. 22-108, passed 7-11-2022)
§ 260.22 DRUG FREE WORKPLACE POLICY.
   (a)   Purpose. The city regards the illegal use of drugs and the abuse of
alcohol as serious problems. In addition to achieving compliance with the
Federal Drug Free Workplace Act of 1988, 41 U.S.C. §§ 8101 et seq., and the
Ohio Drug-Free Safety Program, O.A.C. 4123-17-58, it is the purpose of this
policy to create an alcohol and substance-abuse free workplace, which will
enhance the health, safety, security and performance of the employees of the
city.
   (b)   Policy.
      (1)   The use, sale, manufacture, distribution, dispensation or
possession of unauthorized or illegal drugs on city property is absolutely
prohibited. Reporting to work or working while under the influence of alcohol
or illegal drugs is also prohibited. Violation of this policy will result in
disciplinary action up to and including termination.
      (2)   It is the city’s intention to apply federal law as it applies to
all employees, union and non-union. The city shall address problems associated
with having on-duty employees under the influence of alcohol or illicit drugs
and the obligation of the city to deal with these problems pursuant to the
Federal Drug Free Workplace Act of 1988, 41 U.S.C. §§ 8101 et seq., the
regulations thereunder, the Federal Omnibus Transportation Testing Act of 1991,
41 U.S.C. §§ 9701 et seq., and any other federal or state laws or regulations
requiring substance abuse testing. However, where a direct conflict between
this policy and a collective bargaining agreement exists, the parties shall
meet and confer to resolve any conflicts. Discipline shall be enforced
according to the terms of the collective bargaining agreement.
   (c)   Reasonable accommodations. Except as otherwise set forth herein, the
city recognizes that some prescription medications and medical marihuana may
affect judgment, coordination and physical ability but that such prescription
medications and/or medical marihuana have been prescribed by a licensed
physician specifically to meet the needs of the employee. Employees who present
evidence of a medical condition requiring the use of prescription medications
or medical marihuana which otherwise might violate the terms of the city’s Drug
Free Workplace Policy may be entitled to reasonable accommodations in
accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et
seq..
(Prior Code, § 260.23) (Ord. 22-108, passed 7-11-2022)
§ 260.23 DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING POLICY.
   In accordance with the city’s drug free workplace policy, the city has
implemented a drug and alcohol testing policy.
   (a)   Responsibility. All department heads, managers and supervisory
personnel are responsible for the implementation of this policy. Questions
concerning the interpretation of this policy should be referred to the Director
of Human Resources for the city.
   (b)   Adoption by reference. The City of Avon Lake DOT (Department of
Transportation) Drug/Alcohol Abuse Policy for operators of city equipment with
commercial drivers’ licenses, as attached to original Ordinance 127-96, passed
June 24, 1996, is hereby adopted by the city by reference as if fully set forth
herein. Copies of the Policy and of such ordinance may be obtained, at cost,
from the Clerk of Council. The city further follows all applicable Department
of Transportation regulations for both federal and state governments, including
the continued prohibition on the use of medical marihuana by commercial
drivers.
   (c)   Implementation guidelines.
      (1)   A urine drug screen will be conducted to detect the presence of
illegal drugs; a blood alcohol test will be conducted to detect the presence of
alcohol. The employee must consent to either test which must be performed in an
approved medical facility.
      (2)   Testing of urine specimens will be conducted only by laboratories
that have received Federal Department of Health and Human Services’ (HHS)
approval and which follow HHS guidelines for testing. This will allow for
maximum consistency in operating procedures and quality control.
      (3)   All urine samples will be tested for the following drugs:
marihuana, cocaine, amphetamines, opiates, and phencyclidine (PCP).
      (4)   Collection of urine samples will be conducted by controlled
laboratory methods to assure security but will not require witnessing of sample
collection.
      (5)   All urine samples will undergo a preliminary analysis for the above
listed substances. If the test result is positive, the urine sample will
undergo a confirmatory gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) test. If
the urine sample tests positive on both the preliminary analysis and the GC/MS,
the urine sample will be classified as positive. The laboratory will report all
results to a designated city official.
      (6)   Employees who have a positive drug test result may ask for a retest
of the original specimen according to procedures and specifications of
applicable federal regulations, or in the absence of such regulations, any
applicable collective bargaining agreement or, in the absence of such
agreement, according to procedures and specifications of the Human Resources
Director. The laboratory performing such a retest shall be certified by HHS.
         A.   Any such retest shall be at the expense of the employee.
         B.   An employee request for a retest shall not delay the imposition
of appropriate disciplinary action or referral to an alcohol and/or drug abuse
rehabilitation program.
      (7)   Tests shall be administered as soon as possible after the employee
receives medical attention, if necessary, or within eight hours for suspected
alcohol and within 32 hours for other suspected drugs.
   (d)   Testing guidelines.
      (1)   Pre-employment and new-hire testing.
         A.   All new employees may be subject to pre-employment testing and/or
new-hire testing within the employee’s probationary period.
         B.   All new employees in safety-sensitive and special needs positions
will be subject to random drug testing during the employee’s probationary
period.
      (2)   Reasonable suspicion testing.
         A.   For drugs and/or alcohol will be conducted when reasonable
suspicion exists that an employee:
            1.   Reports for work or reasonably appears to be working under the
influence of alcohol or illegal drugs.
            2.   Admits to a supervisor being under the influence of alcohol or
illegal drugs while on city property or on city business.
            3.   Is involved in any workplace accident or other incident which
suggests the employee is under the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs.
            4.   Has excessive and unexplained absenteeism or tardiness.
            5.   Is involved in a significant incident in which the health or
safety of the employee or other individuals is involved, or in which extensive
property damage has occurred.
         B.   When reasonable suspicion testing is warranted, both management
and HR will meet with the employee to explain the observations and the
requirement to undergo a drug and/or alcohol test within two hours. Refusal by
an employee will be treated as a positive drug test result and will result in
immediate termination of employment.
         C.   Under no circumstances will the employee be allowed to drive
himself or herself to the testing facility. A member of management must
transport the employee or arrange for a cab and arrange for the employee to be
transported home.
      (3)   Random testing. Employees may be selected at random for drug and/or
alcohol testing at any interval determined by the city and must undergo a drug
and/or alcohol test within two hours of notification.
      (4)   Return-to-duty and follow-up alcohol test with two hours of
notification.
         A.   Any employee who tests positive for illegal drugs, alcohol, and/
or medically unjustified drugs may be subject to follow-up testing and/or
rehabilitation prior to being allowed to return to duty.
         B.   An employee who tests positive a second time is subject to
termination without further opportunity for rehabilitation.
   (e)   Discipline/rehabilitation.
      (1)   Refusal to be tested will be grounds for discipline, up to and
including termination. Submission of an adulterated specimen will constitute a
refusal to test.
      (2)   Driving motor vehicles. Any operation of a motor vehicle on company
business while under the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs may be cause for
disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
      (3)   Except as otherwise set forth herein, when testing for reasonable
suspicion is required, employees are to be removed immediately from the
workplace and escorted to an appropriate medical facility.
      (4)   If reasonable suspicion testing is performed as a result of an on-
the-job accident, each employee who may have caused or contributed to the
accident will be required to submit to a drug or alcohol test unless the
accident investigation documents all of the exceptions identified below.
      (5)   If the alcohol and/or drug test(s) are classified as negative after
review, the employee will be returned to work and standard disciplinary
practices will prevail for the incident which led to the testing. The only
exception to this is if other evidence exists which identifies the employee who
tested negative as a current illegal drug user. If sufficient evidence exists
to identify the employee as a current illegal drug user, the employee will be
subject to discipline/rehabilitation as described in division (d)(2) of this
section.
      (6)   If the positive alcohol and/or drug test(s) are classified as
medically unjustified after review, the result(s) will be reported to the Human
Resources Department. The report will be made available to the employee if
requested.
   (f)   City’s Employee Assistance Program (EAP).
      (1)   Purpose. The city’s EAP provides professional, confidential
assistance to help employees resolve problems with alcohol and drugs and other
issues that affect their personal and work life.
      (2)   Rehabilitative treatment and unannounced testing. If an employee’s
alcohol or drug test is a medically unjustified positive, or if sufficient
evidence exists to identify the employee as a current illegal drug user, the
city, at its discretion, may require an employee to undergo rehabilitative
treatment and unannounced testing at the worksite, as recommended by the
treatment facility in conjunction with the EAP and the city’s Human Resources
Department. Refusal to undergo rehabilitative treatment and/or failure to
comply with post-rehabilitation testing will result in termination.
      (3)   Director of Human Resources. The Director of Human Resources for
the city will contact the EAP to discuss the employee’s alcohol or drug
problem, develop a plan of action, and if appropriate, arrange an appointment
for the employee with the EAP. The supervisor and the Human Resources Director
will communicate the agreed upon plan to the employee. An employee’s refusal to
accept referral to the EAP and follow EAP recommendations for addressing an
alcohol or drug problem may be grounds for discipline, up to and including
termination.
      (4)   Representatives from the EAP. Representatives from the EAP will
maintain contact with the employee’s supervisor and/or Human Resources
representative concerning the employee’s participation in the EAP and
compliance with treatment recommendations. Information regarding the employee’s
diagnosis and treatment will not be disclosed; any confidential information
will be disclosed only with a signed release from the employee.
      (5)   Convictions for alcohol/drug related criminal offenses. Any
conviction for an alcohol or drug-related criminal offense will be considered
grounds for discipline, up to and including termination.
         A.   When an employee is convicted, the conviction will be reviewed by
management, including representatives from the union (if applicable), Human
Resources and Legal Departments, to determine the appropriate course of action.
         B.   Where applicable, all drug-related workplace convictions will be
reported to the appropriate contracting office of the federal government, in
accordance with the provisions of the Drug Free Workplace Act of 1988.
      (6)   Employee training and education. Each department, in conjunction
with Human Resources, is required to implement programs to inform employees of
the city’s Alcohol and Drug Free Workplace Policy. These, programs must:
         A.   Educate employees and increase their awareness of the negative
effects of alcohol and drug abuse on health and safety;
         B.   Train supervisory personnel on their responsibilities for
ensuring compliance with the city’s policy and fostering an alcohol and drug
free workplace; and
         C.   Inform employees and supervisory personnel about the use of the
Employee Assistance Program.
      (7)   Searches. The city reserves the right to conduct reasonable
searches of any property when there is reason to suspect violation of the
policy, with prior notification and approval of the Mayor and review by legal
counsel.
      (8)   Right to privacy.
         A.   Information regarding an employee’s use of alcohol or illegal
drugs will be maintained in a confidential medical record.
         B.   All records that pertain to an employee’s use of the Employee
Assistance Program will be maintained by and remain the property of the EAP. No
information concerning the employee’s diagnosis and treatment will be revealed
by the EAP except in the following circumstances:
            1.   The employee consents in writing;
            2.   The law requires disclosure; and
            3.   It is believed that life or safety are threatened by failure
to disclose.
(Prior Code, § 260.24) (Ord. 22-108, passed 7-11-2022)
§ 260.24 UNAUTHORIZED LEAVES.
   An employee absent from work for unauthorized reasons, not included in §
260.14 and/or without authorization or approval, shall be considered on an
unauthorized leave. An unauthorized leave for three or more consecutive working
days may be considered by the department head as an automatic resignation.
(Ord. 25-32, passed 3-10-2025)
§ 260.25 COMPENSATION TIME.
   (a)   Full-time non-bargaining municipal employees, whether compensated on a
salary or hourly basis, who upon approval from his or her department head,
shall be entitled to accumulate up to 120 hours per year of compensation time
at a rate of one and one-half times the hours worked beyond a 40-hour work
week. The department head shall have sole discretion in compensation time
usage. As employees use compensation time, they may add time to the accumulated
time as long as the total accumulated time does not exceed 120 hours.
   (b)   Compensation time off shall not be carried or credited beyond the
calendar year in which it was earned. Such compensation time off shall be used
during the calendar year in which it was earned within a reasonable time after
the request, provided that such use would not unduly disrupt the operations of
the department, as determined by the department head.
   (c)   If any compensation time off is not used during the calendar year in
which it was earned, the employee shall be paid for the same in cash 31 days
after the end of such calendar year.
   (d)   The department head shall maintain a continuing written record of
compensation time which has been permitted and earned and shall have such
records available for inspection and information by and for the Finance
Director.
(Prior Code, § 260.26) (Ord. 22-108, passed 7-11-2022)
§ 260.26 ETHICS AND OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT.
   (a)   All city employees are expected to conduct themselves in accordance
with the city’s Policy and Procedure Manual, as may be amended from time to
time.
   (b)   Ohio law does not prohibit city employees from engaging in private,
secondary employment provided that:
      (1)   No conflict of interest exists between the employee’s employment
with the city and the private employer;
      (2)   There is no misuse of the public office or employee’s position with
the city;
      (3)   Such employment is not conducted at such time as employee is
engaged or supposed to be engaged in employee’s employment with the city; and
      (4)   There is no use or misuse of city facilities, personnel, or other
resources.
(Prior Code, § 260.27) (Ord. 22-108, passed 7-11-2022)
§ 260.27 NEPOTISM.
   In keeping with good personnel management procedures, to guarantee equal
employment opportunities to all, and to foster an environment where people are
treated with respect and trust, the city hereby adopts the following as its
official policy towards employment of immediate family members within the city.
   (a)   For purposes of this section, IMMEDIATE FAMILY shall include parents,
grandparents, children (natural or adopted), grandchildren, spouse, siblings,
or any other persons related to the public official or employee by blood or by
marriage and residing in the same household with the official.
      (1)   Pursuant to opinions from the Ohio Ethics Commission, this nepotism
policy does not create a “no relatives” standard but rather a prohibition
against a public servant using or abusing their public position to secure
public jobs or contracts for family members. It is not intended to prevent
families from working together, but to prevent the possibility that a public
servant may show favoritism towards their family in the exercise of
discretionary authority to hire qualified public employees on behalf of the
public entity.
      (2)   All employees required to complete a personal information sheet
upon initial employment which asks for name(s) of any relative(s), not limited
to immediate family members, employed within the city. The Human Resources
Department is responsible for monitoring this information and notifying the
Director or Mayor of a prohibited relationship.
   (b)   No public official or employee shall use the authority or influence of
their office to secure employment or authorization of any public contract for
any member of their immediate family within the political subdivision in which
they serve.
      (1)   The basic criteria for appointment and promotion of all municipal
employees will be appropriate qualifications and performance. Relationship by
family or marriage will constitute neither an advantage nor a deterrent to
appointment, provided that the individual meets and fulfills the appropriate
appointment standards.
      (2)   Members of the same immediate family whose qualifications rank each
of them first for the positions under consideration may be employed in either
full-time or part-time positions so long as neither family member is in a
position to hire, supervise, direct, evaluate or otherwise influence the work
assignments, working conditions, working hours, promotion, retention,
discipline or compensation of the other.
   (c)   An employee who violates this policy, whether by knowingly permitting
or knowingly accepting employment in violation of this policy, is subject to
disciplinary action up to and including dismissal from employment.
   (d)   Any conflicts between this section and the rules for hiring employees
subject to a collective bargaining agreement shall be resolved in favor of the
collective bargaining agreement.
(Prior Code, § 260.28) (Ord. 22-108, passed 7-11-2022)
§ 260.28 CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM.
   (a)   The city hereby adopts a cybersecurity program consistent with the
requirements of R.C. § 9.64(C) and aligned with generally accepted best
practices, such as the NIST Cybersecurity Framework.
   (b)   The cybersecurity program shall implement the NIST Cybersecurity
Framework to identify and mitigate risks, assess potential impacts, detect and
respond to threats, restore affected systems, and maintain ongoing protection
of city assets and data. The program shall include annual cybersecurity
training for all employees, align with state and federal best practices, and
ensure third-party providers meet applicable security standards to achieve
practical, measurable, and cost-effective improvements in defending against
cyber threats such as ransomware and phishing.
   (c)   The Communications and Technology Director and the Information
Security Officer, as defined in the cybersecurity program, in coordination with
the Finance Director and Public Safety Director, shall oversee the
implementation, documentation, and annual review of the cybersecurity program
to ensure continued alignment with state requirements and best practices.
   (d)   All records and documents related to the city's cybersecurity program
are exempt from public records disclosure, consistent with R.C. § 9.64(E).
(Ord. 25-173, passed 10-27-2025)
CHAPTER 268: SUBPOENAS
Section
268.01 Issuance of subpoenas
268.02 Limitations on the issuance of subpoenas
§ 268.01 ISSUANCE OF SUBPOENAS.
   Every board, commission or committee that has been granted such power by the
Charter or by ordinance may subpoena witnesses and books, documents, records or
other evidence at the request of any member of such board, commission or
committee or at the request of any person who will appear at a hearing before
such board, commission or committee. The president, chair or other head of such
board, commission or, in his or her absence or unavailability, the acting head
of such board, commission or committee shall sign any subpoena to be issued
pursuant to this section, and such subpoena shall be served and executed by any
person authorized to serve subpoenas, and in the manner required, by Rule 45 of
the Ohio Rules of Civil Procedure. The return of such subpoena shall be filed
with the clerk or secretary of such board, commission or committee. The Law
Director, the Assistant Law Director or, in their absence or unavailability,
the chair or any other member of such board, commission or committee may
administer the requisite oaths to witnesses, and such board, commission or
committee shall have the same power to compel the giving of testimony by the
attending witnesses as is conferred upon courts of justice. In all such cases,
witnesses shall be entitled to the same privileges, immunities and compensation
as are allowed witnesses in civil cases, and the cost shall be paid from the
general fund of the city. Any person who refuses to obey a subpoena issued
pursuant to this section or to testify in response to such subpoena shall be
guilty of contempt of such board, commission or committee, a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(Ord. 68-2015, passed 6-8-2015)
§ 268.02 LIMITATIONS ON THE ISSUANCE OF SUBPOENAS.
   (a)   The power of Council and every board, commission or committee to issue
subpoenas shall be subject to the following limitations.
      (1)   The body issuing the subpoena shall take reasonable steps to avoid
imposing undue burden or expense on a person subject to the subpoena.
      (2)   The subpoena must allow the person to whom it is issued a
reasonable time to comply.
      (3)   The subpoena must be pertinent to the subject matter area that is
being heard or investigated by the body issuing the subpoena.
      (4)   The subject matter area to which such subpoena relates must be one
that the body issuing the subpoena is authorized to hear or investigate.
      (5)   Prior to issuance, the subpoena must be approved as to form by
either the Law Director or the Assistant Law Director.
   (b)   In any prosecution brought for the refusal to obey a subpoena, it
shall be a defense that the subpoena was issued in violation of this section,
that the subpoena subjects the person to undue expense or burden, or that the
testimony to be compelled or books, documents, records or other evidence to be
produced is protected from release or disclosure by common law privilege or by
any federal, state or local law.
(Ord. 68-2015, passed 6-8-2015)
TITLE EIGHT - Boards, Commissions and Committees
   
Chap. 270. Audit Commission.
   
Chap. 272. Avon Lake Historical Preservation Commission.
   
Chap. 274. City Records Commission.
   
Chap. 276. Civil Service Commission.
   
Chap. 278. Communications and Technology Commission.
   
Chap. 280. Community Relations Board.
   
Chap. 282. Economic Development Advisory Board.
   
Chap. 284. Environmental Affairs Advisory Board.
   
Chap. 286. Parks and Recreation Commission.
   
Chap. 288. Tree Commission.
CHAPTER 270: AUDIT COMMISSION
Section
270.01 Establishment and purpose
270.02 Membership and compensation
270.03 Powers and duties
270.04 Meetings and organization
Charter reference:
   Finance Director, see
Charter Ch. V
   Finance, generally, see
Charter Ch. X
Cross-reference:
   Council Finance Committee, see §
220.05(b)
   Finance Director, see
Ch. 232
§ 270.01 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.
   There is hereby established in and for the city an Audit Commission to
provide independent review and oversight of the city's financial reporting
processes, internal controls, risk assessments, audit processes; compliance
with laws, rules, and regulations; and consider and implement independent
auditor comments.
§ 270.02 MEMBERSHIP AND COMPENSATION.
   (a)   The Audit Commission shall be comprised of the members of the Finance
Committee of Council, Finance Director (or appointee), Law Director (or
appointee), and a resident appointed by Council.
   (b)   The members of the Audit Commission shall serve without compensation.
With prior approval by Council, any expense incurred by the Commission or the
members thereof in the performance of their duties shall be paid from the
municipal treasury.
(Ord. 182-98, passed 10-26-1998; Ord. 25-2011, passed 4-11-2011)
§ 270.03 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (a)   The Audit Commission shall retain one or more financial experts to
conduct independent audits as required by law and aid the Commission in its
understanding of financial reporting and performance of its duties.
   (b)   The Audit Commission shall:
      (1)   Review the annual unaudited financial report submitted to the
Auditor of State;
      (2)   Periodically review the process used to prepare interim financial
information submitted to Council;
      (3)   Review audit results;
      (4)   Assure auditors’ independence from the city administration.
      (5)   Assure that audit recommendations are appropriately addressed; and
      (6)   Serve as a liaison between the city administration and the
independent auditors.
(Ord. 182-98, passed 10-26-1998)
§ 270.04 MEETINGS AND ORGANIZATION.
   (a)   The Audit Commission shall meet no less than quarterly to monitor the
city’s financial reporting and control activities and shall meet with its
auditors before and after each audit. All meetings of the Commission shall be
open to the public.
   (b)   A Chairperson shall be designated by a majority vote of the Audit
Commission members to serve until the expiration of that member’s term. At the
first meeting following the expiration of a Chairperson’s term, the Commission
shall appoint a new Chairperson to serve for the entirety of that member’s
term.
(Ord. 182-98, passed 10-26-1998)
CHAPTER 272: AVON LAKE HISTORICAL PRESERVATION COMMISSION
Section
272.01 Establishment and purpose
272.02 Membership; term; qualifications; compensation and removal
272.03 Powers and duties
272.04 Meetings and organization
§ 272.01 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.
   The Avon Lake Historical Preservation Commission is hereby established to
safeguard the architectural integrity of historic sites, buildings, structures,
works of art, and other objects having a special historical, community, or
aesthetic interest or value in the interest of the health, prosperity, safety,
and welfare of the residents of the City of Avon Lake.
§ 272.02 MEMBERSHIP; TERM; QUALIFICATIONS; COMPENSATION AND REMOVAL.
   (a)   Membership. The Avon Lake Historical Preservation Commission shall
consist of seven members, comprised of the following:
      (1)   Three members, who for the previous two years have been registered,
qualified electors of the city, shall be appointed by Council;
      (2)   Two members,who for the previous two years have been registered,
qualified electors of the city, shall be appointed by the Mayor;
      (3)   One ex officio, non-voting member shall be appointed by the Avon
Lake Planning Commission to serve as its liaison to the Avon Lake Historical
Preservation Commission; and
      (4)   One ex officio, non-voting member appointed from the members of the
Council to serve as its liaison to the Avon Lake Historical Preservation
Commission.
   (b)   Term. The five appointed resident members of the Avon Lake Historical
Preservation Commission shall serve three years with staggered terms, a third
of which shall be appointed each year. Each member is eligible for
reappointment without limitation on the number of consecutive appointments.
      (1)   Vacancies on the Avon Lake Historical Preservation Commission shall
be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term in the same manner that the
position was originally filled.
      (2)   The Chairperson will notify the Clerk of Council when a vacancy
exists.
      (3)   Any vacancy shall be filled within 60 days, unless extenuating
circumstances require a longer period.
   (c)   Qualifications. Whenever possible, members shall have demonstrated a
special interest, experience, or knowledge of history, architecture,
architectural history, archaeology, interior design (with a specialization in
historic preservation), planning, or a related discipline.
   (d)   Compensation. Members of the Avon Lake Historical Preservation
Commission shall serve without compensation. With the prior approval of the
assigned Department Director, according to the city procurement policies, any
expense incurred by the Commission or the members thereof in the performance of
their duties shall be paid from the city treasury.
   (e)   Removal. Any Avon Lake Historical Preservation Commission member who
misses three consecutive meetings, or more than 50% of the regular meetings on
an annual basis, may be removed from the Commission by a majority vote of the
other Commissioners.
(Ord. 25-196, passed 12-8-2025)
§ 272.03 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Avon Lake Historical Preservation Commission’s duties and authority
shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
   (a)   To approve or deny an application for a certificate of appropriateness
regarding any change, demolition, construction, preservation, restoration,
reconstruction and rehabilitation of any structure or property within its
jurisdiction. Such approval shall be required in addition to all other permits
applicable to the property;
   (b)   To make recommendations to the Public Service Committee and Planning
Commission regarding amendments to this chapter and with respect to other
legislation affecting historic districts or landmarks;
   (c)   To establish the procedures for evaluating applications for
certificates of appropriateness. Such information shall be written and
published and made available to the public within three months after the
members have been appointed and may be revised as needed;
   (d)   To conduct or cause to be conducted a continuing survey of cultural
resources in the community, according to the guidelines established by the Ohio
Historic Preservation Office;
   (e)   To act in an advisory role to other officials and departments of local
government regarding the protection of local cultural resources;
   (f)   To act as a liaison on behalf of the local government to individuals
and organizations concerned with historic preservation;
   (g)   To conduct or encourage members to attend educational sessions at
least once a year or an in-depth consultation with the Ohio Historic
Preservation Office pertaining to the work and functions of the Avon Lake
Historical Preservation Commission or on specific historic preservation issues;
   (h)   To educate property owners/applicants on the benefits and possible
limitations of their property being declared historic;
   (i)   To maintain a system for the survey and inventory of historic
properties; and
   (j)   To review applications for designation as a historic landmark or
historic district according to the procedures and criteria in this chapter.
(Ord. 36-2010, passed 3-22-2010; Ord. 25-196, passed 12-8-2025)
§ 272.04 MEETINGS AND ORGANIZATION.
   (a)   Meetings. The Avon Lake Historical Preservation Commission shall meet
at least six times per year, which shall be held at regular intervals,
advertised in advance, and held in a public place.
   (b)   Quorum. A majority of the membership of the Avon Lake Historical
Preservation Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business. A majority of a quorum shall be required to approve any action.
   (c)   Election of Chairperson and Secretary. At the first meeting in
January, the Avon Lake Historical Preservation Commission shall elect a
Chairperson and recording Secretary by a majority vote of the members.
   (d)   Avon Lake Historical Preservation Commission Chairperson. Duties shall
consist of preparing the agenda for each meeting; determining the time, place,
and frequency of meetings; and ensuring that all meetings comply with the
requirements of Ohio’s Open Meeting Laws, R.C. §§ 121.22 et seq.
   (e)   Avon Lake Historical Preservation Commission Recording Secretary.
Duties shall consist of:
      (1)   Taking and maintaining complete files containing all applications
granted or denied and written minutes of all meetings which shall be available
for public inspection; and
      (2)   Preparing a written annual report of the Avon Lake Historical
Preservation Commission’s activities, cases, decisions, special projects and
the like to be submitted to the Community Development Director, Planning
Commission and Council.
(Ord. 36-2010, passed 3-22-2010; Ord. 83-2013, passed 6-24-2013; Ord. 153-2014,
passed 12-8-2014; Ord. 25-196, passed 12-8-2025)
CHAPTER 274: CITY RECORDS COMMISSION
Section
274.01 Establishment and purpose
274.02 Membership, term and compensation
274.03 Powers and duties
274.04 Meetings and organization
274.05 Rules for retention and disposition of public records
274.06 Public records policy
Cross-reference:
   Employee records, see §
260.15
   Tampering with records, see §
642.23
Statutory reference:
   Photostat or microfilm recording, see R.C. § 9.01
   Procedure for disposal of records, see R.C. § 149.39
§ 274.01 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.
   There is hereby established in and for the city a City Records Commission to
provide for such rules and regulations not inconsistent with R.C. §§ 149.39 et
seq. as may be necessary for the orderly preservation and provision of access
to public records.
§ 274.02 MEMBERSHIP, TERM AND COMPENSATION.
   (a)   The Commission shall be composed of four persons, comprised of the
following:
      (1)   The Mayor or Mayor’s designee, who shall act as Chairperson of the
Commission;
      (2)   The Finance Director;
      (3)   The Law Director; and
      (4)    A resident of the city who shall be appointed by the Mayor.
   (b)   The resident member of the Commission shall serve a term of two years.
Such member shall serve without compensation but shall be entitled to
reimbursement for any and all necessary expenditures in carrying out the
functions of the Commission as approved by Council.
(Ord. 39-82, passed 2-22-1982)
§ 274.03 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (a)   The City Records Commission shall provide rules for the retention and
disposal of the records of the city, which shall be approved by Council, and
review records disposal lists submitted by municipal offices.
      (1)   Such disposal lists shall contain those records which have been
microfilmed or stored or which no longer have any administrative, legal, or
fiscal value to the city or its residents. The disposal of such records shall
be pursuant to procedures determined by the Commission and in accordance with
R.C. § 149.381.
      (2)   Where municipal records have been approved for disposal, a list of
such records shall be sent to the Ohio History Connection, which shall
determine whether such records shall be disposed of or retained, in accordance
with R.C. § 149.381.
   (b)   The City Records Commission shall perform such other duties as are
required by R.C. § 149.39.
(Ord. 39-82, passed 2-22-1982)
§ 274.04 MEETINGS AND ORGANIZATION.
   (a)   The City Records Commission shall appoint its own Secretary, who may
or may not be a member of the Commission and may employ an archivist or records
manager to serve under its direction.
   (b)   The City Records Commission shall meet at least once every six months
and upon the call of the Chairperson.
   (c)   The City Records Commission shall provide for its own rules and
regulations.
(Ord. 39-82, passed 2-22-1982)
§ 274.05 RULES FOR RETENTION AND DISPOSITION OF PUBLIC RECORDS.
   (a)   Adoption. The Council of the City of Avon Lake does hereby adopt the
following rules for retention and disposition of public records of the city, as
recommended by the City Records Commission.
      (1)   Each city department head shall submit to the Chairperson of the
City Records Commission a schedule of records retention and disposition for
records kept by his or her department on forms provided by the Commission and
available through the office of the Clerk of Council.
         A.    After initial submission of a schedule of records retention and
disposal, a department head may add additional records to the schedule by
submitting a list of such additional records on a form provided by the City
Records Commission.
         B.   The City Records Commission will provide an application for the
disposal of records which are obsolete. Approval of the application for
disposal does not represent continuing authority to destroy records.
      (2)   Upon receipt of the schedule of records retention and disposal,
signed by the department head, the City Records Commission shall meet to review
such schedule. If approved, the schedule shall be forwarded to the Ohio
Historical Connection and Auditor of State, Bureau of Inspection and
Supervision, for review. The department head shall be advised by the Commission
of approval or denial of the schedule of records retention and disposal for his
or her department.
      (3)   Upon approval of the schedule of record retention and disposal by
all agencies specified in the Ohio Revised Code, a certificate of records
disposal shall be completed by the department head on a form provided by the
Records Commission each time records listed on the approved records retention
and disposal schedule are destroyed.
      (4)   No city record shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of without
proper authorization of the City Records Commission.
   (b)   Record, defined. As used in this section, RECORD includes any
document, device or item, regardless of physical form or characteristic,
created or received by or coming under the jurisdiction of any municipal
office, which serves to document the organization, functions, policies,
decisions, procedures, operations, or other activities of the city.
(Ord. 214-90, passed 10-29-1990)
§ 274.06 PUBLIC RECORDS POLICY.
   (a)   Pursuant to R.C. § 149.43(E)(1), the following shall constitute the
public records policy of the City of Avon Lake, Ohio:
      (1)   R.C. § 149.43(B)(1) requires that, upon request and subject to R.C.
§ 149.43(B)(8), all public records responsive to a public records request
“shall be promptly prepared and made available for inspection to the requester
at all reasonable times during regular business hours.” R.C. § 149.43(B)(1)
further requires that, subject to R.C. § 149.43(B)(8), “upon request by any
person, a public office or person responsible for public records shall make
copies of the requested public record available to the requester at cost and
within a reasonable period of time.”
      (2)   For purposes of R.C. § 149.43 and this section of the codified
ordinances, the terms “prompt” and “reasonable” shall take into account the
volume of records requested, the proximity of the location where the records
are stored, the age of such records, the format in which such records are
maintained, the necessity for any legal review of the records requested, the
number of employees or officials who are primarily responsible for the records
requested, and whether such employees or officials are full- or part-time and
their typical work schedules.
   (b)   In all other respects, R.C. § 149.43 shall constitute the public
records policy of the City of Avon Lake, Ohio.
(Ord. 143-2015, passed 11-9-2015)
CHAPTER 276: CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
Section
Editor’s note:
   A set of 21 rules and regulations of the Civil Service Commission was
approved by Ordinance 75-94, passed April 11, 1994. Ordinance 75-94 expressly
repealed the previous rules and regulations of the Civil Service Commission,
adopted by Resolution 141-63, passed December 23, 1963, as amended.
    Revised rules of the Civil Service Commission were adopted by Ordinance
145-99, passed August 23, 1999; Ordinance 21-00, passed January 24, 2000;
Ordinance 67-01, passed April 23, 2001; Ordinance 189-03, passed September 8,
2003; Ordinance 216-03, passed October 13, 2003; Ordinance 15-06, passed
January 23, 2006; Ordinance 28-08, passed February 25, 2008; Ordinance 23-172
passed November 13, 2023; Ordinance 24-133, passed September 23, 2024; and
Ordinance 25-139 passed September 22, 2025.
    Copies of these rules and regulations and of amendments thereto may be
obtained, at cost, from the Clerk of Council.
276.01 Membership, term, compensation and removal
276.02 Powers and duties; appeals
276.03 Meetings and organization
276.04 Unclassified positions
Charter reference:
   Civil service, see Charter §
65 
Constitutional reference:
   Civil service, see Ohio Constitution, Art. XV, Sec. 10
Cross-reference:
   Personnel administration, see
Ch. 256
   Wage and salary administration, see
Ch. 258 
Statutory reference:
   Civil Service Commission, see R.C. § 124.40
   Application to police and fire personnel, see R.C. §§ 797.051, 737.10,
737.11
§ 276.01 MEMBERSHIP, TERM, COMPENSATION AND REMOVAL.
   (a)   Membership; term. The Mayor, with the concurrence of a majority of the
members elected to Council, shall appoint persons to serve on the Civil Service
Commission which shall be comprised of three electors of the city, not holding
other municipal office or appointment, to serve for a term of six years each. A
vacancy occurring during the term of any member of the Commission shall be
filled for the unexpired term in the manner authorized for an original
appointment. At the time of any appointment, not more than two Commissioners
shall be adherents of the same political party.
   (b)   Compensation. Members of the Civil Service Commission shall serve
without compensation unless otherwise provided by ordinance. A sufficient sum
shall be appropriated by Council to pay expenses of the Commission and to
otherwise carry out the civil service provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   Suspension and removal.
      (1)   The Mayor may, at any time, suspend any member of the Civil Service
Commission for inefficiency, neglect of duty, malfeasance, misfeasance or
nonfeasance in office, incapacity, or incompetency. However, such suspension
shall not become final without the concurrence of two-thirds of the members of
Council.
      (2)   The Mayor may, at any time, remove any Commissioner for
inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office, having first given to
the Commissioner a copy of the charges and an opportunity to be publicly heard
in person or by counsel in defense.
(Ord. 8-62, passed 1-8-1962)
§ 276.02 POWERS AND DUTIES; APPEALS.
   (a)   The Civil Service Commission shall provide by rule for the
classification, removal, transfer, layoff, suspension, reduction, and
reinstatement of personnel in the administrative service of the city, and for
the appointment and promotion to classified positions in the city, according to
merit, to be ascertained, insofar as practical, by open competitive
examinations, as required by the State Constitution, the Ohio Revised Code, and
within the framework of
Chapter 256 of the codified ordinances.
   (b)   (1)   The Civil Service Commission shall also provide by rule, within
the framework set forth in §
256.12, for appeals from the action of the Mayor, department heads, elected
officials, boards, and Council or other appointing authority in any case of
transfer, reduction, or removal. The Commission is authorized to subpoena
witnesses and to require the production of records in accordance with Chapter
268 of the codified ordinances. The action of the Commission on any such appeal
shall be final, except as otherwise provided by laws of the state.
      (2)   All rules which are adopted by the Commission pursuant to this
section are subject to the approval of Council.
   (c)   Within five days of receipt of a notice from the Mayor of the
suspension of the Police Chief or the Chief of the Fire Department on grounds
of incompetence, gross neglect of duty, gross immorality, habitual drunkenness,
failure to obey orders given by the proper authority, or any other reasonable
and just cause, the Civil Service Commission shall hear charges and render
judgment pertaining to the grounds for suspension and may affirm, disaffirm, or
modify the decision by the Mayor in accordance with its findings. An appeal of
the Commission’s decision on such suspension may be made to the Court of Common
Pleas as provided by R.C. § 124.34.
   (d)   Pursuant to R.C. § 124.40, the Civil Service Commission shall make
reports from time to time, as the State Personnel Board of Review requires, of
the manner in which the law and the rules and regulations under it have been
and are being administered and the results of their administration in the city.
A copy of the annual report shall be filed in the office of the Board as a
public record.
(Ord. 147-84, passed 10-22-1984; Ord. 68-2015, passed 6-8-2015)
§ 276.03 MEETINGS AND ORGANIZATION.
   (a)   The Civil Service Commission shall designate one of its members as
Chairperson and may appoint a Secretary who need not be a member of the
Commission and may hold other municipal office or appointment.
   (b)   The Civil Service Commission shall meet no less than six times per
year.
   (c)   A majority of the Civil Service Commission members shall be a quorum
for the transaction of business. All plans, findings, advice, reports, and
recommendations made by the Commission shall be in writing and shall designate
by name those members of the Commission approving the same, failing to concur
therein or abstaining therefrom. Those who fail to concur or who abstain shall
have the right, as a part of such report, to state their reasons for refusing
to approve or to concur. Minutes of meetings shall be recorded and kept on file
in the Human Resources Director’s office. Copies shall be filed with Commission
members, the Mayor, and Council.
(Ord. 8-62, passed 1-8-1962)
§ 276.04 UNCLASSIFIED POSITIONS.
   All positions in the service of the city shall be deemed “classified” and
filled pursuant to open competitive examinations, except the following:
   (a)   Elected officials;
   (b)   Any member of a board or commission;
   (c)   Any head or deputy head of a department other than the Police Chief
and the Fire Chief;
   (d) The Director and Assistant Director of Avon Lake Regional Water;
   (e)   All positions in the Building Department, including the Chief Building
Official, the Building Inspector, the Plumbing Inspector, the Electrical
Inspector, the Residential Inspector, and the Plans Examiner;
   (f)   One secretary each to the Mayor, the Finance Director and any board,
committee, commission, or head of a department; two secretaries for the Public
Works Department;
   (g)   Any assistant to the Mayor, the Finance Director or the Law Director;
   (h)   Any temporary appointment;
   (i)   Appointments to any other office requiring peculiar or exceptional
qualifications for which testing is impracticable;
   (j)   Seasonal or part-time employees;
   (k)   The Clerk of Council;
   (l)   The Dial-A-Bus Operator;
   (m)   Any finance clerk or trainee in the Finance Department;
   (n)   The Public Works Foreman; and
   (o)   The Code Administrator.
(Ord. 155-89, passed 7-17-1989; Ord. 75-2013, passed 6-10-2013; Ord. 43-2014,
passed 4-14-2014; Ord. 41-2019, passed 4-8-2019)
CHAPTER 278: COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY COMMISSION
Section
278.01 Establishment and purpose
278.02 Membership; term; qualifications; compensation and removal
278.03 Powers and duties
278.04 Rules and regulations
278.05 Meetings and organizations
Cross-reference:
   Property defined to include cable television service, see §
606.01
   Satellite dish antennas, see
Ch. 1480
   Services defined to include cable television service, see §
642.01
   Wireless telecommunications towers and facilities, see §
1216.06(j)
Statutory reference:
   Interrupting or impairing television - see Ohio R.C. 2909.04
§ 278.01 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.
   There is hereby established in and for the city a citizens’ advisory
commission entitled the Communications and Technology Commission to manage Avon
Lake Community Television (ALC-TV), the City of Avon Lake website, the City of
Avon Lake’s social media presence and outreach, the digital communications with
and among city departments and the community, branding, and marketing of the
City of Avon Lake and its programs, and to advise and make recommendations to
Council on the various areas of technology utilized by the city.
(Ord. 25-189, passed 12-8-2025)
§ 278.02 MEMBERSHIP; TERM; QUALIFICATIONS; COMPENSATION AND REMOVAL.
   (a)   Membership. The Communications and Technology Commission shall consist
of seven members, comprised of the following:
      (1)   Three members, who for the previous two years have been registered,
qualified electors of the city, shall not be employed by, nor have any
financial interest in, the broadcasting, cable communications, or telephone
business, shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by Council.
      (2)   Two members, who for the previous two years have been registered,
qualified electors of the city, shall not be employed by, nor have any
financial interest in, the broadcasting, cable communications, or telephone
business, shall be appointed by Council.
      (3)   In addition to the voting members, there shall be two ex officio,
non-voting advisory members.
         A.   One member shall be from the Building and Utilities Committee.
         B.   One member shall be a representative from the Avon Lake School
System or Board of Education.
   (b)   Terms. The five appointed resident members of the Communications and
Technology Commission shall each serve three years with staggered terms, a
third of which shall be appointed each year. Each member is eligible for
reappointment without limitation on the number of consecutive appointments.
      (1)   Vacancies on the Communications and Technology Commission shall be
filled for the remainder of the unexpired term in the same manner that the
position was originally filled.
      (2)   The Chairperson will notify the Clerk of Council when a vacancy
exists.
      (3)   Any vacancy shall be filled within 60 days, unless extenuating
circumstances require a longer period.
   (c)   Qualifications. As far as is practicable, appointments to the
Communications and Technology Commission shall include individuals having
expertise or experience in such areas as:
      (1)   Law focusing on FCC regulations, copyright and internet
regulations;
      (2)   Technology relating to media communications;
      (3)   Marketing and social media;
      (4)   Education and non-profit;
      (5)   Consumer affairs relating to cable access and Internet
communications; and
      (6)   Historic understanding of Avon Lake and ALC-TV.
   (d)   Compensation. The members of the Communications and Technology
Commission shall serve without compensation. With prior approval by the
assigned Department Director, according to the city procurement policies, any
expense incurred by the Commission, or the members thereof in the performance
of their duties shall be paid from the city treasury.
   (e)   Removal. Any Communications and Technology Commission member who
misses three consecutive meetings, or more than 50% of the regular meetings on
an annual basis, may be removed from the Commission by a majority vote of the
other Commissioners.
(Ord. 80-94, passed 4-25-1994; Ord. 47-04, passed 3-8-2004; Ord. 26-09, passed
3-16-2009; Ord. 5-2010, passed 1-11-2010; Ord. 196-2017, passed 12-18-2017;
Ord. 181-2018, passed 12-17-2018; Ord. 25-189, passed 12-8-2025)
§ 278.03 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Communications and Technology Commission shall have the following duties
and responsibilities:
   (a)   To advise Council regarding general policy relating to the operation
and uses of the ALC- TV with a view toward maximizing the diversity of programs
and services to subscribers and users and provide access to government services
and communications;
   (b)   To encourage the use of access channels among the widest range of
institutions, groups and individuals within the city, including for
governmental transparency, community events and programs and education;
   (c)   To encourage cooperation with schools, museums, and other institutions
located in the city or in neighboring communities with a view toward utilizing
the facilities located therein to enrich the quality and diversity of access
channel programming for the system;
   (d)   To advise Council of changes in the state-of-the-art technology and
the applicability of the same to access channel programming for the system;
   (e)   To review budgets and recommend expenditures as appropriate; and
   (f)   To submit an annual report to Council, including, but not limited to,
a summary of the utilization of access channels, a review of any plans
submitted during the year by the Communications and Technology Director for the
development of new services, and a summary report of Commission deliberations
throughout the year in connection with its assigned functions.
(Ord. 80-94, passed 4-25-1994; Ord. 181-2018, passed 12-17-2018; Ord. 25-189,
passed 12-8-2025)
§ 278.04 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Communications and Technology Commission shall have the authority to
submit proposed rules and regulations for the conduct of its business to
Council for approval and, upon approval, shall have the right to hold hearings
and make recommendations to the Communications and Technology Director and to
the educational and governmental communities on the coordination of the
education and governmental access channels. All such actions shall be advisory
only.
(Ord. 80-94, passed 4-25-1994; Ord. 181-2018, passed 12-17-2018)
§ 278.05 MEETINGS AND ORGANIZATIONS.
   (a)   The Communications and Technology Commission shall meet no less than
six times every year. All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the
public. Copies of meeting minutes shall be forwarded to the Clerk of Council,
members of Council and the Mayor.
   (b)   There shall be a Secretary, or designee, employed by the city who
shall publish an agenda and serve notification of meetings, attend meetings of
the Communications and Technology Commission, take minutes of the meetings and
publish these minutes, and perform such follow-through and research as are
required by the Commission.
   (c)   A Chairperson shall be elected by a majority vote of the
Communications and Technology Commission members to serve until the expiration
of that member’s term. At the first meeting following the expiration of a
Chairperson’s term, the Commission shall elect a new Chairperson to serve for
the entirety of that member’s term.
(Ord. 80-94, passed 4-25-1994; Ord. 181-2018, passed 12-17-2018; Ord. 25-189,
passed 12-8-2025)
CHAPTER 280: COMMUNITY RELATIONS BOARD
Section
280.01 Establishment and purpose
280.02 Membership, term and compensation
280.03 Powers and duties
280.04 Meetings and organization
§ 280.01 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.
   There is hereby established the Community Relations Board to form and
maintain positive relationships between residents, businesses, organizations
and other institutions.
(Ord. 95-2020, passed 10-26-2020)
§ 280.02 MEMBERSHIP, TERM AND COMPENSATION.
   (a)   The Community Relations Board shall consist of seven members comprised
of the following:
      (1)   Law Director;
      (2)   Finance Director;
      (3)   Human Resources Director;
      (4)   Chairperson of the Human Resources Committee of Council; and
      (5)   Three community members of which:
         A.   Two members shall be residents of the city for at least two years
and appointed by Council; and
         B.   One nonresident member of the business community, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor.
   (b)   The community members shall be appointed for staggered terms of three
years each.
(Ord. 95-2020, passed 10-26-2020)
§ 280.03 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (a)   The Community Relations Board will work with the residents,
businesses, organizations, faith-based institutions and Building and/or
Community Development Departments to promote and enforce fair housing and ADA
objectives, initiatives and laws.
   (b)    The Community Relations Board shall promote amicable relations among
racial, cultural and other groups within the community; take appropriate steps
to deal with conditions which strain relationships; aid in the coordination of
the activities of private organizations concerned with these relationships;
assemble, analyze, and disseminate authentic and factual data relating to
interracial and other intergroup relationships.
   (c)   The Community Relations Board shall have power to publish and
distribute at public expense such factual material as it shall deem necessary
or desirable to promote the goals of the Board.
(Ord. 95-2020, passed 10-26-2020)
§ 280.04 MEETINGS AND ORGANIZATION.
   (a)   The Community Relations Board shall select its own Chairperson make
its own rules and regulations and keep a record of its proceedings. In the
absence of any rule upon the matter of business, the Board shall be governed by
Robert’s Rules of Order. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the
transaction of business.
   (b)   The Community Relations Board shall meet on a quarterly basis or as
requested by its Chairperson. Minutes of Board meetings shall be forwarded to
the Mayor and members of Council.
   (c)   For matters of state and federal funding, the Finance Director is
hereby appointed to serve as Fair Housing Officer, Equal Opportunity Officer
and Compliance Officer.
(Ord. 95-2020, passed 10-26-2020)
CHAPTER 282: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ADVISORY BOARD
Section
282.01 Establishment and purpose
282.02 Membership, term and compensation
282.03 Powers and duties
282.04 Meetings and organization
§ 282.01 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.
   There is hereby established in and for the city an Economic Development
Advisory Board to create and foster a positive responsible, cooperative, and
continuous effort between business, industry, city government and the residents
of the city.
(Ord. 60-02, passed 3-11-2002)
§ 282.02 MEMBERSHIP, TERM AND COMPENSATION.
   (a)   The Economic Development Advisory Board shall consist of seven
members, comprised of the following:
      (1)   The Mayor shall appoint five members to serve terms of two years
each:
         A.   Two members shall be representatives of the Avon Lake/Avon
Chamber of Commerce, but they need not be residents of the city; and
         B.   Three community members, who during the term of their membership,
shall be residents of the city and shall hold no other elective or appointive
office in the city administration.
      (2)   The Public Works Director or Director’s designee;
      (3)   A representative of Council; and
      (4)   The Finance Director or the Director’s designee shall serve as
Secretary to the Economic Development Advisory Board.
   (b)   All members of the Economic Development Advisory Board shall be
selected because of their knowledge and interest in matters relating to
economic development and for their ability to competently represent the
economic development of the community.
   (c)   The members of the Economic Development Advisory Board shall serve
without compensation. With prior approval by Council, any expenses incurred by
the Board or the members thereof in the performance of the business of the
Board shall be paid from the municipal treasury.
   (d)   The Mayor and Finance Director or Director’s designee shall serve as
ex officio members of the Board.
(Ord. 60-02, passed 3-11-2002; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014)
§ 282.03 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (a) The Economic Development Advisory Board shall study and advise the
administration of the city on areas to seek economic development, including the
following:
      (1)   Industrial development;
      (2)   Commercial development;
      (3)   Residential development; and
      (4)   Recreational activity development.
   (b)   The Economic Development Advisory Board shall recommend ideas and
programs to the city administration for:
      (1)   Marketing the city to outside business interests;
      (2)   Ways to meet the economic and business needs of current business
and industry;
      (3)   Improving the city services to meet the economic needs of the city,
including:
         A.   Infrastructure;
         B.   Recreation improvements; and
         C.   Educational programs.
      (4)   Abatement tax proposals.
(Ord. 60-02, passed 3-11-2002)
§ 282.04 MEETINGS AND ORGANIZATION.
   (a) The Economic Development Advisory Board shall, at its first meeting of
each calendar year, appoint its own Chairperson.
   (b)   The Finance Director or their designee shall serve as Secretary to the
Board.
   (c) The Economic Development Advisory Board shall meet on a quarterly basis
or as requested by its Chairperson. Minutes of the Board shall be forwarded to
the Mayor and members of the Council by the Secretary.
(Ord. 60-02, passed 3-11-2002)
CHAPTER 284: ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS ADVISORY BOARD
Section
284.01 Establishment and purpose
284.02 Membership; term; compensation; and removal
284.03 Powers and duties
284.04 Meetings and organization
Charter reference:
   Authority to establish, see Charter §
36 
Cross-reference:
   Air pollution, see §
660.08
   Air pollution control standards, see §
1226.02(c)
   Polluting watercourse, see §
660.04
   Water Pollution Control and Sewer Fund, see §
1056.04
§ 284.01 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.
   There is hereby established an advisory board to be known as the
Environmental Affairs Advisory Board with its purposes to include the
following:
   (a)   To study and advise courses of action which the Environmental
Committee of Council may take to formulate and promote general and broad codes
of land, air and water management for the city; and
   (b) To study and investigate other environmentally related concerns and
issues of importance to Council and residents of the city and to report its
findings and make appropriate recommendations to residents of the city and
Council as needed.
(Ord. 83-94, passed 4-25-1994; Ord. 25-190, passed 12-8-2025)
§ 284.02 MEMBERSHIP; TERM; COMPENSATION; AND REMOVAL.
   (a)   Membership. The Environmental Affairs Advisory Board shall consist of
14 members, comprised of the following:
      (1)   Up to six members shall be employees or representatives of
industrial concerns located within the city who shall be selected because of
their knowledge, technical capability, or interest in matters relating to air
and/or water management and for their ability to competently represent both
their own industry and industry in general, which is located in the community.
The industrial members need not be residents of the city and shall be appointed
by Council;
      (2)   The other members, who for the previous two years have been
registered, qualified electors of the city and who are not employees of
industrial concerns located in the city, shall be appointed by Council;
      (3)   One ex officio, non-voting member shall be the Public Works
Director;
      (4)   One ex officio, non-voting member shall be the Chairperson of the
Environmental Committee; and
      (5)   One ex officio member shall be a member of the Tree Commission.
   (b)   Term. The appointed resident members of the Environmental Affairs
Advisory Board shall each serve three years with staggered terms, a third of
which shall be appointed each year. Each member is eligible for reappointment
without limitation on the number of consecutive appointments.
      (1)   Beginning in 2026, the Chairperson shall serve for three years, and
the Vice-Chairperson shall serve for two years, then every appointment
thereafter, shall serve for three years.
      (2)   Vacancies on the Environmental Affairs Advisory Board shall be
filled for the remainder of the unexpired term in the same manner that the
position was originally filled.
      (3)   The Chairperson will notify the Clerk of Council when a vacancy
exists.
      (4)   Any vacancy shall be filled within 60 days, unless extenuating
circumstances require a longer period.
   (c)   Compensation. Members of the Environmental Affairs Advisory Board
shall serve without compensation. With prior approval of the assigned
Department Director, according to the city procurement policies, any expense
incurred by the Board or the members thereof in the performance of their duties
shall be paid from the city treasury.
   (d)   Removal. Any Environmental Affairs Advisory Board member who misses
three consecutive meetings, or more than 50% of the regular meetings on an
annual basis, may be removed from the Board by a majority vote of the other
Board members.
(Ord. 83-94, passed 4-25-1994; Ord. 41-04, passed 2-23-2004; Ord. 69-08, passed
5-12-2008; Ord. 82-09, passed 8-24-2009; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014; Ord.
133-2014, passed 10-27-2014; Ord. 17-2016, passed 2-8-2016; Ord. 196-2017,
passed 12-18-2017; Ord. 25-190, passed 12-8-2025)
§ 284.03 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Environmental Affairs Advisory Board shall seek, as its general goals:
   (a)   To create and foster a positive, responsible, cooperative, and
continuous effort among businesses and residents of the city;
   (b)   To educate Council and residents of the city on important
environmental issues;
   (c)   To establish and make appropriate recommendations to Council through
the use of subject matter experts on land, air, and water management programs;
and
   (d)   To investigate every reasonable means available to inform and educate
its members relative to the problems and possible solutions of land, water, and
air pollution and management in communities of similar size to the city.
(Ord. 25-190, passed 12-8-2025)
§ 284.04 MEETINGS AND ORGANIZATION.
   (a)   The Environmental Affairs Advisory Board shall elect by a majority
vote its own Chairperson to make its own rules and regulations and keep a
record of its proceedings.
   (b)   The Environmental Affairs Advisory Board shall meet on a quarterly
basis or more frequently as requested by its Chairperson. Minutes of Board
meetings shall be forwarded to the Mayor and members of Council and filed with
the Clerk of Council.
(Ord. 83-94, passed 4-25-1994; Ord. 82-09, passed 8-24-2009; Ord. 196-2017,
passed 12-18-2017; Ord. 25-190, passed 12-8-2025)
CHAPTER 286: PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
Section
286.01 Establishment and purpose
286.02 Membership, term, compensation and removal
286.03 Powers and duties
286.04 Meetings and organization
Charter reference:
   Authority to establish, see Charter §
36
Cross-reference:
   Avon Lake Park, Assembly Hall, see
Ch. 1070
   Recreation Department, see
Ch. 248 
   Swimming pool, see
Ch. 1078
§ 286.01 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.
    There is hereby established a Parks and Recreation Commission to function
in an advisory capacity to Council, the Mayor and the Recreation Director on
all matters affecting city-owned parks, in addition to recreation policies and
programs for the city. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall serve as an
agency to develop and recommend a program of recreation policy for the
community, working with the Recreation Director to administer the program.
(Ord. 29-63, passed 3-11-1963; Ord. 166-04, passed 7-12-2004; Ord. 122-2018,
passed 7-9-2018; Ord. 25-191, passed 12-8-2025)
§ 286.02 MEMBERSHIP, TERM, COMPENSATION AND REMOVAL.
   (a)   Membership. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall consist of nine
members, comprised of the following:
      (1)   Three members, who for the previous two years have been registered,
qualified electors of the city, shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed
by Council;
      (2)   Two members, who for the previous two years have been registered,
qualified electors of the city, shall be appointed by Council;
      (3)   The members shall have at least one resident member appointed from
each ward;
      (4)   One ex officio, non-voting members comprised of shall be a member
of Council, selected by the Mayor;
      (5)   One ex officio, non-voting member shall be a member of the Board of
Education, selected by the Parks and Recreation Commission;
      (6)   One ex officio member shall be a member of the Tree Commission; and
      (7)   The Recreation Director, who shall serve as an ex officio, non-
voting member.
   (b)   Term. The five appointed resident members of the Parks and Recreation
Commission shall each serve three years with staggered terms, a third of which
shall be appointed each year. Each member is eligible for reappointment without
limitation on the number of consecutive appointments.
      (1)   Vacancies on the Parks and Recreation Commission shall be filled
for the remainder of the unexpired term in the same manner that the position
was originally filled.
      (2)   The Chairperson will notify the Clerk of Council when a vacancy
exists.
      (3)   Any vacancy shall be filled within 60 days, unless extenuating
circumstances require a longer period.
   (c)   Compensation. Members of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall
serve without compensation. With prior approval by the Recreation Director,
according to the city procurement policies, any expense incurred by the
Commission or the members thereof in the performance of their duties shall be
paid from the city treasury.
   (d)   Removal. Any Parks and Recreation Commission member who misses three
consecutive meetings, or more than 50% of the regular meetings on an annual
basis, may be removed from the Commission by a majority vote of the other
Commissioners.
(Ord. 29-63, passed 3-11-1963; Ord. 166-04, passed 7-12-2004; Ord. 25-191,
passed 12-8-2025)
§ 286.03 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (a)   The Parks and Recreation Commission shall recommend rules, regulations
and policies governing all public parks and all facilities and appurtenances
for the protection of the public and proper use of the parks, except otherwise
provided by Council. In addition to its other duties and jurisdiction and for
the promotion of the health, safety, and enjoyment of the public, the
Commission shall recommend all needed rules and regulations for the maintenance
of order, safety and decency in all public parks and public grounds used for
park and/or recreation purposes.
   (b)   No power to acquire or deed land. The Parks and Recreation Commission
may make recommendations for acquisition and donations of real property used
for park and/or recreation purposes but shall have no power to acquire or
dispose of real property.
   (c)   Improvements. The Parks and Recreation Commission may make
recommendations for improvements to all parks and grounds used for park and/or
recreation purposes.
(Ord. 25-191, passed 12-8-2025)
§ 286.04 MEETINGS AND ORGANIZATION.
   (a)   The Parks and Recreation Commission shall hold an organizational
meeting at its first regular meeting date of the year, and the meeting schedule
for the year will be the first order of business.
   (b)   There shall be a minimum of five meetings per year held on the fourth
Wednesday of the scheduled month. Work sessions may be called at the discretion
of the Parks and Recreation Commission Chairperson and/or the Recreation
Director.
   (c)   The Recreation Director, or designee, shall serve as the Secretary of
the Parks and Recreation Commission.
   (d)   Minutes of meetings shall be recorded and kept on file in the
Recreation Director’s office. Copies shall be filed with Park and Recreation
Commission members, the Mayor and Clerk of Council.
(Ord. 145-76, passed 10-25-1976; Ord. 166-04, passed 7-12-2004; Ord. 122-2018,
passed 7-9-2018; Ord. 25-191, passed 12-8-2025)
CHAPTER 288: TREE COMMISSION
Section
288.01 Establishment and purpose
288.02 Membership; term; compensation; and removal
288.03 Powers and duties
288.04 Meetings; organization
§ 288.01 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.
   (a)   Establishment. There is hereby established in and for the city a Tree
Commission to foster a community that is committed to the sustainable
management of the urban forest.
   (b)   Purpose.
      (1)   Promote the health and safety of the existing urban tree population
and achieve a fully stocked, healthy, and resilient urban forest by providing
recommendations for tree planting on public lands, in rights-of-way, and in
subdivisions, per the Planning and Zoning Code;
      (2)   Educate Avon Lake’s residents, employees, and volunteers about the
need for a sustainable urban forest and the value and importance of maintaining
and improving the urban forest;
      (3)   Work with city staff to ensure annual Tree City USA recognition and
Growth Award attainment; and
      (4)   Advise on arboricultural and urban forestry best management
practices.
(Ord. 23-200, passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 25-197, passed 12-8-2025)
§ 288.02 MEMBERSHIP; TERM; COMPENSATION; AND REMOVAL.
   (a)   Membership. The Tree Commission shall consist of seven members
comprised of the following:
      (1)   Three members, who for the previous two years have been registered,
qualified electors of the city, shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed
by Council;
      (2)   Two members, who for the previous two years have been registered,
qualified electors of the city, shall be appointed by Council;
      (3)   One ex officio, non-voting member shall be the Urban Forester;
      (4)   One ex officio, non-voting member appointed by Council, who serves
as shall be the Chairperson of the Public Service Committee.
   (b)   Term. The five appointed resident members of the Tree Commission shall
each serve three years with staggered terms, a third of which shall be
appointed each year. Each member is eligible for reappointment without
limitation on the number of consecutive appointments.
      (1)   Vacancies on the Tree Commission shall be filled for the remainder
of the unexpired term in the same manner that the position was originally
filled.
      (2)   The Chairperson will notify the Clerk of Council when a vacancy
exists.
      (3)   Any vacancy shall be filled within 60 days, unless extenuating
circumstances require a longer period.
   (c)   Compensation. Members of the Tree Commission shall serve without
compensation but shall be entitled to reimbursement for any and all necessary
expenditures in carrying out the functions of the Commission, including
recommended continuing education opportunities provided through the Ohio
Department of Natural Resources, Division of Forestry, and other qualified
providers, or as approved by the Urban Forester or the Public Works Director.
   (d)   Removal. Any Tree Commission member who misses three consecutive
meetings or more than 50% of the regular meetings on an annual basis may be
removed from the Commission by a majority vote of the other Commissioners.
(Ord. 23-200, passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 25-197, passed 12-8-2025)
§ 288.03 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (a)   The Tree Commission shall have the power to study, investigate, plan,
advise, report and recommend to Council, the Urban Forester, Planning
Commission or the Mayor any action, program, plan, or legislation which the
Commission shall find or determine to be necessary or advisable:
      (1)   To promote the health and safety of all trees in the urban forest
on the public lands through the care, preservation, trimming, planting,
replanting, maintaining, protecting, prompting, removal or disposition of trees
and shrubs in public ways, curb strips, streets, alleys, and all city property;
      (2)   To achieve a fully stocked, healthy, and resilient urban forest by
identifying and recommending trees and other plants desirable for planting in
public spaces and on private property to ensure public safety and welfare,
promote diversity of native species of trees and other plants, and protect the
local natural ecosystem;
      (3)   To identify trees and other plants that are undesirable for
planting in public spaces and on private property to ensure public safety and
welfare and benefit the natural, local ecosystem;
      (4)   To work with city staff to ensure annual Tree City USA recognition
and Growth Award attainment;
      (5)   To educate the community’s residents, elected officials, employees,
and volunteers about the value and need for a sustainable urban forest by
understanding the importance of maintaining and improving the urban forest
through encouraging arboricultural best practices for the city; and
      (6)   To work with the Urban Forester to establish and maintain an
inventory of city-owned trees and identify trees at high risk for failure,
disease, and insect infiltration.
   (b)   The Tree Commission, when requested by Council, the Mayor, or the
Urban Forester, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report, and
recommend upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its
work. Recommendations requiring Council action shall be made to the Public
Service Committee of Council.
   (c)   The members of the Tree Commission shall provide website content to
the Communications and Technology Department concerning the rules, regulations,
standards and specifications developed by the Commission and approved by
Council or such other content as deemed advisable.
   (d)   It is recommended that members of the Tree Commission participate in
continuing education through the Ohio Department of Natural Resources,
Department of Forestry, and other educational opportunities.
   (e)   The Tree Commission shall establish and implement an annual Arbor Day
observance.
(Ord. 23-200, passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 25-197, passed 12-8-2025)
§ 288.04 MEETINGS; ORGANIZATION.
   (a)   The Tree Commission shall hold an organizational meeting at its first
regular meeting date of the year, and the meeting schedule for the year will be
the first order of business. There shall be a minimum of six meetings per year.
Work sessions or special meetings may be called at the discretion of the
Commission Chairperson.
   (b)   The Tree Commission shall elect by a majority vote its own officers,
make its own rules and regulations, and keep a record of its proceedings. A
handbook shall be kept in the Clerk of Council’s office as a permanent record.
In the absence of any rule regarding the matter of business, the Commission
shall be governed by Robert’s Rules of Order.
   (c)   The Tree Commission shall appoint one of its members to serve as an ex
officio member of the Parks and Recreation Commission and one member to serve
as an ex officio member of the Environmental Affairs Advisory Board.
   (d)   A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of
business. All plans, findings, advice, reports, and recommendations made by the
Tree Commission shall be in writing and shall designate by name those members
of the Commission approving the same, failing to concur therein, or abstaining
therefrom. Those who fail to concur or who abstain shall have the right, as a
part of such report, to state their reasons for refusing to approve or to
concur. Minutes of meetings shall be filed in the Urban Forester’s office and
forwarded to the Mayor, and the Clerk of Council.
(Ord. 23-200, passed 12-11-2023; Ord. 25-197, passed 12-8-2025)
TITLE TEN - Judiciary
      
Chap. 298. Municipal Court.
CHAPTER 298: MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
298.01 Clerk; other positions
298.02 Establishment of Municipal Court Computer Fund
298.03 Deposits into Municipal Court Computer Fund
Editor’s note:
   R.C. § 1901.01 established a Municipal Court in the city. R.C. § 1901.02
extended the jurisdiction of such Court, in addition to the city, to the city
and the Village of Sheffield in Lorain County.
§ 298.01 CLERK; OTHER POSITIONS.
   (a)   The positions of Clerk of the Municipal Court, Bailiff, Chief Deputy
Clerk and Deputy Clerk are hereby established in the city service.
   (b)   The written specifications of the responsibilities and duties
applicable to the position of Clerk of the Municipal Court, as prepared and
recommended by the Job Evaluation Committee, are hereby approved and adopted.
(Ord. 45-67, passed 8-28-1967)
§ 298.02 ESTABLISHMENT OF MUNICIPAL COURT COMPUTER FUND.
   (a)   Pursuant to R.C. § 1901.261, there is hereby established the Avon Lake
Municipal Court Computer Fund.
   (b)   All moneys collected pursuant to §
298.03 shall be paid to the office of the Finance Director for deposit in the
Avon Lake Municipal Court Computer Fund, to be disbursed only upon order of the
Municipal Court and subject to an appropriation by Council in an amount no
greater than the actual cost to the Court of procuring and maintaining computer
systems for the office of the Clerk of Court.
   (c)   All entries in the newly established Fund shall encompass all
transactions as appropriate effective on, and retroactive to, July 1, 1993.
(Ord. 106-93, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 298.03 DEPOSITS INTO MUNICIPAL COURT COMPUTER FUND.
   The Clerk of the Avon Lake Municipal Court shall, effective July 1, 1993,
include a fee of $10 per case in its schedule of fees and costs on the filing
of each cause of action, and on the docketing and indexing of each aid in
execution filed that is equivalent to one described in R.C. § 2903.20(A), (Q)
or (T), which fee shall be deposited into the Municipal Court Computer Fund
pursuant to §
298.02.
(Ord. 106-93, passed 8-23-1993)
PART FOUR - TRAFFIC CODE
   TITLE TWO - Administration, Enforcement and Penalties
      
Chap. 402. Definitions.
      
Chap. 404. Enforcement; Impounding.
      
Chap. 406. Traffic Control.
      
Chap. 408. Penalties.
   TITLE FOUR - Public Ways and Traffic Control Devices
      
Chap. 412. Obstruction and Special Uses of Public Ways.
      
Chap. 414. Traffic Control Devices.
      
Chap. 416. Pedestrians.
   TITLE SIX - Vehicles and Operation
      
Chap. 432. Operation Generally.
      
Chap. 434. OVI; Reckless Operation; Speed.
      
Chap. 436. Licensing; Accidents.
      
Chap. 438. Safety and Equipment.
      
Chap. 440. Commercial and Heavy Vehicles.
      
Chap. 442. Drivers of Commercial Vehicles.
      
Chap. 444. Offenses Relating to Theft and Fraud.
   TITLE EIGHT - Parking
      
Chap. 452. Parking Generally.
      
Chap. 454. Parking Violations Bureau.
   TITLE TEN - Bicycles, Motorcycles and Snowmobiles
      
Chap. 474. Bicycles, Electric Bicycles, and Motorcycles Generally.
      
Chap. 476. Snowmobiles, Off-Highway Motorcycles and All-Purpose Vehicles.
      
Chap. 478. Motorized Bicycles.
TITLE TWO - Administration, Enforcement and Penalties
      
Chap. 402. Definitions.
      
Chap. 404. Enforcement; Impounding.
      
Chap. 406. Traffic Control.
      
Chap. 408. Penalties.
CHAPTER 402: DEFINITIONS
Section
402.01 Meaning of words and phrases
§ 402.01 MEANING OF WORDS AND PHRASES.
   Except as otherwise provided, the definitions set forth in R.C. § 4501.01
shall apply to this traffic code and the penal laws of the municipality. Except
as otherwise provided, the following words and phrases, when used in this
traffic code, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this
chapter.
   AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR and TRACTION ENGINE. Every self-propelled vehicle
designed or used for drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery, but having no
provision for carrying loads independently of such other vehicles, and used
principally for agricultural purposes.
   ALLEY. A street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or side of
lots or buildings in urban districts, and not intended for the purpose of
through vehicular traffic, and any street or highway that has been declared an
ALLEY by the legislative authority of the municipality in which the street or
highway is located.
   ARTERIAL STREET. A street or highway primarily used by through traffic,
usually on a continuous route or a street or highway designated as part of an
arterial system.
   AUTOCYCLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   BEACON. A highway traffic signal with one or more signal sections that
operate in a flashing mode.
   BICYCLE. A pedal-powered vehicle upon which a human operator sits, including
an electric bicycle.
   BICYCLE BOX. A designated area on the approach to a signalized intersection,
between an advance motorist stop line and the crosswalk or intersection, that
is intended to provide bicyclists a visible location to wait in front of
stopped motorists during the red signal phase.
   BICYCLE LANE. A portion of a roadway that has been designated for
preferential or exclusive use by bicyclists and is often delineated from the
adjacent general-purpose lanes by longitudinal pavement markings and either a
bicycle lane symbol, words, or signs. The term includes all of the following:
      (1)   A buffer-separated bicycle lane, which is separated from the
adjacent general-purpose lanes by a pattern of standard longitudinal pavement
markings that are wider than a normal or wide-lane pavement marking;
      (2)   A counter-flow bicycle lane, which is a one-directional bicycle
lane that provides a lawful path of travel for bicycles in the opposite
direction from the general traffic on a roadway that otherwise requires the
general traffic to travel in only one direction. A counter-flow bicycle lane is
designated by the traffic control devices used for other bicycle lanes;
      (3)   A separated bicycle lane, which is an exclusive facility for
bicyclists that is located within or directly adjacent to the roadway and is
physically separated from the motor vehicle traffic with a vertical element.
   BICYCLE SIGNAL FACE. A signal face that displays only bicycle symbol signal
indications in accordance with R.C. § 4511.15 that exclusively controls a
bicyclist's movement from a designated bicycle lane or from a separate
facility, and that displays signal indications that are applicable only to a
bicyclist's movement.
   BICYCLE SIGNAL SIGN. A sign meant to inform road users that the signal
indications in the bicycle signal face are intended only for bicyclists, and to
inform bicyclists which bicyclist movements are controlled by that bicycle
signal face.
   BIKEWAY. Any road, street, path, or way that in some manner is specifically
designated for bicycle travel, regardless of whether the facility is designated
for the exclusive use of bicycles or if it is shared with other modes of
transportation.
   BUS. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than nine passengers,
and used for the transportation of persons other than in a ridesharing
arrangement, and every motor vehicle, automobile for hire or funeral car, other
than a taxicab or motor vehicle used in a ridesharing arrangement, designed and
used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory fronting upon a street or highway,
including the street or highway, between successive intersections within the
municipality, where 50% or more of the frontage between successive
intersections is occupied by buildings in use for business, or within or
outside the municipality where 50% or more of the frontage for a distance of
300 feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business, and the
character of the territory is indicated by official traffic-control devices.
   BUSWAY. A traveled way that is used exclusively by buses.
   CAB-ENCLOSED MOTORCYCLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE. A motor vehicle that is designed to carry nine or
fewer passengers and is operated for hire pursuant to a prearranged contract
for the transportation of passengers on public roads and highways along a route
under the control of the person hiring the vehicle and not over a defined and
regular route. PREARRANGED CONTRACT means an agreement, made in advance of
boarding, to provide transportation from a specific location in a chauffeured
limousine. CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE does not include any vehicle that is used
exclusively in the business of funeral directing.
(R.C. § 4501.01(LL))
   CHILD CARE CENTER. Has the same meaning as set forth in R.C. § 5104.01.
   COMMERCIAL TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle having motive power designed or used
for drawing other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry any load
thereon, or designed or used for drawing other vehicles while carrying a
portion of the other vehicles, or the load thereon, or both.
   CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every street or highway in respect to which
owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right or
access to or from the same except at certain points only and in a manner as may
be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over the street or
highway.
   CROSSWALK.
      (1)   That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs, or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of
the traversable roadway, and in the absence of a sidewalk on one side of the
roadway, the part of a roadway included within the extension of the lateral
lines of the sidewalk at right angles to the center line;
      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere,
distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the
surface, which might be supplemented by contrasting pavement texture, style, or
color;
      (3)   Notwithstanding divisions (1) and (2) of this definition, the term
does not include an area where local authorities have placed signs indicating
no crossing.
   DRIVER or OPERATOR. Any person who drives or is in actual physical control
of a vehicle.
   DRIVEWAY. An access from a roadway to a building, site, or abutting
property.
   ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a “class 1 electric bicycle”, a “class 2 electric
bicycle” or a “class 3 electric bicycle” as defined below.
      (1)   CLASS 1 ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that
provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 miles per hour.
      (2)   CLASS 2 ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that may
provide assistance regardless of whether the rider is pedaling and is not
capable of providing assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 miles
per hour.
      (3)   CLASS 3 ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that
provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 28 miles per hour.
   ELECTRONIC. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Emergency vehicles of municipal, township or county
departments or public utility corporations, when identified as such as required
by law, the Director of Public Safety or local authorities, and motor vehicles
when commandeered by a police officer.
   EXPLOSIVES. Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is intended for
the purpose of producing an explosion that contains any oxidizing and
combustible units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities or
packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion or
by a detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause a sudden
generation of highly heated gases, such that the resultant gaseous pressures
are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects, or of
destroying life or limb. Manufactured articles shall not be held to be
“explosives” when the individual units contain explosives in limited quantities
of a nature or in such packing that it is impossible to procure a simultaneous
or a destructive explosion of the units, to the injury of life, limb or
property by fire, friction, concussion, percussion or by a detonator, such as
fixed ammunition for small arms, firecrackers or safety fuse matches.
   EXPRESSWAY. A divided arterial street or highway for through traffic with
full or partial control of access with an excess of 50% of all crossroads
separated in grade.
   FARM MACHINERY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   FLAMMABLE LIQUID. Any liquid which has a flash point of 70°F or less, as
determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed cup test device.
   FREEWAY. A divided multi-lane highway for through traffic with crossroads
separated in grade and with full control of access.
   FUNERAL ESCORT VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle, including a funeral hearse, while
used to facilitate the movement of a funeral procession.
   GROSS WEIGHT. The weight of a vehicle plus the weight of any load thereon.
   HIGHWAY MAINTENANCE VEHICLE. A vehicle used in snow and ice removal or road
surface maintenance, including a snow plow, traffic line striper, road sweeper,
mowing machine, asphalt distributing vehicle, or other such vehicle designed
for use in specific highway maintenance activities.
   HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SIGNAL. A power-operated traffic control device by which
traffic is warned or directed to take some specific action. The term includes a
beacon, an in-road warning light, a lane-use control signal, and a traffic
control signal. The term does not include a power-operated sign, steadily
illuminated pavement marker, gate, flashing light signal, warning light, or
steady burning electric lamp.
   HYBRID BEACON. A special type of beacon that is intentionally placed in a
dark mode where no indications are displayed between periods of operation and,
when operated, displays both steady and flashing highway traffic signal
indications. The term includes both of the following:
      (1)   An emergency-vehicle hybrid beacon used to warn and control traffic
at an otherwise unsignalized location to assist authorized emergency vehicles
in entering or crossing a street or highway;
      (2)   A pedestrian hybrid beacon used to warn and control traffic at an
otherwise unsignalized location to assist pedestrians in crossing a street or
highway at a marked crosswalk.
   IN-ROAD WARNING LIGHT. A special type of highway traffic signal that is
installed in the roadway surface to warn road users that they are approaching a
condition on or adjacent to the roadway that might not be readily apparent and
might require the road users to reduce speed or come to a complete stop.
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of
two highways that join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or
the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways that join at
any other angle might come into conflict. The junction of an alley, driveway,
or site roadway open to public travel with a public roadway or highway does not
constitute an intersection, unless the public roadway or highway at the
junction is controlled by a traffic control device.
      (2)   If a highway includes two roadways separated by a median, then
every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway constitutes a separate intersection if the opposing left-turn paths
cross and there is sufficient interior storage for the design vehicle. As used
in this division, "design vehicle" means the longest vehicle authorized under
R.C. § 5577.05 to operate on that roadway without a permit.
      (3)   At a location controlled by a highway traffic signal, regardless of
the distance between the separate intersections as described in division (2) of
this definition:
         A.   If a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk has not been designated
on the roadway within the median between the separate intersections, the two
intersections and the roadway and median constitute one intersection.
         B.   Where a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk is designated on the
roadway on the intersection approach, the area within the crosswalk and any
area beyond the designated stop line or yield line constitute part of the
intersection.
         C.   Where a crosswalk is designated on a roadway on the departure
from the intersection, the intersection includes the area that extends to the
far side of the crosswalk.
   LANE-USE CONTROL SIGNAL. A signal face or comparable display on a full-
matrix changeable message sign that displays indications to permit or prohibit
the use of specific lanes of a roadway or a shoulder where driving is sometimes
authorized or to indicate the impending prohibition of such use.
   LANED HIGHWAY. A highway the roadway of which is divided into two or more
clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
   LIMITED DRIVING PRIVILEGES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   LOCAL AUTHORITIES. Every county, municipal and other local board or body
having authority to adopt police regulations under the Constitution and laws of
this state.
   LOW-SPEED MICROMOBILITY DEVICE. Means a device weighing less than 100 pounds
that has handlebars, is propelled by an electric motor or human power, and has
an attainable speed on a paved level surface of not more than 20 miles per hour
when propelled by the electric motor.
   MEDIAN. The portion of a highway separating opposing directions of the
traveled way or the area between two roadways of a divided highway, measured
from edge of traveled way to edge of traveled way. The median excludes turn
lanes. The width of a median may be different between intersections,
interchanges, and at opposite approaches of the same intersection.
   MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE OR MOTOR SCOOTER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4501.01.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than muscular
power or power collected from overhead electric trolley wires, except motorized
bicycles, electric bicycles, road rollers, traction engines, power shovels,
power cranes and other equipment used in construction work, and not designed
for or employed in general highway transportation, hole-digging machinery,
well-drilling machinery, ditch-digging machinery, farm machinery, and trailers
designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage
and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or
highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per
hour or less.
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle, other than a tractor, having a seat or
saddle for the use of the operator and designed to travel on not more than
three wheels in contact with the ground, including but not limited to motor
vehicles known as MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE, MOTOR SCOOTER, AUTOCYCLE, CAB-ENCLOSED
MOTORCYCLE or MOTORCYCLE without regard to weight or brake horsepower.
   MOTORIZED BICYCLE or MOPED. Any vehicle having either two tandem wheels or
one wheel in the front and two wheels in the rear, that may be capable of being
pedaled, and that is equipped with a helper motor of not more than 50 cubic
centimeters piston displacement that produces not more than one brake
horsepower, and is capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed of not greater
than 20 miles per hour on a level surface. The terms do not include an electric
bicycle.
   MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR. Any self-propelled vehicle designed for, and used by,
a person with a disability and that is incapable of a speed in excess of eight
miles per hour.
   MULTI-WHEEL AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR. A type of agricultural tractor that has
two or more wheels or tires on each side of one axle at the rear of the
tractor, is designed or used for drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery,
has no provision for carrying loads independently of the drawn vehicles or
machinery, and is used principally for agricultural purposes.
   NATURAL RESOURCES OFFICER. An officer appointed pursuant to R.C. § 1501.24.
   OPERATE. To cause or have caused movement of a vehicle.
   PARKING or PARKED. The standing of a vehicle upon a street, road, alley,
highway or public ground, whether accompanied or unaccompanied by a driver, but
does not include the temporary standing of a vehicle for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or loading merchandise or passengers.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person on foot, in a motorized or non-motorized wheelchair,
or using another equivalent device, such as skates or a skateboard. The term
includes a personal delivery device as defined in R.C. § 4511.513 unless the
context clearly suggests otherwise.
   PERSON. Every natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
   POLE TRAILER. Every trailer or semitrailer attached to the towing vehicle by
means of a reach, pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing
vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregular shaped loads
such as poles, pipes or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining
themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic, or
to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
   PREDICATE MOTOR VEHICLE OR TRAFFIC OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12, 4511.132,
4511.16, 4511.20, 4511.201, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22, 4511.23,
4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32,
4511.33, 4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40,
4511.41, 4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451,
4511.452, 4511.46, 4511.47, 4511.48, 4511.481, 4511.49, 4511.50, 4511.511,
4511.53, 4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.56, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60,
4511.61, 4511.64, 4511.66, 4511.661, 4511.68, 4511.70, 4511.701, 4511.71,
4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, 4511.73, 4511.763, 4511.771, 4511.78 or
4511.84;
      (2)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.17(A)(2), 4511.51(A) through (D) or
4511.74(A);
      (3)   A violation of any provision of R.C. §§ 4511.01 through 4511.76 for
which no penalty otherwise is provided in the section that contains the
provision violated;
      (4)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.214;
      (5)   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any section or provision set forth or described in division (1),
(2), (3), or (4) of this definition.
   PRIVATE ROAD. Every way or place in private ownership used for vehicular
travel by the owner, and those having express or implied permission from the
owner, but not by other persons.
   PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Any of the following:
      (1)   Ambulances, including private ambulance companies under contract to
a municipality, township or county, and private ambulances and nontransport
vehicles bearing license plates issued under R.C. § 4503.49;
      (2)   Motor vehicles used by public law enforcement officers or other
persons sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state;
      (3)   Any motor vehicle when properly identified as required by the
Director of Public Safety, when used in response to fire emergency calls or to
provide emergency medical service to ill or injured persons, and when operated
by a duly qualified person who is a member of a volunteer rescue service or a
volunteer fire department, and who is on duty pursuant to the rules or
directives of that service. The State Fire Marshal shall be designated by the
Director of Public Safety as the certifying agency for all public safety
vehicles described herein;
      (4)   Vehicles used by fire departments, including motor vehicles when
used by volunteer firefighters responding to emergency calls in the fire
department service when identified as required by the Director of Public
Safety;
      (5)   Any vehicle used to transport or provide emergency medical service
to an ill or injured person, when certified as a “public safety vehicle”, shall
be considered such a vehicle when transporting an ill or injured person to a
hospital, regardless of whether the vehicle has already passed a hospital;
      (6)   Vehicles used by the Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit for the
enforcement of orders and rules of the Public Utilities Commission as specified
in R.C. § 5503.34.
   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property operating upon rails or tracks
placed principally on a private right-of-way.
   RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL. Any sign, signal or device erected by authority of
a public body or official or by a railroad, and intended to give notice of the
presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a train.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory, not comprising a business district,
fronting on a street or highway, including the street or highway, where, for a
distance of 300 feet or more, the frontage is improved with residences or
residences and buildings in use for business.
   RIDESHARING ARRANGEMENT. Includes the transportation of persons in a motor
vehicle where the transportation is incidental to another purpose of a
volunteer driver, and includes “ridesharing arrangements” known as carpools,
vanpools and buspools.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Either of the following, as the context requires:
      (1)   The right of a vehicle or pedestrian to proceed uninterruptedly in
a lawful manner in the direction in which it, he or she is moving, in
preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching from a different
direction into its, his or her path; or
      (2)   A general term denoting land, property or the interest therein,
usually in the configuration of a strip, acquired for or devoted to
transportation purposes. When used in this context, RIGHT-OF-WAY includes the
roadway, shoulders or berm, ditch and slopes extending to the right-of-way
limits under the control of the state or local authority.
   ROAD SERVICE VEHICLE. Wreckers, utility repair vehicles and state, county
and municipal service vehicles equipped with visual signals by means of
flashing, rotating or oscillating lights.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel and parking lanes, not including the berm, sidewalk, or
shoulder, even if the berm, sidewalk, or shoulder is used by a person operating
a bicycle or other human-powered vehicle. If a highway includes two or more
separate roadways, the term means any such roadway separately but not all such
roadways collectively.
   ROUNDABOUT. A circular intersection with a yield control at each entry,
which permits a vehicle on the circulatory roadway to proceed, with deflection
of the approaching vehicles counter-clockwise around a central island.
   RURAL MAIL DELIVERY VEHICLE. Every vehicle used to deliver United States
mail on a rural mail delivery route.
   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians, and protected or marked or indicated by adequate
signs so as to be plainly visible at all times.
   SCHOOL BUS. Every bus designed for carrying more than nine passengers that
is owned by a public, private, or governmental agency or institution of
learning and operated for the transportation of children to or from a school
session or a school function, or owned by a private person and operated for
compensation for the transportation of children to or from a school session or
a school function. The term does not include any of the following:
      (1)   A bus operated by a municipally owned transportation system, a mass
transit company operating exclusively within the territorial limits of a
municipal corporation, or within such limits and the territorial limits of
municipal corporations immediately contiguous to such municipal corporation,
nor a common passenger carrier certified by the public utilities commission
unless such bus is devoted exclusively to the transportation of children to and
from a school session or a school function;
      (2)   A van or bus used by a licensed child care center or type A family
child care home to transport children from the child care center or type A
family child care home to a school if the van or bus does not have more than 15
children in the van or bus at any time;
      (3)   An alternative vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.76.
   SEMITRAILER. Every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or property
with another and separate motor vehicle so that in operation a part of its own
weight or that of its load, or both, rests upon and is carried by another
vehicle.
   SHARED-USE PATH. A bikeway outside the traveled way and physically separated
from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and either within
the highway right-of-way or within an independent alignment. A shared-use path
also may be used by pedestrians, including skaters, joggers, users of manual
and motorized wheelchairs, and other authorized motorized and non-motorized
users. A SHARED-USE PATH does not include any trail that is intended to be used
primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or other similar uses,
or any other single track or natural surface trial that has historically been
reserved for non-motorized use.
   SHOULDER. A longitudinal area contiguous with the traveled way that is used
for accommodating vehicles that are stopped for an emergency and for lateral
support of base and surface courses; graded for emergency stopping; either
paved or unpaved; and when paved, may be open for part-time travel by some or
all vehicles or may also be available for use by pedestrians or bicycles in the
absence of other pedestrian or bicycle facilities.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines or easements of private
property, that is paved or improved, and is intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   SITE ROADWAY OPEN TO PUBLIC TRAVEL. A roadway or bikeway on site of a
shopping center, office park, airport, school, university, sports arena,
recreational park, or other similar business, government, or recreation
facility that is publicly or privately owned but where the public is allowed to
travel without full-time access restrictions. The term does not include a
roadway where access is restricted at all times by gates or guards to
residents, employees, or other specifically authorized persons, a parking area,
a driving aisle within a parking area, or a private highway-rail grade
crossing.
   STATE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   STATE HIGHWAY. A highway under the jurisdiction of the Department of
Transportation, outside the limits of municipalities, provided that the
authority conferred upon the Director of Transportation in R.C. § 5511.01 to
erect state highway route markers and signs directing traffic shall not be
modified by R.C. §§ 4511.01 through 4511.79 and 4511.99.
   STATE ROUTE. Every highway which is designated with an official state route
number and so marked.
   STOP. When required, means a complete cessation of movement.
   STOP INTERSECTION. Any intersection at one or more entrances of which stop
signs are erected.
   STOPPING or STANDING. When prohibited, means any halting of a vehicle, even
momentarily, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. A general term for denoting a public way for purposes of
travel by vehicles and vulnerable road users, including the entire area within
the right-of-way.
   THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every street or highway as provided in R.C. § 4511.65, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   THRUWAY. A through highway whose entire roadway is reserved for through
traffic and on which roadway parking is prohibited.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars, and
other devices, either singly or together, while using for purposes of travel
any highway or site roadway open to public travel.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE. A flagger, sign, signal, marking, channelization
device, or other device that uses colors, shapes, symbols, words, sounds, or
tactile information for the primary purpose of communicating a regulatory,
warning, or guidance message to road users on a street, highway, site roadway
open to public travel, pedestrian facility, bikeway, or pathway.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL. A highway traffic signal placed at an intersection,
movable bridge, fire station, mid-block crosswalk, alternating one-way sections
of a single lane road, private driveway, or other location that requires
conflicting traffic to be directed to stop and permitted to proceed in an
orderly manner. The term includes a vehicular signal indication, a pedestrian
signal indication, and a bicycle symbol signal indication. The term does not
include an emergency-vehicle hybrid beacon or a pedestrian hybrid beacon.
   TRAILER. Every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or property
wholly on its own structure, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, including
any vehicle when formed by or operated as a combination of a semitrailer and a
vehicle of the dolly type, such as that commonly known as a trailer dolly, a
vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production
materials between a local place of storage or supply and the farm when drawn or
towed on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour and a
vehicle designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of
storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a
street or highway for a distance of more than ten miles or at a speed of more
than 25 miles per hour.
   TRAIN. One or more locomotives coupled, with or without cars, that operates
on rails or tracks and to which all other traffic is required by law to yield
the right-of-way at highway-rail grade crossings.
   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers, designed and
used to carry property.
   TWO-STAGE BICYCLE TURN BOX. A designated area at an intersection that is
intended to provide bicyclists a place to wait for traffic to clear before
proceeding in a different direction of travel.
   TYPE A FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME. Has the same meaning as set forth in R.C. §
5104.01.
   URBAN DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including any street or
highway which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry or
dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of
one-quarter of a mile or more, and the character of the territory is indicated
by official traffic-control devices.
   VEHICLE. Every device, including a bicycle, motorized bicycle and an
electric bicycle, in, upon, or by which any person or property may be
transported or drawn upon a highway. The term does not include any motorized
wheelchair, any electric personal assistive mobility device, any low-speed
micromobility device, any personal delivery device as defined in R.C. §
4511.513, any device that is moved by power collected from overhead electric
trolley wires or that is used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, or
any device that is moved by human power.
   WASTE COLLECTION VEHICLE. A vehicle used in the collection of garbage,
refuse, trash, or recyclable materials.
   WILDLIFE OFFICER. An officer designated pursuant to R.C. § 1531.13.
(R.C. § 4511.01)
CHAPTER 404: ENFORCEMENT; IMPOUNDING
Section
404.01 Resisting an enforcing official
404.02 Road workers, motor vehicles and equipment excepted
404.03 Emergency, public safety and coroners’ vehicles excepted
404.04 Application to persons riding, driving animals upon roadway
404.05 Impounding of vehicles; redemption
404.06 Traffic direction in emergencies; obedience to school guards
404.07 Application to drivers of government vehicles
404.08 Authority of property owner
404.09 Vehicle storage charge
404.10 Traffic control in construction areas
404.11 Furnishing false information incident to traffic citation
404.99 Penalty
§ 404.01 RESISTING AN ENFORCING OFFICIAL.
   (a)   No person shall resist, hinder, obstruct or abuse any sheriff,
constable or other official while that official is attempting to arrest
offenders under any provision of this traffic code. No person shall interfere
with any person charged under any provision of this traffic code with the
enforcement of the law relative to public highways.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.36)
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the hindrance,
obstruction, resistance or interference alleged consisted of constitutionally
protected speech only.
(Prior Code, § 404.02)
§ 404.02 ROAD WORKERS, MOTOR VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT EXCEPTED.
   (a)   The provisions of this traffic code, except for §
434.01, do not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles, and other equipment
while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway within an area
designated by traffic-control devices, but apply to those persons and vehicles
when traveling to or from that work.
   (b)   The driver of a highway maintenance vehicle owned by this state or any
political subdivision of this state, while the driver is engaged in the
performance of official duties upon a street or highway, provided the highway
maintenance vehicle is equipped with flashing lights and any other markings as
are required by law and the lights are in operation when the driver and vehicle
are so engaged, shall be exempt from criminal prosecution for violations of
R.C. §§ 4511.25, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.33,
4511.35, 4511.66, 4513.02 and 5577.01 to 5577.09, and any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (c)   (1)   This section does not exempt a driver of a highway maintenance
vehicle from civil liability arising from a violation of R.C. § 4511.22,
4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.66
or 4513.02 or 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
      (2)   This section does not exempt a driver of a vehicle who is not a
state employee and who is engaged in the transport of highway maintenance
equipment from criminal liability for a violation of R.C. §§ 5577.01 through
5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (d)   As used in this section, “engaged in the performance of official
duties” includes driving a highway maintenance vehicle to and from the
manufacturer or vehicle maintenance provider and transporting a highway
maintenance vehicle, equipment, or materials to and from a work location.
(R.C. § 4511.04) (Prior Code, § 404.03)
§ 404.03 EMERGENCY, PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORONERS’ VEHICLES EXCEPTED.
   (a)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4511.12, 4511.13, 4511.131, 4511.132,
4511.14, 4511.202, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25, 4511.26,
4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.34,
4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41, 4511.42,
4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59,
4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.62, 4511.66, 4511.68, 4511.681 and 4511.69, and any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do not apply to the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle if the emergency vehicle or public
safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle and if the driver of the vehicles is giving an audible signal by siren,
exhaust whistle or bell. This section does not relieve the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.041)
   (b)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29,
4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38 and
4511.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do not apply to
a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator operating a motor vehicle
in accordance with R.C. § 4513.171 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance. This division does not relieve a coroner, deputy coroner or
coroner’s investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to drive with
due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.042)
(Prior Code, § 404.035)
§ 404.04 APPLICATION TO PERSONS RIDING, DRIVING ANIMALS UPON ROADWAY.
   Every person riding, driving or leading an animal upon a roadway is subject
to the provisions of this traffic code, applicable to the driver of a vehicle,
except those provisions of this traffic code which by their nature are
inapplicable.
(R.C. § 4511.05)
§ 404.05 IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES; REDEMPTION.
   (a)   Police officers are authorized to provide for the removal and
impounding of a vehicle under the following circumstances:
      (1)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any street, bridge or
causeway and is so illegally parked so as to constitute a hazard or obstruction
to the normal movement of traffic, or so as to unreasonably interfere with
street cleaning or snow removal operations;
      (2)   When any motor vehicle, including an abandoned junk motor vehicle,
as defined in R.C. § 4513.63, is left on private residential property, as
defined in R.C. § 4513.60, or on private agricultural property, for at least
four consecutive hours without the permission of the person having the right to
the possession of the property, or on a public street or other property open to
the public for purposes of vehicular travel, or upon or within the right-of-way
of any road or highway, for 48 consecutive hours or longer, without
notification to the Police Chief of the reasons for leaving the vehicle in that
place, except that when such a motor vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic, it may be ordered into storage immediately;
      (3)   When any vehicle has been stolen or operated without the consent of
the owner;
      (4)   When any vehicle displays illegal license plates or fails to
display the current lawfully required license plates;
      (5)   When any vehicle has been used in or connected with the commission
of a felony;
      (6)   When any vehicle has been damaged or wrecked so as to be inoperable
or violates equipment provisions of this traffic code whereby its continued
operation would constitute a condition hazardous to life, limb or property;
      (7)   When any vehicle is left unattended due to the removal of an ill,
injured or arrested operator;
      (8)   When any vehicle has been operated by any person who has failed to
stop in case of an accident or collision;
      (9)   When any vehicle has been operated by any person who is driving
without a lawful license or while his or her license has been suspended or
revoked;
      (10)   When any vehicle is found for which two or more citation tags for
violations of this traffic code have been issued and the owner or operator
thereof has failed to respond to the citation tags as lawfully required.
   (b)   Any vehicle removed under authority of division (a)(2) of this section
shall be ordered into storage and/or disposed of as provided under R.C. §§
4513.60 et seq. Any other vehicle removed under authority of this section shall
be ordered into storage and the Police Department shall forthwith notify the
registered vehicle owner of the fact of the removal and impounding, reasons
therefor and the place of storage. Any person desiring to redeem an impounded
vehicle shall appear at the Police Department to furnish satisfactory evidence
of identity and ownership or right to possession. Prior to issuance of a
release form, the claimant, owner or operator shall either pay the amount due
for any fines for violations on account of which the vehicle was impounded or,
as the court may require, post a bond in an amount set by the court, to appear
to answer to the violations. The pound operator shall release the vehicle upon
the receipt of the release form and payment of all towage and storage charges.
   (c)   No owner or operator shall remove an impounded vehicle from the place
of storage without complying with the above procedure. Possession of a vehicle
which has been impounded and unlawfully taken from the place of storage, by the
owner or operator, shall constitute prima facie evidence that it was so removed
by the owner or operator.
§ 404.06 TRAFFIC DIRECTION IN EMERGENCIES; OBEDIENCE TO SCHOOL GUARDS.
   (a)   Police officers shall direct or regulate traffic in accordance with
the provisions of this traffic code, provided that, in the event of fire or
other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, they are
authorized to direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the
provisions of this traffic code. Firefighters, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity. The direction of traffic may be by word or audible signal, by gesture
or visible signal or by any combination thereof. No person shall fail to comply
with any lawful order or direction of any police officer or firefighter issued
pursuant to this section.
   (b)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any school crossing guard invested with authority to direct, control or
regulate traffic in the vicinity of the school to which the guard may be
assigned.
§ 404.07 APPLICATION TO DRIVERS OF GOVERNMENT VEHICLES.
   The provisions of this traffic code applicable to the drivers of vehicles
shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United
States, any state or any political subdivision thereof, including this
municipality, except as may be otherwise provided by law and subject to such
specific exceptions as are set forth with reference to authorized emergency and
public safety vehicles.
§ 404.08 AUTHORITY OF PROPERTY OWNER.
   The provisions of this Traffic Code do not prevent the owner of real
property, used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel by permission of
the owner and not as a matter of right, from prohibiting such use or from
requiring additional conditions to those specified in this Traffic Code, or
otherwise regulating such use as may seem best to such owner.
(R.C. § 4511.08) (Ord. 1010, passed 12-28-1954)
§ 404.09 VEHICLE STORAGE CHARGE.
   (a)   The facilities located at 150 Avon Belden Road are hereby authorized
to be used for the storage of motor vehicles which are in the temporary custody
of the Police Department.
   (b)   The storage charge for each such motor vehicle which is placed in such
facilities shall be as set forth in
Chapter 208 of the Administration Code - the General Fee Schedule.
(Ord. 106-89, passed 6-12-1989)
§ 404.10 TRAFFIC CONTROL IN CONSTRUCTION AREAS.
   (a)   If the ordinary and usual flow of motor vehicle traffic within the
city on Lake Road, Walker Road, Electric Boulevard, Miller Road, Moore Road,
Avon Belden Road, Jaycox Road and/or Lear Road is substantially impeded as the
direct and proximate result of construction or utility work being performed by
a private general contractor, traffic control on such roads at such times shall
be performed by a uniformed, off-duty police officer pursuant to an individual
personal service contract between such officer and the general contractor
involved.
   (b)   Whenever open competitive bidding is required by applicable law for a
public project, the traffic control terms as provided in division (a) of this
section shall be included in the bid instructions and specifications to be
publicly advertised for such public project.
   (c)   If, after reasonable steps are taken by the general contractor
involved to obtain such services, no uniformed off-duty police officers are
available for the times required during which such construction or utility work
is being performed, then the traffic control terms as provided in division (a)
of this section shall be deemed to have been fulfilled and other traffic
control services may be utilized in order to protect and maintain the public
safety in the traffic impeded area.
(Ord. 171-89, passed 7-31-1989)
§ 404.11 FURNISHING FALSE INFORMATION INCIDENT TO TRAFFIC CITATION.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly present, display or orally communicate a
false name, Social Security number or date of birth to a law enforcement
officer who is in the process of issuing to the person a traffic ticket or
complaint.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4513.361)
§ 404.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 406: TRAFFIC CONTROL
Section
406.01 Authority and considerations for placement of devices
406.02 Conformity with State Manual
406.03 Powers of Police Chief
406.04 Posting of signs and signals required
406.05 Chief’s powers not limited
406.06 Records of Chief
406.07 Reservation of power to Council
406.08 Violations subject to general code penalty
§ 406.01 AUTHORITY AND CONSIDERATIONS FOR PLACEMENT OF DEVICES.
   The Police Chief is hereby authorized to place and maintain traffic control
devices upon any street or highway under municipal jurisdiction as are
necessary to effectuate the provisions of this Traffic Code, or to regulate,
warn or guide traffic, and such other traffic control devices as such person
shall deem necessary for the proper control of traffic. The Chief shall
determine the location, timing and coordination of such traffic control devices
upon the basis of an applicable engineering or traffic investigation and shall
consider the following:
   (a)   The maximum safety and protection of vehicular and pedestrian traffic
from physical injury or property damage;
   (b)   The existing and potential traffic movement, volume and conditions;
   (c)   The location and frequency of accidents, including studies of remedial
measures;
   (d)   The recommendations of the Fire Chief;
   (e)   The acceleration of transportation of persons and property by vehicles
so as to expedite travel and promote public safety;
   (f)   The convenience and welfare of the general public in parking,
standing, loading and unloading, and the use of the streets as affecting
business concerns and places of assembly; and
   (g)   Economy in the expenditure of money.
(Ord. 94-74, passed 6-10-1974)
§ 406.02 CONFORMITY WITH STATE MANUAL.
   All traffic control devices placed pursuant to the provisions of this
Traffic Code shall conform to the Ohio Manual and Specifications for a Uniform
System of Traffic-Control Devices, as set forth in R.C. § 4511.09.
(Ord. 94-74, passed 6-10-1974)
§ 406.03 POWERS OF POLICE CHIEF.
   The Police Chief is hereby authorized to:
   (a)   Designate any street or highway as a through street or highway and
require that all vehicles stop or yield the right-of-way as may be required
before entering the same;
   (b)   Designate any intersection as a stop intersection and require all
vehicles to stop at one or more entrances to such intersection;
   (c)   Designate any intersection as a yield intersection and require all
vehicles to yield the right-of-way as required;
   (d)   Designate any street as a one-way street and require that all vehicles
thereon be moved in one specific direction;
   (e)   Designate and mark lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular
direction regardless of the centerline of the roadway;
   (f)   Erect signs directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane or
allocating specified lanes to traffic moving in the same direction;
   (g)   Designate those portions of any street, where overtaking and passing
other traffic or driving to the left of the center or centerline of the roadway
would be especially hazardous, by appropriate signs or markings on the street
to indicate the beginning and end of such zones. Such zones may be marked by an
auxiliary yellow line placed parallel and to the right of the normal centerline
or offset marked lane line;
   (h)   Place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections
and require that a specific course of direction be traveled by vehicles
proceeding in lanes by either permitting, prohibiting or requiring turns at
such intersections;
   (i)   Install traffic control devices, signals and signs at any location to
regulate traffic;
   (j)   Establish safety zones, crosswalks, zones of quiet and play streets;
   (k)   Close any street or portion thereof to vehicular traffic which is in
the process of construction, reconstruction or repair;
   (l)   Determine the location of any necessary bus stops and taxicab stands;
   (m)   Determine the location and limiting hours of truck loading zones;
   (n)   Designate dangerous railroad crossings and erect stop signs thereat;
   (o)   Erect “No U Turn” signs at any location to prohibit a vehicle from
being turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction;
   (p)   Regulate or prohibit the stopping, standing and parking of vehicles on
streets, alleys or public property by erecting signs plainly indicating the
prohibitions, restrictions or limitations; and
   (q)   Designate individual parking spaces by markings, which may either be
parallel or at a prescribed angle to the curb or edge of the roadway.
(Ord. 94-74, passed 6-10-1974)
§ 406.04 POSTING OF SIGNS AND SIGNALS REQUIRED.
   No provision of this chapter shall be effective until signs, signals,
markings or other devices giving notice of such local traffic regulations are
posted upon or at the entrance to the street or part thereof affected, as may
be most appropriate, so that in a proper position they are sufficiently legible
to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
(Ord. 94-74, passed 6-10-1974)
§ 406.05 CHIEF’S POWERS NOT LIMITED.
   The powers of the Police Chief shall not be limited by the specific
enumeration of subjects contained in this chapter.
(Ord. 94-74, passed 6-10-1974)
§ 406.06 RECORDS OF CHIEF.
   The Police Chief shall keep a record of all rules, regulations and
proceedings promulgated in connection with this chapter.
(Ord. 94-74, passed 6-10-1974)
§ 406.07 RESERVATION OF POWER TO COUNCIL.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, Council may override any
decision of the Police Chief and may assume any of the powers delegated to such
person, by a resolution adopted by a vote of a majority of the members duly
elected thereto. Upon the adoption of any such resolution, the same may be
changed only by an amending or repealing resolution adopted by Council.
(Ord. 94-74, passed 6-10-1974)
§ 406.08 VIOLATIONS SUBJECT TO GENERAL CODE PENALTY.
   Any person violating the rules and regulations promulgated in connection
with this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be subject to the penalties provided for in §§
408.01 and
408.02.
(Ord. 94-74, passed 6-10-1974)
CHAPTER 408: PENALTIES
Section
408.01 Penalties for misdemeanor
408.02 General code penalty
408.03 Suspension of driver’s license
§ 408.01 PENALTIES FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor shall be sentenced in accordance with §
698.02.
§ 408.02 GENERAL CODE PENALTY.
   (a)   Generally. Whoever violates any provision of this traffic code for
which no penalty otherwise is provided in the section violated is guilty of one
of the following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this
section, a minor misdemeanor;
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more predicate motor vehicle or
traffic offenses, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.99)
   (b)   Violations committed while distracted.
      (1)   As used in this section and each section referenced in division (b)
(2) of this section, all of the following apply:
         A.   “Distracted” means doing either of the following while operating
a vehicle:
            1.   Using an electronic wireless communications device, as defined
in R.C. § 4511.204, in violation of that section.
            2.   Engaging in any activity that is not necessary to the
operation of a vehicle and impairs, or reasonably would be expected to impair,
the ability of the operator to drive the vehicle safely.
         B.   “Distracted” does not include operating a motor vehicle while
wearing an earphone or earplug over or in both ears at the same time. A person
who so wears earphones or earplugs may be charged with a violation of R.C. §
4511.84, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
         C.   “Distracted” does not include conducting any activity while
operating a utility service vehicle or a vehicle for or on behalf of a utility,
provided that the driver of the vehicle is acting in response to an emergency,
power outage, or a circumstance affecting the health or safety of individuals.
As used in this division (b)(1)C.:
            1.   “Utility” means an entity specified in R.C. § 4905.03(A), (C),
(D), (E), or (G).
            2.   “Utility service vehicle” means a vehicle owned or operated by
a utility.
      (2)   If an offender violates R.C. § 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12,
4511.121, 4511.132, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25,
4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33,
4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41,
4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451, 4511.46, 4511.47,
4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.64,
4511.71, 4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, or 4511.73, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
violation, the offender is subject to the applicable penalty for the violation
and, notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28, is subject to an additional fine of not
more than $100 as follows:
         A.   1.   Subject to Traffic Rule 13, if a law enforcement officer
issues an offender a ticket, citation, or summons for a violation of any of the
aforementioned sections of the Ohio Revised Code, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that indicates that the offender was distracted
while committing the violation and that the distracting activity was a
contributing factor to the commission of the violation, the offender may enter
a written plea of guilty and waive the offender’s right to contest the ticket,
citation, or summons in a trial provided that the offender pays the total
amount of the fine established for the violation and pays the additional fine
of $100.
            2.   In lieu of payment of the additional fine of $100, the
offender instead may elect to attend a distracted driving safety course, the
duration and contents of which shall be established by the Ohio Director of
Public Safety. If the offender attends and successfully completes the course,
the offender shall be issued written evidence that the offender successfully
completed the course. The offender shall be required to pay the total amount of
the fine established for the violation, but shall not be required to pay the
additional fine of $100, so long as the offender submits to the court both the
offender’s payment in full and such written evidence within 90 days of the
underlying violation that resulted in the imposition of the additional fine
under division (b) of this section.
         B.   1.   If the offender appears in person to contest the ticket,
citation, or summons in a trial and the offender pleads guilty to or is
convicted of the violation, the court, in addition to all other penalties
provided by law, may impose the applicable penalty for the violation and may
impose the additional fine of not more than $100.
            2.   If the court imposes upon the offender the applicable penalty
for the violation and an additional fine of not more than $100, the court shall
inform the offender that, in lieu of payment of the additional fine of not more
than $100, the offender instead may elect to attend the distracted driving
safety course described in division (b)(2)A. of this section. If the offender
elects the course option and attends and successfully completes the course, the
offender shall be issued written evidence that the offender successfully
completed the course. The offender shall be required to pay the total amount of
the fine established for the violation, but shall not be required to pay the
additional fine of not more than $100, so long as the offender submits to the
court the offender’s payment and such written evidence within 90 days of the
underlying violation that resulted in the imposition of the additional fine
under division (b) of this section.
      (3)   If a law enforcement officer issues an offender a ticket, citation,
or summons for a violation of any of the sections of the Revised Code listed in
division (b)(2) of this section that indicates that the offender was distracted
while committing the violation and that the distracting activity was a
contributing factor to the commission of the violation, the officer shall do
both of the following:
         A.   Report the issuance of the ticket, citation, or summons to the
officer’s law enforcement agency;
         B.   Ensure that such report indicates the offender’s race.
(R.C. § 4511.991)
§ 408.03 SUSPENSION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4510.07 or in any other provision of
the Revised Code, whenever an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of any provision of this traffic code that is substantially
equivalent to a provision of the Revised Code, and a court is permitted or
required to suspend a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit for a violation of that provision, a court, in addition to any other
penalties authorized by law, may suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege for the period of
time the court determines appropriate, but the period of suspension imposed for
the violation of the provision of this traffic code shall not exceed the period
of suspension that is permitted or required to be imposed for the violation of
the provision of the Revised Code to which the provision of this traffic code
is substantially equivalent.
(R.C. § 4510.05)
TITLE FOUR - Public Ways and Traffic Control Devices
      
Chap. 412. Obstruction and Special Uses of Public Ways.
      
Chap. 414. Traffic Control Devices.
      
Chap. 416. Pedestrians.
CHAPTER 412: OBSTRUCTIONS AND SPECIAL USES OF PUBLIC WAYS
Section
412.01 Placing injurious material or obstruction in street
412.02 Zones of quiet
412.03 Play streets
412.04 Toy vehicles on roadway
412.05 Freeway use prohibited by pedestrians, bicycles and animals
412.06 Damaging surface of streets
412.07 Parades
412.08 Depositing snow on pavement, sidewalks or tree lawns
412.99 Penalty
§ 412.01 PLACING INJURIOUS MATERIAL OR OBSTRUCTION IN STREET.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a
highway, lane, road, street or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or
other articles which may damage or injure any person, vehicle or animal
traveling along or upon the highway, except such substances that may be placed
upon the roadway by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof.
      (2)   Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any
highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the
same.
      (3)   Any person authorized to remove a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a
highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the
highway from the vehicle.
      (4)   No person shall place any obstruction in or upon a highway without
proper authority.
   (b)   No person, with intent to cause physical harm to a person or a
vehicle, shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a highway, lane, road,
street or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or other articles which
may damage or injure any person, vehicle or animal traveling along or upon the
highway, except substances that may be placed upon the roadway by proper
authority for the repair or construction thereof.
   (c)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (a) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4511.74)
§ 412.02 ZONES OF QUIET.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, no person
operating a vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning
device of the vehicle except in an emergency.
§ 412.03 PLAY STREETS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that any street or part
thereof is a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street
or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose
residences are within the closed area and then the drivers shall exercise the
greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
§ 412.04 TOY VEHICLES ON ROADWAY.
   No person riding upon any coaster, roller skates, sled, toy vehicle or other
similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a
crosswalk, and when so crossing the person shall be granted all of the rights
and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This
section shall not apply to any street set aside as a play street.
§ 412.05 FREEWAY USE PROHIBITED BY PEDESTRIANS, BICYCLES AND ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, shall:
      (1)   As a pedestrian, occupy any space within the limits of the right-
of-way of a freeway, except: in a rest area; on a facility that is separated
from the roadway and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately
marked for pedestrian use; in the performance of public works or official
duties; as a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of a
motor vehicle; or to obtain assistance.
      (2)   Occupy any space within the limits of the right-of-way of a
freeway, with: an animal-drawn vehicle; a ridden or led animal; herded animals;
a pushcart; a bicycle, except on a facility that is separated from the roadway
and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately marked for
bicycle use; an electric bicycle; a bicycle with motor attached; a motor-driven
cycle with a motor which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower; an
agricultural tractor; farm machinery; except in the performance of public works
or official duties.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.051)
§ 412.06 DAMAGING SURFACE OF STREETS.
   No person shall so operate any vehicle, machine or device upon any street,
road or thoroughfare of the municipality at any time in such manner as to
injure, deface or destroy the traveled surface of the street, road or
thoroughfare.
(Ord. 1010, passed 12-28-1954)
§ 412.07 PARADES.
   (a)   As used in this section, PARADE means a group of ten or more persons
on foot, or three or more vehicles or equestrians, standing or moving upon any
public highway or ground under common control or direction. This definition
does not include governmental officers or employees acting in their capacity as
such, or persons under their direction, any military organization, any funeral
procession or any person while engaging in his or her lawful employment in
business or trade.
   (b)   No person shall take part in any parade unless a license for the
parade has been issued as provided in this section, except that no permit is
required for any person who is engaged in lawful picketing.
   (c)   Any person may apply to the Mayor for permission to hold a parade. The
application shall be in writing and in duplicate, submitted to the Mayor not
less than ten days before the proposed time of the parade and shall state:
      (1)   The correct name and residence address of the applicant and of all
other persons who will have complete or partial charge of the parade;
      (2)   The proposed time and route;
      (3)   The approximate number of participants and how many will be on
foot, mounted or in vehicles;
      (4)   The name of the organization, if any, represented in the parade and
the names and addresses of such officers in charge or control of the
participants in the parade for each organization;
      (5)   The purpose of that parade; and
      (6)   A complete copy of any legend proposed to be displayed on any sign,
banner or otherwise in connection with the parade.
   (d)   The Mayor shall consider the application and pass upon the same within
72 hours of its submission. If he or she finds that the proposed parade will
result in disturbance of the peace, a violation of any law, unreasonable
interference with public travel, unreasonable demand upon the personnel of the
Police, Fire or Public Works Department or unreasonable interference with the
right of quiet enjoyment by the residents in the use of their property, he or
she shall refuse to permit it. Otherwise, he or she shall issue a permit
therefor, which shall be attached to or written upon one copy of the
application and given to the applicant.
   (e)   When a permit has been issued, no person shall take part in the
management or direction of the parade held thereunder unless he or she is named
in the application; participate in the parade at any other time or on any other
route than that named in the application; participate in the parade if it
contains a number of participants, vehicles or animals more than 50% greater
than that stated in the application; or display by sign, banner or otherwise
any legend not completely set forth in the application.
   (f)   No person shall knowingly give any false or misleading information in
any application for a parade permit.
   (g)   No person shall drive a vehicle through a parade, except with the
permission of a police officer.
(Ord. 181-64, passed 12-31-1964; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014)
§ 412.08 DEPOSITING SNOW ON PAVEMENT, SIDEWALKS OR TREE LAWNS.
    (a)   No person removing snow from any driveway or sidewalk within the city
shall deposit the same on the pavement or sidewalk of any public street or on
any tree lawn in any public street, except the tree lawn immediately in front
of the premises from which the snow is removed.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
408.01.
(Ord. 72-99, passed 4-12-1999)
§ 412.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 414: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Section
414.01 Obedience to traffic control devices
414.02 Through streets; stop and yield right-of- way signs
414.03 Traffic control signal terms and lights
414.04 Signal to control lane direction of travel
414.05 Pedestrian control signals
414.06 Unauthorized signs and signals, hiding from view, advertising
414.07 Alteration, injury, removal of traffic control devices
414.08 Unauthorized possession or sale of devices
414.09 Signal preemption devices; prohibitions
414.10 Bicycle symbol signal indications
 
414.99 Penalty
§ 414.01 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   (a)   (1)   No pedestrian or driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
instructions of any traffic-control device placed in accordance with the
provisions of this traffic code, unless at the time otherwise directed by a
police officer.
      (2)   No provision of this traffic code for which signs are required
shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the
alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular
section of this traffic code does not state that signs are required, that
section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place.
(R.C. § 4511.12(A))
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (c) of this section, any operator
of a commercial motor vehicle, upon approaching a scale location established
for the purpose of determining the weight of the vehicle and its load, shall
comply with any traffic-control device or the order of a peace officer
directing the vehicle to proceed to be weighed or otherwise inspected.
      (2)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle, upon bypassing a scale
location in accordance with division (c) of this section, shall comply with an
order of a peace officer to stop the vehicle to verify the use and operation of
an electronic clearance device.
   (c)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle that is equipped with an
electronic clearance device authorized by the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol under R.C. § 4549.081 may bypass a scale location, regardless of
the instruction of a traffic-control device to enter the scale facility, if
either of the following apply:
      (1)   The in-cab transponder displays a green light or other affirmative
visual signal and also sounds an affirmative audible signal;
      (2)   Any other criterion established by the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol is met.
   (d)   Any peace officer may order the operator of a commercial motor vehicle
that bypasses a scale location to stop the vehicle to verify the use and
operation of an electronic clearance device.
   (e)   As used in this section, “commercial motor vehicle” means any
combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating or an actual gross
vehicle weight of more than 10,000 pounds if the vehicle is used in interstate
or intrastate commerce to transport property and also means any vehicle that is
transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is required pursuant to
49 C.F.R. Parts 100 to 180.
(R.C. § 4511.121(A) - (C), (E))
   (f)   No person shall use an electronic clearance device if the device or
its use is not in compliance with rules of the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol.
(R.C. § 4549.081(B))
   (g)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. If
the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting activity
is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the offender is
subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.12(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (b) of this
section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (b)
of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender commits the offense while
distracted and the distracting activity is a contributing factor to the
commission of the offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine
established under § 408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.121(D))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (f) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
third degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.081(C))
§ 414.02 THROUGH STREETS; STOP AND YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY SIGNS.
   (a)   All state routes are hereby designated as through highways, provided
that stop signs, yield signs, or highway traffic signals shall be erected at
all intersections with such through highways by the Department of
Transportation as to highways under its jurisdiction and by local authorities
as to highways under their jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this
section. Where two or more state routes that are through highways intersect,
and no highway traffic signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall
be erected at one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local
authorities having jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section.
Whenever the Director of Transportation determines on the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation that stop signs are necessary to stop
traffic on a through highway for safe and efficient operation, nothing in this
section shall be construed to prevent such installations. When circumstances
warrant, the Director also may omit stop signs on roadways intersecting through
highways under the Director's jurisdiction. Before the Director either installs
or removes a stop sign under this division, the Director shall give notice, in
writing, of that proposed action to the affected local authority at least 30
days before installing or removing the stop sign.
   (b)   Other streets or highways, or portions thereof, are hereby designated
as through highways if they are within the municipality, if they have a
continuous length of more than one mile between the limits of the street or
highway or portion thereof, and if they have stop or yield signs or highway
traffic signals at the entrances of the majority of intersecting streets or
highways. For purposes of this section, the limits of the street or highway, or
portion thereof, shall be the municipal corporation line, the physical terminus
of the street or highway, or any point on the streets or highway at which
vehicular traffic thereon is required by regulatory signs to stop or yield to
traffic on the intersecting street, provided, that in residence districts, the
municipality may by ordinance designate such street or highway, or portion
thereof, not to be a through highway and thereafter the affected residence
district shall be indicated by official traffic control devices. Where two or
more through highways designated under this division intersect and no highway
traffic signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall be erected at
one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local authorities having
jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section.
   (c)   The Department or local authorities having jurisdiction need not erect
stop signs at intersections they find to be so constructed as to permit traffic
to safely enter a through highway without coming to a stop. Signs shall be
erected at such intersections indicating that the operator of a vehicle shall
yield the right-of-way to or merge with all traffic proceeding on the through
highway.
   (d)   Local authorities, with reference to highways under their
jurisdiction, may designate additional through highways, and shall erect stop
signs, yield signs, or highway traffic signals at all streets and highways
intersecting such through highways, or may designate any intersection as a stop
or yield intersection, and shall erect like signs at one or more entrances to
the intersection.
(R.C. § 4511.65)
§ 414.03 TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL TERMS AND LIGHTS.
   Highway traffic signal indications for vehicles and pedestrians shall have
the following meanings:
   (a)   Steady green signal indication.
      (1)   A.   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal indication
are permitted to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a u-
turn movement except as such movement is modified by a lane-use sign, turn
prohibition sign, lane marking, roadway design, separate turn signal
indication, or other traffic control device. Such vehicular traffic, including
vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the
right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         B.   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn
movement to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching
from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard
during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the
intersection.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal indication, displayed
alone or in combination with another signal indication, are permitted to
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications displayed at
the same time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left
or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the
following:
         A.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
         B.   Other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (3)   A.   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication,
as provided in R.C. § 4511.14, pedestrians facing a circular green signal
indication are permitted to proceed across the roadway within any marked or
unmarked associated crosswalk. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection or so close as to create an immediate
hazard at the time that the green signal indication is first displayed.
         B.   Pedestrians facing a green arrow signal indication, unless
otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic control
device, shall not cross the roadway.
   (b)   Steady yellow signal indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow signal indication
are thereby warned that the related green movement or the related flashing
arrow movement is being terminated or that a steady red signal indication will
be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the
intersection. The provisions governing vehicular operation under the movement
being terminated shall continue to apply while the steady circular yellow
signal indication is displayed.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow arrow signal indication is
thereby warned that the related green arrow movement or the related flashing
arrow movement is being terminated. The provisions governing vehicular
operation under the movement being terminated shall continue to apply while the
steady yellow arrow signal indication is displayed.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal
indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic control device, shall not start to
cross the roadway.
   (c)   Steady red signal indication.
      (1)   A.   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal
indication, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted
by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, traffic shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before
entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication
to proceed is displayed except as provided in divisions (c)(1), (c)(2), and (c)
(3) of this section.
         B.   Except when a traffic control device is in place prohibiting a
turn on red or a steady red arrow signal indication is displayed, vehicular
traffic facing a steady circular red signal indication is permitted, after
stopping, to enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-
way street into a one-way street. The right to proceed with the turn shall be
subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a stop
sign.
      (2)   A.   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal indication
shall not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow
and, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted by
another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before entering the
intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication or other
traffic control device permitting the movement indicated by such red arrow is
displayed.
         B.   When a traffic control device is in place permitting a turn on a
steady red arrow signal indication, vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow
indication is permitted, after stopping, to enter the intersection to turn
right, or to turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street. The right
to proceed with the turn shall be limited to the direction indicated by the
arrow and shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a
stop at a stop sign.
      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic control device, pedestrians facing
a steady circular red or steady red arrow signal indication shall not enter the
roadway.
      (4)   Local authorities by ordinance, or the Director of Transportation
on state highways, may prohibit a right or a left turn against a steady red
signal at any intersection, which shall be effective when signs giving notice
thereof are posted at the intersection.
   (d)   Flashing green signal indication. A flashing green signal indication
has no meaning and shall not be used.
   (e)   Flashing yellow signal indication.
      (1)   A.   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing circular yellow signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter
the intersection to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a u-
turn movement except as such movement is modified by lane-use signs, turn
prohibition signs, lane markings, roadway design, separate turn signal
indications, or other traffic control devices. Such vehicular traffic,
including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall
yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         B.   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn to
the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (2)   A.   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing yellow arrow signal indication, displayed alone or in combination with
another signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter the intersection
only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or other such movement as is
permitted by other signal indications displayed at the same time. Such
vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn,
shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         B.   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn to
the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing any flashing yellow signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right- of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing yellow signal indication is first displayed.
      (4)   When a flashing circular yellow signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory or warning requirements of the other traffic
control device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently
applicable.
   (f)   Flashing red signal indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing circular red signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. The right to proceed
shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing any flashing red signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right- of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing red signal indication is first displayed.
      (3)   When a flashing circular red signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory requirements of the other traffic control
device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently applicable.
Use of this signal indication shall be limited to supplementing stop, do not
enter, or wrong way signs, and to applications where compliance with the
supplemented traffic control device requires a stop at a designated point.
      (4)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing red arrow signal indication and if intending to turn in the direction
indicated by the arrow, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if there
is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. The right to proceed
shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.
   (g)   Transit Vehicle Signal Indication.
      (1)   Light rail and mass transit system bus traffic, on an approach to
an intersection from a designated busway or other designated transit vehicle
lane or tracks shall do all of the following:
         A.   Stop when facing a steady horizontal white line;
         B.   proceed straight ahead when facing a steady vertical white line;
         C.   Only turn or proceed left when facing a steady diagonal white
line that begins in the lower right corner and angles up and to the left;
         D.   Only turn or proceed right when facing a steady diagonal white
line that begins in the lower left corner and angles up and to the right;
         E.   Prepare to stop when facing a flashing vertical white line.
      (2)   As used in division (g)(1) of this section, "mass transit system"
and "bus" have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4511.78.
   (h)   In the event an official highway traffic signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature
can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of
any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
   (i)   This section does not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of
drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by
R.C. §§ 4511.61 and 4511.62.
(R.C. § 4511.13)
§ 414.04 SIGNAL TO CONTROL LANE DIRECTION OF TRAVEL.
   The meanings of lane-use control signal indications are as follows:
   (a)   A steady downward green arrow. A road user is permitted to drive in
the lane over which the arrow signal indication is located.
   (b)   A steady yellow “X”. A road user is to prepare to vacate the lane over
which the signal indication is located because a lane control change is being
made to a steady red “X” signal indication.
   (c)   A steady white two-way left-turn arrow. A road user is permitted to
use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, but not
for through travel, with the understanding that common use of the lane by
oncoming road users for left turns also is permitted.
   (d)   A steady white one-way left-turn arrow. A road user is permitted to
use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, without
opposing turns in the same lane, but not for through travel.
   (e)   A steady red “X”. A road user is not permitted to use the lane over
which the signal indication is located and that this signal indication shall
modify accordingly the meaning of other traffic controls present.
(R.C. § 4511.131)
§ 414.05 PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words “walk” or
“don’t walk”, or the symbol of a walking person or an upraised palm are in
place, these signals shall indicate the following instructions:
   (a)   A steady walking person signal indication, which symbolizes “walk”,
means that a pedestrian facing the signal indication is permitted to start to
cross the roadway in the direction of the signal indication, possibly in
conflict with turning vehicles. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the walking person
signal indication is first shown.
   (b)   A flashing upraised hand signal indication, which symbolizes “don’t
walk”, means that a pedestrian shall not start to cross the roadway in the
direction of the signal indication, but that any pedestrian who has already
started to cross on a steady walking person signal indication shall proceed to
the far side of the traveled way of the street or highway, unless otherwise
directed by a traffic control device to proceed only to the median of a divided
highway or only to some other island or pedestrian refuge area.
   (c)   A steady upraised hand signal indication means that a pedestrian shall
not enter the roadway in the direction of the signal indication.
   (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the continued
use of pedestrian control signals utilizing the word “wait” if those signals
were installed prior to March 28, 1985.
   (e)   A flashing walking person signal indication has no meaning and shall
not be used.
(R.C. § 411.14)
§ 414.06 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS AND SIGNALS, HIDING FROM VIEW, ADVERTISING.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of
any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to
be, is an imitation of or resembles a traffic- control device or railroad sign
or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or hides from
view or interferes with the effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any
railroad sign or signal; and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall any
public authority permit, upon any highway, any traffic sign or signal bearing
thereon any commercial advertising. This section does not prohibit either the
erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful
directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for traffic-
control devices, or the erection upon private property of traffic-control
devices by the owner of real property in accordance with R.C. §§ 4511.211 and
4511.432.
      (2)   Every prohibited sign, signal, marking or device is a public
nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway may remove the
same or cause it to be removed.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.16) (Prior Code, § 414.07)
§ 414.07 ALTERATION, INJURY, REMOVAL OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   (a)   No person, without lawful authority, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy or otherwise improperly
tamper with any traffic- control device, any railroad sign or signal, or any
inscription, shield or insignia on the device, sign or signal, or any part of
the device, sign or signal;
      (2)   Knowingly drive upon or over any freshly applied pavement marking
material on the surface of a roadway while the marking material is in an
undried condition, and is marked by flags, markers, signs or other devices
intended to protect it;
      (3)   Knowingly move, damage, destroy or otherwise improperly tamper with
a manhole cover.
   (b)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a)(1) or (a)(3) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
third degree. If a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(3) of this section
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(3) of
this section causes serious physical harm to property that is owned, leased, or
controlled by a state or local authority, the offender is guilty of a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.17) (Prior Code, § 414.08)
§ 414.08 UNAUTHORIZED POSSESSION OR SALE OF DEVICES.
   (a)   As used in this section, "traffic-control device" means any sign,
highway traffic signal or other device conforming to and placed or erected in
accordance with the manual adopted under R.C. § 4511.09 by authority of a
public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic, including signs denoting the names of streets and
highways, but does not mean any pavement marking.
   (b)   No individual shall buy or otherwise possess, or sell, a traffic-
control device, except when one of the following applies:
      (1)   In the course of the individual’s employment by the state or a
local authority for the express or implied purpose of manufacturing, providing,
erecting, moving or removing such a traffic- control device;
      (2)   In the course of the individual’s employment by any manufacturer of
traffic-control devices other than a state or local authority;
      (3)   For the purpose of demonstrating the design and function of a
traffic-control device to state or local officials;
      (4)   When the traffic-control device has been purchased from the state
or a local authority at a sale of property that is no longer needed or is unfit
for use; or
      (5)   When the traffic-control device has been properly purchased from a
manufacturer for use on private property and the person possessing the device
has a sales receipt for the device or other acknowledgment of sale issued by
the manufacturer.
   (c)   This section does not preclude, and shall not be construed as
precluding, prosecution for theft in violation of R.C. § 2913.02, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or for receiving stolen property
in violation of R.C. § 2913.51, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 4511.18) (Prior Code, § 414.09)
§ 414.09 SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICES; PROHIBITIONS.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Highway maintenance vehicle." A vehicle used in snow and ice
removal, including a snow plow, when it is owned by a political subdivision and
operated by an employee of that political subdivision.
      (2)   "Peace officer." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 109.71(A)(1),
(A)(12), (A)(14), and (A)(19).
      (3)   "Portable signal preemption device." A device that, if activated by
a person, is capable of changing a highway traffic signal to green out of
sequence.
      (4)   "Public safety vehicle." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01
(E)(1), (E)(3), and (E)(4).
   (b)   Except as provided in divisions (c) and (d) of this section:
      (1)   No person shall possess a portable signal preemption device.
      (2)   No person shall use a portable signal preemption device to affect
the operation of the highway traffic signal.
   (c)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the following
persons:
      (1)   A peace officer;
      (2)   A state highway patrol trooper;
      (3)   A person while occupying a public safety vehicle;
      (4)   The authorized employee operator of a highway maintenance vehicle.
   (d)   Division (b)(2) of this section does not apply under either of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   When a person listed in divisions (c)(1) to (c)(3) of this section
is responding to an emergency call;
      (2)   When a person listed in division (c)(4) of this section is
responding to an emergency level two or level three weather event.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (b)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates division (b)(2) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4511.031) (Prior Code, § 414.10)
§ 414.10 BICYCLE SYMBOL SIGNAL INDICATIONS.
   Bicycle symbol signal indications have the following meanings:
   (a)   A steady green bicycle signal indication means that bicyclists are
permitted to enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by the
lane-use arrow displayed on the bicycle signal sign that is located immediately
adjacent to the bicycle signal face. Bicyclists proceeding into the
intersection during the display of the indication shall yield the right-of-way
to both of the following:
      (1)   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
      (2)   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
   (b)   A steady yellow bicycle signal indication means that bicyclists are
warned that the related green movement is being terminated and that a steady
red bicycle signal indication will be displayed immediately thereafter when
bicyclists shall not enter the intersection. The provisions governing bicyclist
operations under the movement being terminated continue to apply while the
steady yellow bicycle signal indication is displayed.
   (c)   (1)   A steady red bicycle signal indication means that bicyclists
shall not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the lane-use
arrow displayed on the bicycle signal sign that is located immediately adjacent
to the bicycle signal face. Unless the bicyclist is entering the intersection
to make another movement permitted by another bicycle symbol signal indication,
the bicyclist shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if there is no stop
line, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, shall stop before entering the
intersection; and shall remain stopped until a green bicycle signal indication
to proceed is displayed.
      (2)   Except when a traffic control device is in place prohibiting a turn
on red, bicyclists facing a steady red bicycle signal indication are permitted
to enter the intersection to turn right if there are no approach lanes for
motor vehicle traffic to their right. The right to proceed with the turn is
subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a stop
sign.
   (d)   A flashing green bicycle signal indication and a flashing yellow
bicycle signal indication have no meaning and shall not be used.
   (e)   A flashing red bicycle signal indication means that bicyclists shall
stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if there is no stop line, shall stop
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection; or if there
is no crosswalk, shall stop at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where
the bicyclists have a view of approaching traffic on that roadway before
entering the intersection. The right to make the movement indicated by the
lane-use arrow displayed on the bicycle signal sign that is located immediately
adjacent to the bicycle signal face is subject to the provisions that are
applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
(R.C. § 4511.15)
§ 414.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 416: PEDESTRIANS
Section
416.01 Duties of pedestrians and drivers at crosswalks
416.02 Right-of-way of blind person
416.03 Right-of-way yielded by pedestrian; crossing roadways
416.04 Moving in crosswalks
416.05 Walking on sidewalks and streets
416.06 Soliciting rides or business; riding on outside of vehicle or in cargo
storage area
416.07 Passing through bridge signals or railroad barriers
416.08 Right-of-way of public safety vehicles
416.09 Right-of-way on sidewalks
416.10 Intoxication
416.11 Operation of electric personal assistive mobility devices
416.12 Operation of personal delivery device on sidewalks and crosswalks
416.13 Low-speed micromobility devices
416.99 Penalty
§ 416.01 DUTIES OF PEDESTRIANS AND DRIVERS AT CROSSWALKS.
   (a)   When highway traffic signals are not in place, not in operation or are
not clearly assigning the right-of-way, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the
right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, or if required
by R.C. § 4511.132, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, to a
pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon
the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the
pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as
to be in danger.
   (b)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard.
   (c)   Division (a) of this section does not apply under the conditions
stated in R.C. § 4511.48(B), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (d)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (f)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under § 408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.46)
§ 416.02 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF BLIND PERSON.
   (a)   (1)   As used in this section BLIND PERSON or BLIND PEDESTRIAN means a
person having not more than 20/200 visual acuity in the better eye with
correcting lenses, or visual acuity greater than 20/200, but with a limitation
in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field
subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees.
      (2)   The driver of every vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to every
blind pedestrian guided by a guide dog, or carrying a cane which is
predominantly white or metallic in color, with or without a red tip.
   (b)   No person, other than a blind person, while on any public highway,
street, alley or other public thoroughfare, shall carry a white or metallic
cane, with or without a red tip.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.47)
§ 416.03 RIGHT-OF-WAY YIELDED BY PEDESTRIAN; CROSSING ROADWAYS.
   (a)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (b)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all traffic upon the roadway.
   (c)   Between adjacent intersections at which highway traffic signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
   (d)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic-control devices; and when authorized to cross
diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official
traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
   (e)   This section does not relieve the operator of a vehicle from
exercising due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway.
   (f)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.48)
§ 416.04 MOVING IN CROSSWALKS.
   (a)   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.49)
§ 416.05 WALKING ON SIDEWALKS AND STREETS.
   (a)   Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it shall be
unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (b)   Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable from the
edge of the roadway.
   (c)   Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian
walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an
outside edge of the roadway, and, if on a two-way roadway, shall walk only on
the left side of the roadway.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. §§ 4511.13 and 4511.46, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, any pedestrian upon a roadway
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.50)
§ 416.06 SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS; RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLE OR IN CARGO
STORAGE AREA.
   (a)   No person while on a roadway outside a safety zone shall solicit a
ride from the driver of any vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this section, no person
shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting employment, business or
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle.
      (2)   The Council, by ordinance, may authorize the issuance of a permit
to a charitable organization to allow a person acting on behalf of the
organization to solicit charitable contributions from the occupant of a vehicle
by standing on a highway, other than a freeway as provided in R.C. § 4511.051
(A), that is under the jurisdiction of the municipality. The permit shall be
valid for only one period of time, which shall be specified in the permit, in
any calendar year. The Council also may specify the locations where
contributions may be solicited and may impose any other restrictions on or
requirements regarding the manner in which the solicitations are to be
conducted that the Council considers advisable.
      (3)   As used in division (b)(2) of this section, “charitable
organization” means an organization that has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a currently valid ruling or determination letter recognizing the tax-
exempt status of the organization pursuant to IRC 501(c)(3).
   (c)   No person shall hang onto or ride on the outside of any motor vehicle
while it is moving upon a roadway, except mechanics or test engineers making
repairs or adjustments, or workers performing specialized highway or street
maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency.
   (d)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person to hang onto or ride on
the outside of any motor vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway, except
mechanics or test engineers making repairs or adjustments, or workers
performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under
authority of a public agency.
   (e)   No driver of a truck, trailer or semitrailer shall knowingly permit
any person who has not attained the age of 16 years to ride in the unenclosed
or unroofed cargo storage area of the driver’s vehicle if the vehicle is
traveling faster than 25 miles per hour, unless either of the following
applies:
      (1)   The cargo storage area of the vehicle is equipped with a properly
secured seat to which is attached a seat safety belt that is in compliance with
federal standards for an occupant restraining device as defined in R.C. §
4513.263(A)(2), the seat and seat safety belt were installed at the time the
vehicle was originally assembled, and the person riding in the cargo storage
area is in the seat and is wearing the seat safety belt; or
      (2)   An emergency exists that threatens the life of the driver or the
person being transported in the cargo storage area of the truck, trailer or
semitrailer.
   (f)   No driver of a truck, trailer or semitrailer shall permit any person,
except for those workers performing specialized highway or street maintenance
or construction under authority of a public agency, to ride in the cargo
storage area or on a tailgate of the driver’s vehicle while the tailgate is
unlatched.
   (g)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
any provision of divisions (a) to (d) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates any provision of divisions (a) to (d) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates any provision of divisions
(a) to (d) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (e) or (f) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.51)
§ 416.07 PASSING THROUGH BRIDGE SIGNALS OR RAILROAD BARRIERS.
   (a)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach
thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate or barrier after a bridge operation
signal indication has been given.
   (b)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.511)
§ 416.08 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES.
   (a)   Upon the immediate approach of a public safety vehicle, as stated in
R.C. § 4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, every
pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the public safety vehicle.
   (b)   This section shall not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle
from the duty to exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.452)
§ 416.09 RIGHT-OF-WAY ON SIDEWALKS.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian
on a sidewalk.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.441)
§ 416.10 INTOXICATION.
   (a)   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol, any drug of abuse,
or any combination of them, to a degree that renders the pedestrian a hazard
shall not walk or be upon a highway.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.481)
§ 416.11 OPERATION OF ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES.
   (a)   (1)   Electric personal assistive mobility devices, as defined in R.C.
§ 4501.01, may be operated on the public streets, highways, sidewalks and paths
and portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in
accordance with this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of
this traffic code that by their nature are applicable to an electric personal
assistive mobility device apply to the device and the person operating it
whenever it is operated upon any public street, highway, sidewalk or path or
upon any portion of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
      (3)   The municipality may regulate or prohibit the operation of electric
personal assistive mobility devices on public streets, highways, sidewalks and
paths, or portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles,
under its jurisdiction.
   (b)   No operator of an electric personal assistive mobility device shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians and human-powered
vehicles at all times;
      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian;
      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is
equipped with or wearing both of the following:
         A.   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 500 feet;
         B.   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle;
      (4)   Operate the device on any portion of a street or highway that has
an established speed limit of 55 miles per hour or more;
      (5)   Operate the device upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of
pedestrians or other specialized use when an appropriate sign giving notice of
the specialized use is posted on the path;
      (6)   If under 18 years of age, operate the device unless wearing a
protective helmet on the person’s head with the chin strap properly fastened;
      (7)   If under 16 years of age, operate the device unless, during the
operation, the person is under the direct visual and audible supervision of
another person who is 18 years of age or older and is responsible for the
immediate care of the person under 16 years of age.
   (c)   No person who is under 14 years of age shall operate an electric
personal assistive mobility device.
   (d)   No person shall distribute or sell an electric personal assistive
mobility device unless the device is accompanied by a written statement that is
substantially equivalent to the following: “WARNING: TO REDUCE THE RISK OF
SERIOUS INJURY, USE ONLY WHILE WEARING FULL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT – HELMET,
WRIST GUARDS, ELBOW PADS AND KNEE PADS.”
   (e)   Nothing in this section affects or shall be construed to affect any
rule of the Director of Natural Resources or a Board of Park District
Commissioners governing the operation of vehicles on lands under the control of
the Director or Board, as applicable.
   (f)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (b) or (c) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor and shall be punished as follows:
         A.   The offender shall be fined $10;
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (b) or (c) of this section, or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to imposing the fine required under division (f)(1)A. of this section,
shall do one of the following:
            1.   Order the impoundment for not less than one day but no more
than 30 days of the electric personal assistive mobility device that was
involved in the current violation of that division. The court shall order the
device to be impounded at a safe indoor location designated by the court and
may assess storage fees of not more than $5 per day; provided the total
storage, processing and release fees assessed against the offender or the
device in connection with the device’s impoundment or subsequent release shall
not exceed $50.
            2.   If the court does not issue an impoundment order pursuant to
division (f)(1)B.1. of this section, issue an order prohibiting the offender
from operating any electric personal assistive mobility device on the public
streets, highways, sidewalks and paths and portions of roadways set aside for
the exclusive use of bicycles for not less than one day but not more than 30
days.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.512)
   (g)   As used in this code, “electric personal assistive mobility device”
means a self-balancing two non-tandem wheeled device that is designed to
transport only one person, has an electric propulsion system of an average of
750 watts, and when ridden on a paved level surface by an operator who weighs
170 pounds has a maximum speed of less than 20 miles per hour.
(R.C. § 4501.01(TT))
§ 416.12 OPERATION OF PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE ON SIDEWALKS AND CROSSWALKS.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Eligible entity.” Means a corporation, partnership, association,
firm, sole proprietorship, or other entity engaged in business.
      (2)   “Personal delivery device.” Means an electrically powered device to
which all of the following apply:
         A.   The device is intended primarily to transport property and cargo
on sidewalks and crosswalks.
         B.   The device weighs less than 250 pounds excluding any property or
cargo being carried in the device.
         C.   The device has a maximum speed of ten miles per hour.
         D.   The device is equipped with technology that enables the operation
of the device with active control or monitoring by a person, without active
control or monitoring by a person, or both with or without active control or
monitoring by a person.
      (3)   “Personal delivery device operator.” Means an agent of an eligible
entity who exercises direct physical control over, or monitoring of, the
navigation and operation of a personal delivery device. The phrase does not
include, with respect to a delivery or other service rendered by a personal
delivery device, the person who requests the delivery or service. The phrase
also does not include a person who only arranges for and dispatches a personal
delivery device for a delivery or other service.
   (b)   An eligible entity may operate a personal delivery device on sidewalks
and crosswalks so long as all of the following requirements are met:
      (1)   The personal delivery device is operated in accordance with all
regulations, if any, established by each local authority within which the
personal delivery device is operated.
      (2)   A personal delivery device operator is actively controlling or
monitoring the navigation and operation of the personal delivery device.
      (3)   The eligible entity maintains an insurance policy that includes
general liability coverage of not less than $100,000 for damages arising from
the operation of the personal delivery device by the eligible entity and any
agent of the eligible entity.
      (4)   The device is equipped with all of the following:
         A.   A marker that clearly identifies the name and contact information
of the eligible entity operating the personal delivery device and a unique
identification number;
         B.   A braking system that enables the personal delivery device to
come to a controlled stop;
         C.   If the personal delivery device is being operated between sunset
and sunrise, a light on both the front and rear of the personal delivery device
that is visible in clear weather from a distance of at least 500 feet to the
front and rear of the personal delivery device when directly in front of low
beams of headlights on a motor vehicle.
   (c)   No personal delivery device operator shall allow a personal delivery
device to do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with traffic or pedestrian control devices and
signals;
      (2)   Unreasonably interfere with pedestrians or traffic;
      (3)   Transport any hazardous material that would require a permit issued
by the Public Utilities Commission;
      (4)   Operate on a street or highway, except when crossing the street or
highway within a crosswalk.
   (d)   A personal delivery device has all of the rights and obligations
applicable to a pedestrian under the same circumstances, except that a personal
delivery device shall yield the right-of-way to human pedestrians on sidewalks
and crosswalks.
   (e)   (1)   No person shall operate a personal delivery device unless the
person is authorized to do so under this section and complies with the
requirements of this section.
      (2)   An eligible entity is responsible for both of the following:
         A.   Any violation of this section that is committed by a personal
delivery device operator; and
         B.   Any other circumstance, including a technological malfunction, in
which a personal delivery device operates in a manner prohibited by divisions
(c)(1) to (c)(4) of this section.
(R.C. § 4511.513)
§ 416.13 LOW-SPEED MICROMOBILITY DEVICES.
   (a)   (1)   A low-speed micromobility device may be operated on the public
streets, highways, sidewalks, and shared-use paths, and may be operated on any
portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance
with this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of
this title that by their nature could apply to a low-speed micromobility device
do apply to the device and the person operating it whenever it is operated upon
any public street, highway, sidewalk, or shared-use path, or upon any portion
of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (b)   No operator of a low-speed micromobility device shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians at all times;
      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian;
      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is
equipped with or wearing both of the following:
         A.   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 500 feet;
         B.   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
   (c)   (1)   No person who is under 16 years of age shall rent a low-speed
micromobility device.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly rent a low-speed micromobility device to
a person who is under 16 years of age.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly rent a low-speed micromobility device on
behalf of a person who is under 16 years of age.
   (d)   No person shall operate a low-speed micromobility device at a speed
greater than 20 miles per hour.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Unless a mens rea is otherwise specified in this section, an
offense established under this section is a strict liability offense and R.C. §
2901.20 does not apply. The designation of that offense as a strict liability
offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for which there
is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.
   (f)   Notwithstanding division (a)(1) of this section, the municipality,
county, township, metropolitan park district, township park district,
recreation district, or any division of the Ohio Department of Natural
Resources if the division has the approval of the Ohio Director of Natural
Resources may do any of the following:
      (1)   Regulate or prohibit the operation of low-speed micromobility
devices on public streets, highways, sidewalks, and shared-use paths, and
portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, under its
jurisdiction;
      (2)   Include low-speed micromobility devices that are adapted to expand
access for people with various physical limitations into a shared bicycle,
shared electric bicycle, or similar vehicle sharing program, under its
jurisdiction;
      (3)   Require the owner or operator of a low-speed micromobility device
rental service or low-speed micromobility device sharing program to maintain
commercial general liability insurance related to the operation of the devices,
with limits of up to $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 per aggregate.
(R.C. § 4511.514)
§ 416.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
TITLE SIX - Vehicles and Operation
      
Chap. 432. Operation Generally.
      
Chap. 434. OVI; Reckless Operation; Speed.
      
Chap. 436. Licensing; Accidents.
      
Chap. 438. Safety and Equipment.
      
Chap. 440. Commercial and Heavy Vehicles.
      
Chap. 442. Drivers of Commercial Vehicles.
      
Chap. 444. Offenses Relating to Theft and Fraud.
CHAPTER 432: OPERATION GENERALLY
Section
432.01 Driving upon right side of roadway; exceptions
432.02 Passing to right when proceeding in opposite directions
432.03 Overtaking, passing to left; driver’s duties
432.04 Overtaking, passing to right of vehicle
432.05 Overtaking, passing to left of centerline
432.06 Driving upon left side of roadway
432.07 Hazardous or no passing zones
432.08 Driving within lanes or continuous lines of traffic
432.09 Following too closely
432.10 Turning at intersections
432.11 “U” turns restricted
432.12 Starting and backing vehicles
432.13 Signals before changing course, turning or stopping
432.14 Hand and arm signals
432.15 Right-of-way at intersections
432.16 Intersections at which traffic control signals fail or malfunction
432.17 Right-of-way when turning left
432.18 Operation of vehicle at stop and yield signs
432.19 Emergency or public safety vehicles at stop signals or signs
432.20 Right-of-way of public safety or coroner’s vehicle
432.21 Driving while approaching stationary public safety vehicle and certain
other vehicles with flashing lights
432.22 Right-of-way at private driveway, alley or building
432.23 Stop signs on private roads and driveways
432.24 Right-of-way of funeral procession
432.25 Driving upon sidewalks, tree lawns or curbs
432.26 Driver’s view and control to be unobstructed by load or persons
432.27 Driving upon street posted as closed for repair
432.28 Following and parking near emergency or safety vehicles
432.29 Driving over fire hose
432.30 Driving through safety zone
432.31 One-way streets and rotary traffic islands
432.32 Driving upon divided roadways
432.33 Stopping for school bus; actuating visual signals; discharging children
432.34 Driving across grade crossings
432.35 Stopping at grade crossings
432.36 Slow-moving vehicles or equipment at grade crossings
432.37 Obstructing intersections, crosswalks or grade crossings
432.38 “Peeling”; cracking exhaust noises
432.39 Shortcutting across private property
432.40 Entering and exiting controlled-access highway
432.41 Weaving; full time and attention
432.42 Interference with traffic
432.43 Operation on paths set aside for bicycles
432.44 Littering from motor vehicles
432.45 Use of earphones while driving
432.46 Texting while driving prohibited
432.47 Use of electronic wireless communication devices by minors or
probationary drivers while driving prohibited
 
432.99 Penalty
§ 432.01 DRIVING UPON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction, or when making a left turn under the rules governing those
movements;
      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left
of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an
immediate hazard;
      (3)   When driving upon a roadway divided into three or more marked lanes
for traffic under the rules applicable thereon;
      (4)   When driving upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for
one-way traffic;
      (5)   When otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic-control
device.
   (b)   (1)   Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the
prevailing and lawful speed of traffic at the time and place and under the
conditions then existing shall be driven in the right- hand lane then available
for traffic, and far enough to the right to allow passing by faster vehicles if
the passing is safe and reasonable, except under any of the following
circumstances:
         A.   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction;
         B.   When preparing for a left turn;
         C.   When the driver must necessarily drive in a lane other than the
right-hand lane to continue on the driver’s intended route.
      (2)   Nothing in division (b)(1) of this section requires a driver of a
slower vehicle to compromise the driver’s safety to allow overtaking by a
faster vehicle.
   (c)   Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and
providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the
left of the centerline of the roadway, except when authorized by official
traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left of the center of
the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use the lanes, or
except as permitted under division (a)(2) of this section. This division shall
not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the centerline in making a left
turn into or from an alley, private road or driveway.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (e)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.25)
§ 432.02 PASSING TO RIGHT WHEN PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
   (a)   Operators of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass
each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one
line of traffic in each direction, each operator shall give to the other one-
half of the main traveled portion of the roadway or as nearly one-half as is
reasonably possible.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.26)
§ 432.03 OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT; DRIVER’S DUTIES.
   (a)   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction:
      (1)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction shall, except as provided in division (a)(3) of this
section, signal to the vehicle to be overtaken, shall pass to the left thereof
at a safe distance, and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway
until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. When a motor vehicle overtakes and
passes a bicycle or electric bicycle, three feet or greater is considered a
safe passing distance.
(2)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
operator of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle at the latter’s audible signal, and the operator shall not
increase the speed of the operator’s vehicle until completely passed by the
overtaking vehicle.
(3)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction on a divided highway as defined in R.C. §
4511.35, a limited access highway as defined in R.C. § 5511.02, or a highway
with four or more traffic lanes is not required to signal audibly to the
vehicle being overtaken and passed.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.27)
§ 432.04 OVERTAKING, PASSING TO RIGHT OF VEHICLE.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass on the right of another
vehicle only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
or
      (2)   Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for
two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being traveled
by the overtaking vehicle.
   (b)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle only
under conditions permitting the movement in safety. The movement shall not be
made by driving off the roadway.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.28)
§ 432.05 OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT OF CENTERLINE.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center of the roadway in
overtaking and passing traffic proceeding in the same direction, unless the
left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be completely made
without interfering with the safe operation of any traffic approaching from the
opposite direction or any traffic overtaken. In every event, the overtaking
vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable, and
in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for the
traffic approaching from the opposite direction, before coming within 200 feet
of any approaching vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.29)
§ 432.06 DRIVING UPON LEFT SIDE OF ROADWAY.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be driven upon the left side of the roadway under the
following conditions:
      (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
highway, where the operator’s view is obstructed within such a distance as to
create a hazard in the event traffic might approach from the opposite
direction;
      (2)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any
bridge, viaduct or tunnel; or
      (3)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection
or railroad grade crossing.
   (b)   This section does not apply to vehicles upon a one-way roadway, upon a
roadway where traffic is lawfully directed to be driven to the left side, or
under the conditions described in R.C. § 25(A)(2) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.30)
§ 432.07 HAZARDOUS OR NO PASSING ZONES.
   (a)   The Department of Transportation may determine those portions of any
state highway where overtaking and passing other traffic or driving to the left
of the center or centerline of the roadway would be especially hazardous, and
may, by appropriate signs or markings on the highway, indicate the beginning
and end of the zones. When signs or markings are in place and clearly visible,
every operator of a vehicle shall obey the directions of the signs or markings,
notwithstanding the distances set out in R.C. § 4511.30.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply when all of the following
apply:
      (1)   The slower vehicle is proceeding at less than half the speed of the
speed limit applicable to that location.
      (2)   The faster vehicle is capable of overtaking and passing the slower
vehicle without exceeding the speed limit.
      (3)   There is sufficient clear sight distance to the left of the center
or centerline of the roadway to meet the overtaking and passing provisions of
R.C. § 4511.29, considering the speed of the slower vehicle.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.31)
§ 432.08 DRIVING WITHIN LANES OR CONTINUOUS LINES OF TRAFFIC.
   (a)   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic, or wherever within the municipality traffic is lawfully
moving in two or more substantially continuous lines in the same direction, the
following rules apply:
      (1)   A vehicle shall be driven, as nearly as is practicable, entirely
within a single lane or line of traffic and shall not be moved from the lane or
line until the driver has first ascertained that the movement can be made with
safety.
      (2)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for
the two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center
lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is
clearly visible and the center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance,
or when preparing for a left turn, or where the center lane is at the time
allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is
proceeding, and is posted with signs to give notice of that allocation.
      (3)   Official signs may be erected directing specified traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction, regardless of the center of the roadway, or restricting
the use of a particular lane to only buses during certain hours or during all
hours, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of the signs.
      (4)   Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting the
changing of lanes on sections of roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey
the directions of every such device.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.33)
§ 432.09 FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   (a)   (1)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle
more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of
the vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.
      (2)   The driver of any truck, or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle,
when traveling upon a roadway outside a business or residence district, shall
maintain a sufficient space, whenever conditions permit, between the vehicle
and another vehicle ahead so an overtaking motor vehicle may enter and occupy
the space without danger. This division (a) does not prevent overtaking and
passing nor does it apply to any lane specially designated for use by trucks.
      (3)   Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business
or residence district in a caravan or motorcade shall maintain a sufficient
space between the vehicles so an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy the
space without danger. This division shall not apply to funeral processions.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.34)
§ 432.10 TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall be
governed by the following rules:
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right- hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both
directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left
turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
centerline thereof and by passing to the right of the centerline where it
enters the intersection, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn
shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of
the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made in
that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection.
      (3)   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on
one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at
any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand
lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of the
vehicle, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so
as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left hand lane
of the roadway being entered lawfully available to traffic moving in that lane.
   (b)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities may cause
markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections, and
thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in this
section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when markers,
buttons or signs are so placed, no operator of a vehicle shall turn the vehicle
at an intersection other than as directed and required by the markers, buttons
or signs.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.36)
§ 432.11 “U” TURNS RESTRICTED.
   (a)   Except as provided in R.C. §  4511.13  and division (b) of this
section, no vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction
upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, if the
vehicle cannot be seen within 500 feet by the driver of any other vehicle
approaching from either direction.
   (b)   The driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, may turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction. This division applies only when the emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle, and when the driver of the vehicle is giving an audible signal by
siren, exhaust whistle or bell. This division does not relieve the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.37)
§ 432.12 STARTING AND BACKING VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or
parked until the movement can be made with reasonable safety.
      (2)   Before backing, operators of vehicles shall give ample warning, and
while backing they shall exercise vigilance not to injure person or property on
the street or highway.
      (3)   No person shall back a motor vehicle on a freeway, except:
         A.   In a rest area;
         B.   In the performance of public works or official duties;
         C.   As a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of
a motor vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.38)
§ 432.13 SIGNALS BEFORE CHANGING COURSE, TURNING OR STOPPING.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall turn a vehicle or move right or left upon a
highway unless and until the person has exercised due care to ascertain that
the movement can be made with reasonable safety, nor without giving an
appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided.
      (2)   When required, a signal of intention to turn or move right or left
shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by
the vehicle before turning, except that in the case of a person operating a
bicycle or electric bicycle, the signal shall be made not less than one time
but is not required to be continuous. A bicycle or electric bicycle operator is
not required to make a signal if the bicycle is in a designated turn lane, and
a signal shall not be given when the operator’s hands are needed for the safe
operation of the bicycle or electric bicycle.
      (3)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear, when there is opportunity to
give a signal.
      (4)   Any stop or turn signal required by this section shall be given
either by means of the hand and arm, or by signal lights that clearly indicate
to both approaching and following traffic the intention to turn or move right
or left, except that any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped
with, and the required signal shall be given by, signal lights when the
distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside
limit of the body, cab or load of the motor vehicle exceeds 24 inches, or when
the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit
of the body or load thereof exceeds 14 feet, whether a single vehicle or a
combination of vehicles.
      (5)   The signal lights required by this section shall not be flashed on
one side only on a disabled vehicle, flashed as a courtesy or “do pass” signal
to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear, nor be flashed on one
side only of a parked vehicle except as may be necessary for compliance with
this section.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.39)
§ 432.14 HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, all signals
required by the provisions of this traffic code, when given by hand and arm,
shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and
the signals shall indicate as follows:
      (1)   Left turn, hand and arm extended horizontally;
      (2)   Right turn, hand and arm extended upward;
      (3)   Stop or decrease speed, hand and arm extended downward.
   (b)   As an alternative to division (a)(2) of this section, a person
operating a bicycle or electric bicycle may give a right turn signal by
extending the right hand and arm horizontally and to the right side of the
bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.40)
§ 432.15 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (a)   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different
streets or highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle
on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
   (b)   The right-of-way rule declared in division (a) of this section is
modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this traffic code or
R.C. Chapter 4511.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.41)
§ 432.16 INTERSECTIONS AT WHICH TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS FAIL OR MALFUNCTION.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle who approaches an intersection where traffic
is controlled by traffic control signals shall do all of the following if the
signal facing the driver exhibits no colored lights or colored lighted arrows,
exhibits a combination of such lights or arrows that fails to clearly indicate
the assignment of right-of-way, or, if the vehicle is a bicycle or an electric
bicycle, the signals are otherwise malfunctioning due to the failure of a
vehicle detector to detect the presence of the bicycle or electric bicycle:
      (1)   Stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, stop
before entering the intersection;
      (2)   Yield the right-of-way to all vehicles in the intersection or
approaching on an intersecting road, if the vehicles will constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways;
      (3)   Exercise ordinary care while proceeding through the intersection.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.132) (Prior Code, § 432.155)
§ 432.17 RIGHT-OF-WAY WHEN TURNING LEFT.
   (a)   The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an
intersection or into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right-
of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within
the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.42) (Prior Code, § 432.16)
§ 432.18 OPERATION OF VEHICLE AT STOP AND YIELD SIGNS.
   (a)   Except when directed to proceed by a law enforcement officer, every
driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering it. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-
way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so
closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is
moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways.
   (b)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow down to a
speed reasonable for the existing conditions, and if required for safety to
stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it. After
slowing, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways. Whenever a driver is involved in a
collision with a vehicle in the intersection or junction of roadways, after
driving past a yield sign without stopping, the collision shall be prima facie
evidence of the driver’s failure to yield the right-of-way.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.43) (Prior Code, § 432.17)
§ 432.19 EMERGENCY OR PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES AT STOP SIGNALS OR SIGNS.
   (a)   The driver of any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, upon approaching a red or stop signal or any
stop sign, shall slow down as necessary for safety to traffic, but may proceed
cautiously past the red or stop sign or signal with due regard for the safety
of all persons using the street or highway.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.03) (Prior Code, § 432.18)
§ 432.20 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY OR CORONER’S VEHICLE.
   (a)   Upon the approach of a public safety vehicle or coroner’s vehicle,
equipped with at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible
under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of
the vehicle, and the driver is giving an audible signal by siren, exhaust
whistle or bell, no driver of any other vehicle shall fail to yield the right-
of-way, immediately drive, if practical, to a position parallel to, and as
close as possible to, the right edge or curb of the highway clear of any
intersection, and stop and remain in that position until the public safety
vehicle or coroner’s vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer.
   (b)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle or
coroner’s vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons and property upon the highway.
   (c)   This section applies to a coroner’s vehicle only when the vehicle is
operated in accordance with R.C. § 4513.171, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. As used in this section, “coroner’s vehicle” means a
vehicle used by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator that is
equipped with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and a
siren, exhaust whistle or bell capable of giving an audible signal.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division or division (e), whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a
first offense. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 4511.45)
   (e)   (1)   When the failure of a motor vehicle operator to yield the right-
of-way to a public safety vehicle as required by division (a) of this section
impedes the ability of the public safety vehicle to respond to an emergency,
any emergency personnel in the public safety vehicle may report the license
plate number and a general description of the vehicle and the operator of the
vehicle to the law enforcement agency exercising jurisdiction over the area
where the alleged violation occurred.
      (2)   A.   Upon receipt of a report under division (e)(1) of this
section, the law enforcement agency may conduct an investigation to attempt to
determine or confirm the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation.
         B.   If the identity of the operator at the time of an alleged
violation of division (a) of this section is established, the law enforcement
agency has probable cause to issue either a written warning or a citation for
that violation, and the agency shall issue a written warning or a citation to
the operator.
         C.   If the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the
alleged violation cannot be established, the law enforcement agency may issue a
written warning to the person who owned the vehicle at the time of the alleged
violation. However, in the case of a leased or rented vehicle, the law
enforcement agency shall issue the written warning to the person who leased or
rented the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation.
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates division (a) of this section based on a
report filed under division (e)(1) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined $150.
         B.   If a person who is issued a citation for a violation of division
(a) of this section based on a report filed under division (e)(1) of this
section does not enter a written plea of guilty and does not waive the person’s
right to contest the citation but instead appears in person in the proper court
to answer the charge, the trier of fact cannot find beyond a reasonable doubt
that the person committed that violation unless the emergency personnel who
filed the report appears in person in the court and testifies.
      (4)   As used in this division (e):
         A.   “License plate.” Includes any temporary motor vehicle license
registration issued under R.C. § 4503.182 or similar law of another
jurisdiction.
         B.   “Public safety vehicle.” Does not include an unmarked public
safety vehicle or a vehicle used by a public law enforcement officer or other
person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state or a vehicle
used by the motor carrier enforcement unit for the enforcement of orders and
rules of the public utilities commission.
(R.C. § 4511.454) (Prior Code, § 432.19)
§ 432.21 DRIVING WHILE APPROACHING STATIONARY PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE AND CERTAIN
OTHER VEHICLES WITH FLASHING LIGHTS.
   (a)   The driver of a motor vehicle, upon approaching a stationary public
safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, waste collection
vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor
vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a
highway maintenance vehicle that is displaying the appropriate visual signals
by means of flashing, oscillating, or rotating lights, as prescribed in R.C. §
4513.17, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   If the driver of the motor vehicle is traveling on a highway that
consists of at least two lanes that carry traffic in the same direction of
travel as that of the driver’s motor vehicle, the driver shall proceed with due
caution and, if possible and with due regard to the road, weather and traffic
conditions, shall change lanes into a lane this is not adjacent to that of the
stationary public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle,
waste collection vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to
conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and
4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle.
      (2)   If the driver is not traveling on a highway of a type described in
division (a)(1) of this section, or if the driver is traveling on a highway of
that type but it is not possible to change lanes or if to do so would be
unsafe, the driver shall proceed with due caution, reduce the speed of the
motor vehicle, and maintain a safe speed for the road, weather and traffic
conditions.
   (b)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle,
emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, waste collection vehicle, vehicle used
by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor vehicle inspections in
accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle
from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and
property upon the highway.
   (c)   No person shall fail to drive a motor vehicle in compliance with
divisions (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section when so required by division (a) of
this section.
   (d)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Notwithstanding §
698.02 or R.C. § 2929.28, upon a finding that a person operated a motor vehicle
in violation of division (c) of this section, the court, in addition to all
other penalties provided by law, shall impose a fine of two times the usual
amount imposed for the violation.
      (3)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
   (e)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense as a
strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
(R.C. § 4511.213) (Prior Code, § 432.195)
§ 432.22 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT PRIVATE DRIVEWAY, ALLEY OR BUILDING.
   (a)   (1)   The operator of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from
any place other than another roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all
traffic approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.44)
   (b)   (1)   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building,
private road or driveway within a business or residence district shall stop the
vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area
extending across the alley, building entrance, road or driveway, or in the
event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the street to
be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic thereon.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (b) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (b) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.431)
   (c)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn into a private road or
driveway, alley or building from a public street or highway shall be governed
by the following rules:
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   Upon a roadway where traffic is proceeding in opposite directions,
approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made from that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof.
      (3)   Upon a roadway where traffic is restricted to one direction,
approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made as close as practicable
to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   (d)   It shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle entering a private
road or driveway, alley or building to yield the right-of-way to pedestrians
lawfully using the sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across the private road
or driveway, alley or building.
(Prior Code, § 432.20)
§ 432.23 STOP SIGNS ON PRIVATE ROADS AND DRIVEWAYS.
   (a)   The owner of a private road or driveway located in a private
residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units may erect stop signs at
places where the road or driveway intersects with another private road or
driveway in the residential area, in compliance with all of the following
requirements:
      (1)   The stop sign is sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily
observant person and meets the specifications of and is placed in accordance
with the Manual adopted by the Department of Transportation pursuant to R.C. §
4511.09.
      (2)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road or
driveway that is in plain view and clearly informs persons entering the road or
driveway that they are entering private property, stop signs have been posted
and must be obeyed, and the signs are enforceable by law enforcement officers
under state law. The sign required by this division, where appropriate, may be
incorporated with the sign required by R.C. § 4511.211(A)(2), or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (b)   R.C. §§ 4511.43(A) and 4511.46, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, shall be deemed to apply to the driver of a vehicle on a
private road or driveway where a stop sign is placed in accordance with
division (a) of this section and to a pedestrian crossing such a road or
driveway at an intersection where a stop sign is in place.
   (c)   When a stop sign is placed in accordance with division (a) of this
section, any law enforcement officer may apprehend a person found violating the
stop sign and may stop and charge the person with violating the stop sign.
   (d)   As used in this section, and for the purpose of applying R.C. §§
4511.43(A) and 4511.46, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, to
conduct under this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Intersection.”
         A.   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two private roads or driveways which join one another at, or
approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling
upon different private roads or driveways joining at any other angle may come
in conflict.
         B.   Where a private road or driveway includes two roadways 30 feet or
more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of the private roads or
driveways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
      (2)   “Owner” and “private residential area containing 20 or more
dwelling units.” Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4511.211.
      (3)   “Roadway.” That portion of a private road or driveway improved,
designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder.
If a private road or driveway includes two or more separate roadways, the term
“roadway” means any such roadway separately but not all such roadways
collectively.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.432) (Prior Code, § 432.205)
§ 432.24 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF FUNERAL PROCESSION.
   (a)   As used in this section, “funeral procession” means two or more
vehicles accompanying the cremated remains or the body of a deceased person in
the daytime when each of the vehicles has its headlights lighted and is
displaying a purple and white or an orange and white pennant attached to each
vehicle in such a manner as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from
any direction.
   (b)   Excepting public safety vehicles proceeding in accordance with R.C. §
4511.45  or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or when directed
otherwise by a police officer, pedestrians and the operators of all vehicles
shall yield the right-of-way to each vehicle that is a part of a funeral
procession. Whenever the lead vehicle in a funeral procession lawfully enters
an intersection, the remainder of the vehicles in the procession may continue
to follow the lead vehicle through the intersection, notwithstanding any
traffic-control devices or right-of-way provisions of the Revised Code,
provided that the operator of each vehicle exercises due care to avoid
colliding with any other vehicle or pedestrian.
   (c)   No person shall operate any vehicle as a part of a funeral procession
without having the headlights of the vehicle lighted and without displaying a
purple and white or an orange and white pennant in such a manner as to be
clearly visible to traffic approaching from any direction.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (e)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.451) (Prior Code, § 432.21)
§ 432.25 DRIVING UPON SIDEWALKS, TREE LAWNS OR CURBS.
   (a)   No person shall drive, stand or park a motor vehicle on a sidewalk or
on the curb or gutter line of a street, except when entering or leaving a
permanent or temporary driveway.
   (b)   As used in this section, “motor vehicle” includes any vehicle whose
power source is other than human or animal, including, but not limited to,
motorized bicycles, mopeds, minibikes, snowmobiles and any other motorized
conveyance or vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 432.22) (Ord. 149-79, passed 11-26-1979)
§ 432.26 DRIVER’S VIEW AND CONTROL TO BE UNOBSTRUCTED BY LOAD OR PERSONS.
   (a)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there
are in the front seat such number of persons, as to obstruct the view of the
driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or to interfere with the driver’s
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (b)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in a position as to interfere
with the driver’s view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with the driver’s
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (c)   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic; nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.70) (Prior Code, § 432.23)
§ 432.27 DRIVING UPON STREET POSTED AS CLOSED FOR REPAIR.
   (a)   No person shall drive upon, along or across a street or highway, or
any part of a street or highway that has been closed in the process of its
construction, reconstruction or repair, and posted with appropriate signs by
the authority having jurisdiction to close the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.71(A))
   (b)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on or onto a public street or
highway that is temporarily covered by a rise in water level, including
groundwater or an overflow of water, and that is clearly marked by a sign that
specifies that the road is closed due to the rise in water level and that any
person who uses the closed portion of the road may be fined up to $2,000.
      (2)   A person who is issued a citation for a violation of division (b)
(1) of this section is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty and
waive the person’s right to contest the citation in court, but instead must
appear in person in the proper court to answer the charge.
(R.C. § 4511.714(A), (B))
   (c)   (1)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
B.   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting
activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the
offender is subject to the additional fine established under § 408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.71(B))
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
         B.   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required
under R.C. § 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required under
any provision of law, the court imposing the sentence upon an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (b) of this section
shall order the offender to reimburse one or more rescuers for the cost any
such rescuer incurred in rescuing the person, excluding any cost of
transporting the rescued person to a hospital or other facility for treatment
of injuries, up to a cumulative maximum of $2,000. If more than one rescuer was
involved in the emergency response, the court shall allocate the reimbursement
proportionately, according to the cost each rescuer incurred. A financial
sanction imposed under this section is a judgment in favor of the rescuer and,
subject to a determination of indigency under R.C. § 2929.28(B), a rescuer may
collect the financial sanction in the same manner as provided in R.C. §
2929.28.
(R.C. § 4511.714(C))
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Emergency medical service organization.” Has the same meanings as
in R.C. § 9.60.
      (2)   “Firefighting agency.” Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 9.60.
      (3)   “Private fire company.” Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 9.60.
      (4)   “Rescuer.” Means a state agency, political subdivision,
firefighting agency, private fire company, or emergency medical service
organization.
(R.C. § 4511.714(D))
(Prior Code, § 432.24)
§ 432.28 FOLLOWING AND PARKING NEAR EMERGENCY OR SAFETY VEHICLES.
   (a)   The driver of any vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle or public
safety vehicle on official business, shall not follow any emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle traveling in response to an alarm closer than 500 feet,
or drive into or park the vehicle within the block where the fire apparatus has
stopped in answer to a fire alarm, unless directed to do so by a police officer
or a firefighter.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.72) (Prior Code, § 432.25)
§ 432.29 DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
   (a)   No vehicle shall, without the consent of the Fire Department official
in command, be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department that is
laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of
fire.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.73) (Prior Code, § 432.26)
§ 432.30 DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE.
   (a)   No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety
zone.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.60) (Prior Code, § 432.27)
§ 432.31 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   (a)   (1)   Upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for one-way
traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
      (2)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven
only to the right of the rotary traffic island.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.32) (Prior Code, § 432.28)
§ 432.32 DRIVING UPON DIVIDED ROADWAYS.
   (a)   Whenever any highway has been divided into two roadways by an
intervening space, or by a physical barrier, or a clearly indicated dividing
section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be
driven only upon the right-hand roadway, and no vehicle shall be driven over,
across or within any dividing space, barrier or section, except through an
opening, crossover or intersection established by public authority. This
section does not prohibit the occupancy of the dividing space, barrier or
section for the purpose of an emergency stop, or in compliance with an order of
a police officer.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.35) (Prior Code, § 432.29)
§ 432.33 STOPPING FOR SCHOOL BUS; ACTUATING VISUAL SIGNALS; DISCHARGING
CHILDREN.
    (a)   The driver of a vehicle, upon meeting or overtaking from either
direction any school bus stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging
any school child, person attending programs offered by community boards of
mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child
attending a program offered by a head start agency, shall stop at least ten
feet from the front or rear of the school bus and shall not proceed until such
school bus resumes motion, or until signaled by the school bus driver to
proceed. It is no defense to a charge under this division (a) that the school
bus involved failed to display or be equipped with an automatically extended
stop warning sign as required by division (b) of this section.
   (b)   Every school bus shall be equipped with amber and red visual signals
meeting the requirements of R.C. § 4511.771 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and an automatically extended stop warning sign of a type
approved by the Ohio Department of Education and Workforce, which shall be
actuated by the driver of the bus whenever but only whenever the bus is stopped
or stopping on the roadway for the purpose of receiving or discharging school
children, persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental
health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or children attending
programs offered by head start agencies. A school bus driver shall not actuate
the visual signals or the stop warning sign in designated school bus loading
areas where the bus is entirely off the roadway or at school buildings when
children or persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental
health and county boards of developmental disabilities are loading or unloading
at curbside or at buildings when children attending programs offered by head
start agencies are loading or unloading at curbside. The visual signals and
stop warning sign shall be synchronized or otherwise operated as required by
the Ohio Administrative Code.
   (c)   Where a highway has been divided into four or more traffic lanes, a
driver of a vehicle need not stop for a school bus approaching from the
opposite direction which has stopped for the purpose of receiving or
discharging any school child, persons attending programs offered by community
boards of mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or
children attending programs offered by head start agencies. The driver of any
vehicle overtaking the school bus shall comply with division (a) of this
section.
    (d)   School buses operating on divided highways or on highways with four
or more traffic lanes shall receive and discharge all school children, persons
attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and county
boards of developmental disabilities, and children attending programs offered
by head start agencies on their residence side of the highway.
   (e)   No school bus driver shall start the driver’s bus until after any
child, person attending programs offered by community boards of mental health
and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child attending a program
offered by a head start agency who may have alighted therefrom has reached a
place of safety on the child’s or person’s residence side of the road.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of an
unclassified misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section may be fined an
amount no less than $500 and not to exceed $750. A person who is issued a
citation for a violation of division (a) of this section is not permitted to
enter a written plea of guilty and waive the person’s right to contest the
citation in a trial but instead must appear in person in the proper court to
answer the charge.
      (3)   In addition to and independent of any other penalty provided by
law, the court may impose upon an offender who violates this section a class
seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7) and/or a
sentence up to 30 days in jail. When a license is suspended under this section,
the court shall cause the offender to deliver the license to the court, and the
court or Clerk of the Court immediately shall forward the license to the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles, together with notice of the court’s action.
   (g)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Head start agency.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3301.32.
      (2)   “School bus.” As used in relation to children who attend a program
offered by a head start agency, means a bus that is owned and operated by a
head start agency, is equipped with an automatically extended stop warning sign
of a type approved by the Ohio Department of Education and Workforce, is
painted the color and displays the markings described in R.C. § 4511.77, and is
equipped with amber and red visual signals meeting the requirements of R.C. §
4511.77, irrespective of whether or not the bus has 15 or more children aboard
at any time. The term does not include a van owned and operated by a head start
agency, irrespective of its color, lights or markings.
(R.C. § 4511.75) (Prior Code, § 432.30) (Ord. 102-2019, passed 8-26-2019; Ord.
21-132, passed 9-27-2021)
§ 432.34 DRIVING ACROSS GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   (1)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad
grade crossing, the person shall stop within 50 feet, but not less than 15 feet
from the nearest rail of the railroad if any of the following circumstances
exist at the crossing:
         A.   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a train or other on-track equipment.
         B.   A crossing gate is lowered.
         C.   A flagperson gives or continues to give a signal of the approach
or passage of a train or other on-track equipment.
         D.   There is insufficient space on the other side of the railroad
grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the person is operating without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles, pedestrians, or trains,
notwithstanding any highway traffic signal indication to proceed.
         E.   An approaching train is emitting an audible signal or is plainly
visible and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing.
         F.   There is insufficient undercarriage clearance to safely negotiate
the crossing.
         G.   There is insufficient space on the other side of the railroad
grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the person is operating without
obstructing the passage of other on-track equipment.
         H.   Approaching on-track equipment is emitting an audible signal or
is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing.
      (2)   A.   A person who is driving a vehicle and who approaches a
railroad grade crossing shall not proceed as long as any of the circumstances
described in divisions (a)(1)A. to (a)(1)F. of this section exist at the
crossing.
         B.   A person who is driving a vehicle and who approaches a railroad
grade crossing shall not recklessly proceed as long as any of the circumstances
described in division (a)(1)G. or (a)(1)H. of this section exist at the
crossing.
   (b)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed unless the person is signaled by a law
enforcement officer or flagperson that it is permissible to do so.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
      (2)   In lieu of a fine or jail term for a violation of this section, a
court may instead order the offender to attend and successfully complete a
remedial safety training or presentation regarding rail safety that is offered
by an authorized and qualified organization that is selected by the court. The
offender shall complete the presentation within a time frame determined by the
court, not to exceed 180 days after the court issues the order. The offender
shall notify the court of the successful completion of the presentation. When
the offender notifies the court of the successful completion of the
presentation, the court shall waive any fine or jail term that it otherwise
would have imposed for a violation of this section.
(R.C. § 4511.62) (Prior Code, § 432.31)
§ 432.35 STOPPING AT GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) of this section, the
operator of any bus, any school vehicle, or any vehicle transporting a material
or materials required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R. Parts 100 through 185,
before crossing at grade any track of a railroad, shall stop the vehicle and,
while so stopped, shall listen through an open door or open window and look in
both directions along the track for any approaching train or other on-track
equipment, and for signals indicating the approach of a train or other on-track
equipment, and shall proceed only upon exercising due care after stopping,
looking, and listening as required by this section. Upon proceeding, the
operator of such a vehicle shall cross only in a gear that will ensure there
will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing the crossing and shall
not shift gears while crossing the tracks.
      (2)   Division (a) of this section does not apply at grade crossings when
any local authority has filed an application with the Public Utilities
Commission requesting the approval of an exempt crossing, and the Public
Utilities Commission has authorized and approved an exempt crossing as provided
in R.C. § 4511.63(B).
      (3)   As used in division (a) of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         A.   “Bus.” Any vehicle originally designed by its manufacturer to
transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver, or carries 16 or more
passengers, including the driver.
         B.   “Exempt crossing.” A highway rail grade crossing authorized and
approved by the Public Utilities Commission under R.C. § 4511.63(B) at which
vehicles may cross without making the stop otherwise required by this section.
         C.   “School vehicle.” Any vehicle used for the transportation of
pupils to and from a school or school-related function if the vehicle is owned
or operated by, or operated under contract with, a public or nonpublic school.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of
division (a) of this section or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762,
4511.764, 4511.77 or 4511.79, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates division (a) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.63)
   (b)   (1)   As used in this section, "grade crossing warning system" means
the flashing-light signals, with or without automatic gates together with the
necessary control equipment that is used to inform road users of the approach
and presence of rail traffic at a grade crossing.
      (2)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities, with the
approval of the Department, may designate dangerous highway crossings over
railroad tracks and erect stop signs thereat.
      (3)   A.   The Department and local authorities shall erect stop signs at
a railroad highway grade crossing in either of the following circumstances:
            1.   New warning devices that are not grade crossing warning
systems are being installed at the grade crossing, and railroad crossbucks were
the only warning devices at the grade crossing prior to the installation of the
new warning devices.
            2.   The grade crossing is constructed after July 1, 2013, and only
warning devices that are not grade crossing warning devices systems are
installed at the grade crossing.
         B.   Division (b)(3)A. of this section does not apply to a railroad
highway grade crossing that the Director of Transportation has exempted from
that division because of traffic flow or other considerations or factors.
      (4)   When stop signs are erected pursuant to division (b)(2) or (b)(3)
of this section, the operator of any vehicle shall stop within 50, but not less
than 15, feet from the nearest rail of the railroad tracks and shall exercise
due care before proceeding across such grade crossing.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b)(4) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (6)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.61) (Prior Code, § 432.32)
§ 432.36 SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES OR EQUIPMENT AT GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   No person shall operate or move any crawler-type tractor, steam
shovel, derrick, roller or any equipment or structure having a normal operating
speed of six or less miles per hour or a vertical body or load clearance of
less than nine inches above the level surface of a roadway, upon or across any
tracks at a railroad grade crossing without first complying with divisions (a)
(1) and (a)(2) of this section.
      (1)   Before making any such crossing, the person operating or moving any
such vehicle or equipment shall first stop the same, and while stopped the
person shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any
approaching train or other on-track equipment and for signals indicating the
approach of a train or other on-track equipment, and shall proceed only upon
exercising due care.
      (2)   No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by automatic
signal or crossing gates or a flagperson or otherwise of the immediate approach
of a train or car or other on-track equipment.
   (b)   If the normal sustained speed of the vehicle, equipment or structure
is not more than three miles per hour, the person owning, operating or moving
the same shall also give notice of the intended crossing to a station agent or
superintendent of the railroad, and a reasonable time shall be given to the
railroad to provide proper protection for the crossing. Where the vehicles or
equipment are being used in constructing or repairing a section of highway
lying on both sides of a railroad grade crossing, and in this construction or
repair it is necessary to repeatedly move the vehicles or equipment over the
crossing, one daily notice specifying when the work will start and stating the
hours during which it will be prosecuted is sufficient.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.64) (Prior Code, § 432.33)
§ 432.37 OBSTRUCTING INTERSECTIONS, CROSSWALKS OR GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   No driver shall enter an intersection or marked crosswalk or drive
onto any railroad grade crossing unless there is sufficient space on the other
side of the intersection, crosswalk, or grade crossing to accommodate the
vehicle the driver is operating without obstructing the passage of other
vehicles, pedestrians, or trains, notwithstanding any highway traffic signal
indication to proceed.
   (b)   This section does not apply to a bicyclist using a two-stage bicycle
turn box.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.712) (Prior Code, § 432.34)
§ 432.38 “PEELING”; CRACKING EXHAUST NOISES.
   No person shall operate any motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe
operation, or in compliance with law, in such a manner that the vehicle is so
rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped position, or in the shifting of
gears while in motion, that the exhaust system emits a loud, cracking or
chattering noise unusual to its normal operation, or that the rubber tires of
the vehicle squeal or leave tire marks on the roadway, commonly known as
“peeling”.
(Prior Code, § 432.35)
§ 432.39 SHORTCUTTING ACROSS PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No operator of a motor vehicle shall enter upon private property for the
sole purpose of driving across that property, between abutting streets or other
public ways thereof. The failure to stop on the property in connection with or
in furtherance of the enterprise or activities being conducted on the property
shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation.
(Prior Code, § 432.36)
§ 432.40 ENTERING AND EXITING CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY.
   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access highway
except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
(Prior Code, § 432.37)
§ 432.41 WEAVING; FULL TIME AND ATTENTION.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle upon any street
or highway in a weaving or zigzag course unless the irregular course is
necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle without giving
his or her full time and attention to the operation of the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 432.38)
§ 432.42 INTERFERENCE WITH TRAFFIC.
   No person shall purposely block, obstruct or otherwise interfere with the
free flow of traffic on any street, highway, railroad or navigable body of
water or stream.
(Prior Code, § 432.39) (Ord. 1233, passed 11-24-1958)
§ 432.43 OPERATION ON PATHS SET ASIDE FOR BICYCLES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, snowmobile or all-
purpose vehicle upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, when
an appropriate sign giving notice of that use is posted on the path.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect any rule of
the Director of Natural Resources governing the operation of motor vehicles,
snowmobiles, all-purpose vehicles and bicycles on lands under the Director’s
jurisdiction.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.713) (Prior Code, § 432.40)
§ 432.44 LITTERING FROM MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   No operator or occupant of a motor vehicle shall, regardless of
intent, throw, drop, discard or deposit litter from any motor vehicle in
operation upon any street, road or highway, except into a litter receptacle in
a manner that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (b)   No operator of a motor vehicle in operation upon any street, road or
highway shall allow litter to be thrown, dropped, discarded or deposited from
the motor vehicle, except into a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents
its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (c)   As used in this section, “litter” means garbage, trash, waste,
rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts,
furniture, glass or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.82) (Prior Code, § 432.41)
§ 432.45 USE OF EARPHONES WHILE DRIVING.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Earphones.” Any device that covers all or a portion of both ears
and that does either of the following:
         A.   Through either a physical connection to another device or a
wireless connection, provides the listener with radio programs, music, or other
information;
         B.   Provides hearing protection.
   “Earphones” does not include speakers or other listening devices that are
built into protective headgear.
      (2)   “Earplugs.” Any device that can be inserted into one or both ears
and that does either of the following:
         A.   Through either a physical connection to another device or a
wireless connection, provides the listener with radio programs, music, or other
information;
         B.   Provides hearing protection.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle while wearing earphones over,
or earplugs in, both ears.
   (c)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   Any person wearing a hearing aid;
      (2)   Law enforcement personnel while on duty;
      (3)   Fire Department personnel and emergency medical service personnel
while on duty;
      (4)   Any person engaged in the operation of equipment for use in the
maintenance or repair of any highway;
      (5)   Any person engaged in the operation of refuse collection equipment;
      (6)   Any person wearing earphones or earplugs for hearing protection
while operating a motorcycle.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.84) (Prior Code, § 432.42)
§ 432.46 TEXTING WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any street, highway, or
property open to the public for vehicular traffic while using, holding, or
physically supporting with any part of the person’s body an electronic wireless
communications device.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device to make
contact, for emergency purposes, with a law enforcement agency, hospital or
health care provider, fire department, or other similar emergency agency or
entity;
      (2)   A person driving a public safety vehicle while using an electronic
wireless communications device in the course of the person’s duties;
      (3)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device when
the person's motor vehicle is in a stationary position and is outside a lane of
travel, at a highway traffic signal that is currently directing traffic to
stop, or parked on a road or highway due to an emergency or road closure;
      (4)   A person using and holding an electronic wireless communications
device directly near the person’s ear for the purpose of making, receiving, or
conducting a telephone call, provided that the person does not manually enter
letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
      (5)   A person receiving wireless messages on an electronic wireless
communications device regarding the operation or navigation of a motor vehicle;
safety-related information, including emergency, traffic, or weather alerts; or
data used primarily by the motor vehicle, provided that the person does not
hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (6)   A person using the speaker phone function of the electronic
wireless communications device, provided that the person does not hold or
support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (7)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device for
navigation purposes, provided that the person does not do either of the
following during the use:
         A.   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         B.   Hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (8)   A person using a feature or function of the electronic wireless
communications device with a single touch or single swipe, provided that the
person does not do either of the following during the use:
         A.   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         B.   Hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (9)   A person operating a commercial truck while using a mobile data
terminal that transmits and receives data;
      (10)   A person operating a utility service vehicle or a vehicle for or
on behalf of a utility, if the person is acting in response to an emergency,
power outage, or circumstance that affects the health or safety of individuals;
      (11)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device in
conjunction with a voice- operated or hands-free feature or function of the
vehicle or of the device without the use of either hand except to activate,
deactivate, or initiate the feature or function with a single touch or swipe,
provided the person does not hold or support the device with any part of the
person’s body;
      (12)   A person using technology that physically or electronically
integrates the device into the motor vehicle, provided that the person does not
do either of the following during the use:
         A.   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         B.   Hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body.
      (13)   A person storing an electronic wireless communications device in a
holster, harness, or article of clothing on the person’s body.
   (c)   If a law enforcement officer issues an offender a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of division (a) of this section, the officer shall do
both of the following:
      (1)   Report the issuance of the ticket, citation, or summons to the
officer’s law enforcement agency;
      (2)   Ensure that such report indicates the offender’s race.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of operating a
motor vehicle while using an electronic wireless communication device, an
unclassified misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in divisions (d)(1)
to (d)(5) of this section.
      (1)   The offender shall be fined, and is subject to a suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege, as follows:
         A.   Except as provided in divisions (d)(1)B., (d)(1)C., (d)(1)D., and
(d)(2) of this section, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine of not
more than $150.
         B.   If, within two years of the violation, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one prior violation of this section, R.C. §
4511.204, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court shall
impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $250.
         C.   If, within two years of the violation, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more prior violations of this section,
R.C. § 4511.204, or a substantially equivalent or municipal ordinance, the
court shall impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $500. The court
also may impose a suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or
nonresident operating privilege for 90 days.
         D.   Notwithstanding divisions (d)(1)A. to (d)(1)C. of this section,
if the offender was operating the motor vehicle at the time of the violation in
a construction zone where a sign was posted in accordance with R.C. § 4511.98,
the court, in addition to all other penalties provided by law, shall impose
upon the offender a fine of two times the amount imposed for the violation
under division (d)(1)A., (d)(1)B., or (d)(1)C. of this section, as applicable.
      (2)   If the offender is in the category of offenders to whom division
(d)(1)A. of this section applies, in lieu of payment of the fine of $150 under
division (d)(1)A. of this section and the assessment of points under division
(d)(4) of this section, the offender instead may elect to attend the distracted
driving safety course, as described in R.C. § 4511.991. If the offender attends
and successfully completes the course, the offender shall be issued written
evidence that the offender successfully completed the course. The offender
shall not be required to pay the fine and shall not have the points assessed
against that offender’s driver’s license if the offender submits the written
evidence to the court within 90 days of the violation of division (a) of this
section. However, successful completion of the course does not result in a
dismissal of the charges for the violation, and the violation is a prior
offense under divisions (d)(1)B. and (d)(1)C. of this section if the offender
commits a subsequent violation or violations of division (a) of this section
within two years of the offense for which the course was completed. This
division does not apply with respect to any offender in the category of
offenders to whom division (d)(1)B., (d)(1)C., or (d)(1)D. of this section
applies.
      (3)   The court may impose any other penalty authorized under R.C. §§
2929.21 to 2929.28. However, the court shall not impose a fine or a suspension
not otherwise specified in division (d)(1) of this section. The court also
shall not impose a jail term or community residential sanction.
      (4)   Except as provided in division (d)(2) of this section, points shall
be assessed for a violation of division (a) of this section in accordance with
R.C. § 4510.036.
      (5)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense as a
strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
   (e)   A prosecution for an offense in violation of this section does not
preclude a prosecution for an offense in violation of R.C. § 4511.204 based on
the same conduct. However, the two offenses are allied offenses of similar
import under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (f)   (1)   A law enforcement officer does not have probable cause and shall
not stop the operator of a motor vehicle for purposes of enforcing this section
unless the officer visually observes the operator using, holding, or physically
supporting with any part of the person’s body the electronic wireless
communications device.
      (2)   A law enforcement officer who stops the operator of a motor vehicle
for a violation of division (a) of this section shall inform the operator that
the operator may decline a search of the operator’s electronic wireless
communications device. The officer shall not do any of the following:
         A.   Access the device without a warrant, unless the operator
voluntarily and unequivocally gives consent for the officer to access the
device;
         B.   Confiscate the device while awaiting the issuance of a warrant to
access the device;
         C.   Obtain consent from the operator to access the device through
coercion or any other improper means. Any consent by the operator to access the
device shall be voluntary and unequivocal before the officer may access the
device without a warrant.
   (g)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Electronic wireless communications device.”
         A.   Includes any of the following:
            1.   A wireless telephone;
            2.   A text-messaging device;
            3.   A personal digital assistant;
            4.   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
            5.   Any device capable of displaying a video, movie, broadcast
television image, or visual image;
            6.   Any other substantially similar wireless device that is
designed or used to communicate text, initiate or receive communication, or
exchange information or data.
         B.   An “electronic wireless communications device” does not include a
two-way radio transmitter or receiver used by a person who is licensed by the
federal communications commission to participate in the amateur radio service.
      (2)   “Utility.” An entity specified in R.C. § 4905.03(A), (C), (D), (E),
or (G).
      (3)   “Utility service vehicle.” A vehicle owned or operated by a
utility.
      (4)   “Voice-operated or hands-free feature or function.” A feature or
function that allows a person to use an electronic wireless communications
device without the use of either hand, except to activate, deactivate, or
initiate the feature or function with a single touch or single swipe.
(R.C. § 4511.204) (Prior Code, § 432.43) (Ord. 23-67, passed 4-10-2023)
Statutory reference:
   No preemption for local regulations imposing greater penalties, see R.C. §
4511.204(E)
§ 432.47 USE OF ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATION DEVICES BY MINORS OR
PROBATIONARY DRIVERS WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit who has not attained the
age of 18 years and no holder of a probationary driver’s license shall drive a
motor vehicle on any street, highway, or property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking while using in any manner an
electronic wireless communications device.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to either of the
following:
      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device for
emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a law enforcement
agency, hospital or health care provider, fire department, or other similar
emergency agency or entity;
      (2)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device whose
motor vehicle is in a stationary position and the motor vehicle is outside a
lane of travel;
      (3)   A person using a navigation device in a voice-operated or hands-
free manner who does not manipulate the device while driving.
   (c)   (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, whoever
violates division (a) of this section shall be fined $150. In addition, the
court shall impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license
or permit for a definite period of 60 days.
      (2)   If the person previously has been adjudicated a delinquent child or
a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this section, whoever violates
this section shall be fined $300. In addition, the court shall impose a class
seven suspension of the person’s driver’s license or permit for a definite
period of one year.
   (d)   The filing of a sworn complaint against a person for a violation of
this section does not preclude the filing of a sworn complaint for a violation
of R.C. §4511.205 for the same conduct. However, if a person is adjudicated a
delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this section
and is also adjudicated a delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a
violation of R.C. § 4511.205 for the same conduct, the two offenses are allied
offenses of similar import under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (e)   As used in this section, “electronic wireless communications device”
includes any of the following:
      (1)   A wireless telephone;
      (2)   A personal digital assistant;
      (3)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
      (4)   A text-messaging device;
      (5)   Any other substantially similar electronic wireless device that is
designed or used to communicate via voice, image, or written word.
(R.C. § 4511.205) (Prior Code, § 432.44)
§ 432.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 434: OVI; RECKLESS OPERATION; SPEED
Section
434.01 Driving or physical control of vehicle while under the influence of
alcohol or drugs
434.02 Immobilizing or disabling device violation
434.03 Reckless operation on streets, public or private property
434.04 Reasonable control
434.05 Maximum speed limits; assured clear distance ahead
434.06 Speed limits on private roads
434.07 Slow speed; posted minimum speeds
434.08 Speed limitations over bridges
434.09 Speed exceptions for emergency or safety vehicles
434.10 Street racing, stunt driving and street takeovers prohibited
434.11 Vehicular homicide; vehicular manslaughter
434.12 Operation restricted for mini-trucks and low-speed, under-speed, or
utility vehicles
 
434.99 Penalty
§ 434.01 DRIVING OR PHYSICAL CONTROL OF VEHICLE WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF
ALCOHOL OR DRUGS.
   (a)   Driving under the influence.
      (1)   No person shall operate any vehicle within this municipality, if,
at the time of the operation, any of the following apply:
         A.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
a combination of them.
         B.   The person has a concentration of 0.08% or more but less than
0.17% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
         C.   The person has a concentration of 0.096% or more but less than
0.204% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma.
   D.   The person has a concentration of 0.08 grams or more but less than 0.17
grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
   E.   The person has a concentration of 0.11 grams or more but less than
0.238 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
   F.   The person has a concentration of 0.17% or more by weight per unit
volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
         G.   The person has a concentration of 0.204% or more by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or plasma.
   H   The person has a concentration of 0.17 grams or more by weight of
alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
   I.   The person has a concentration of 0.238 grams or more by weight of
alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
         J.   Except as provided in division (k) of this section, the person
has a concentration of any of the following controlled substances or
metabolites of a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds any of the following:
            1.   The person has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s
urine of at least 500 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter
of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            2.   The person has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s
urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s urine
or has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
            3.   The person has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter
of the person’s urine or has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of
cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
            4.   The person has a concentration of heroin in the person’s urine
of at least 2,000 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s urine or
has a concentration of heroin in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
            5.   The person has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-
monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s urine of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s urine or has
a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma.
            6.   The person has a concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s urine
of at least 25 nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s urine or a
concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of
at least ten nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma.
            7.   The person has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s
urine of at least ten nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least two nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            8.   Either of the following applies:
               a.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or a combination of them, and the person has a concentration of
marihuana metabolite in the person’s urine of at least 15 nanograms of
marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a
concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least five nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
               b.   The person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in
the person’s urine of at least 35 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite
in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms
of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma.
            9.   The person has a concentration of methamphetamine in the
person’s urine of at least 500 nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of
the person’s urine or has a concentration of methamphetamine in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of
methamphetamine per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
            10.   The person has a concentration of phencyclidine in the
person’s urine of at least 25 nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter of the
person’s urine or has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of phencyclidine per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            11.   The State Board of Pharmacy has adopted a rule pursuant to
R.C. § 4729.041 that specifies the amount of salvia divinorum and the amount of
salvinorin A that constitute concentrations of salvia divinorum and salvinorin
A in a person’s urine, in a person’s whole blood, or in a person’s blood serum
or plasma at or above which the person is impaired for purposes of operating
any vehicle within this state, the rule is in effect, and the person has a
concentration of salvia divinorum or salvinorin A of at least that amount so
specified by rule in the person’s urine, in the person’s whole blood, or in the
person’s blood serum or plasma.
      (2)   No person who, within 20 years of the conduct described in division
(a)(2)A. of this section, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
a violation of this division or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, division (a)(1) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or shall do both of the following:
         A.   Operate any vehicle within this municipality while under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;
         B.   Subsequent to being arrested for operating the vehicle as
described in division (a)(2)A. of this section, being asked by a law
enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and being advised by the
officer in accordance with R.C. § 4511.192 or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance of the consequences of the person’s refusal or submission
to the test or tests, refuse to submit to the test or tests.
   (b)   Underage alcohol consumption. No person under 21 years of age shall
operate any vehicle within this municipality if, at the time of the operation,
any of the following apply:
      (1)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02% but less than
0.08% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood;
      (2)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.03% but less than
0.096% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma;
      (3)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02 grams but less than
0.08 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath;
      (4)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.028 grams but less
than 0.11 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
   (c)   Prosecution; limitation on convictions. In any proceeding arising out
of one incident, a person may be charged with a violation of division (a)(1)A.
or (a)(2) and a violation of division (b)(1), (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section,
but the person may not be convicted of more than one violation of these
divisions.
   (d)   Evidence; tests.
      (1)   A.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (a)(1)A. of this section or for an equivalent offense
that is vehicle-related, the result of any test of any blood, oral fluid, or
urine withdrawn and analyzed at any health care provider, as defined in R.C. §
2317.02, may be admitted with expert testimony to be considered with any other
relevant and competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the
defendant.
         B.   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of division (a) or
(b) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, the
court may admit evidence on the presence and concentration of alcohol, drugs of
abuse, controlled substances, metabolites of a controlled substance, or a
combination of them in the defendant's whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, urine, oral fluid, or other bodily substance at the time of the alleged
violation as shown by chemical analysis of the substance withdrawn within three
hours of the time of the alleged violation. The three-hour time limit specified
in this division regarding the admission of evidence does not extend or affect
the two-hour time limit specified in R.C. § 4511.192(A) as the maximum period
of time during which a person may consent to a chemical test or tests as
described in that section. The court may admit evidence on the presence and
concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse, or a combination of them as described
in this division when a person submits to a blood, breath, urine, oral fluid,
or other bodily substance test at the request of a law enforcement officer
under R.C. § 4511.191 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a
blood or urine sample is obtained pursuant to a search warrant. Only a
physician, a registered nurse, an emergency medical technician-intermediate, an
emergency medical technician-paramedic, or a qualified technician, chemist, or
phlebotomist shall withdraw a blood sample for the purpose of determining the
alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the whole blood, blood serum, or blood plasma. This
limitation does not apply to the taking of breath, oral fluid, or urine
specimens. A person authorized to withdraw blood under this division may refuse
to withdraw blood under this division, if in that person's opinion, the
physical welfare of the person would be endangered by the withdrawing of blood.
The bodily substance withdrawn under this division (d)(1)B. shall be analyzed
in accordance with methods approved by the Director of Health by an individual
possessing a valid permit issued by the Director pursuant to R.C. § 3701.143.
         C.   As used in division (d)(1)B. of this section, “Emergency medical
technician- intermediate” and “Emergency medical technician-paramedic” have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4765.01.
      (2)   In a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (a) of this
section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, if there was at
the time the bodily substance was withdrawn a concentration of less than the
applicable concentration of alcohol specified in divisions (a)(1)B., (a)(1)C.,
(a)(1)D. and (a)(1)E. of this section or less than the applicable concentration
of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled
substance specified for a violation of division (a)(1)J. of this section, that
fact may be considered with other competent evidence in determining the guilt
or innocence of the defendant. This division does not limit or affect a
criminal prosecution for a violation of division (b) of this section.
      (3)   Upon the request of the person who was tested, the results of the
chemical test shall be made available to the person or the person’s attorney,
immediately upon the completion of the chemical test analysis. If the chemical
test was obtained pursuant to division (d)(1)B. of this section, the person
tested may have a physician, a registered nurse or a qualified technician,
chemist or phlebotomist of the person’s own choosing administer a chemical test
or tests, at the person’s expense, in addition to any administered at the
request of a law enforcement officer. If the person was under arrest as
described in R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the arresting officer shall advise the
person at the time of the arrest that the person may have an independent
chemical test taken at the person’s own expense. If the person was under arrest
other than described in R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the form to be read to the
person to be tested, as required under division (g) of this section, shall
state that the person may have an independent test performed at the person’s
expense. The failure or inability to obtain an additional chemical test by a
person shall not preclude the admission of evidence relating to the chemical
test or tests taken at the request of a law enforcement officer.
      (4)   A.   As used in division (d)(4)B. and (d)(4)C. of this section,
“National Highway Traffic Safety Administration” means the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration established as an administration of the United
States Department of Transportation under 96 Stat. 2415 (1983), 49 U.S.C. 105.
         B.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (a) or (b) of this section, of a municipal ordinance
relating to operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or alcohol and a drug of abuse, or of a municipal ordinance relating to
operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine, if a law enforcement officer has
administered a field sobriety test to the operator of the vehicle involved in
the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the
officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing
standards for any reliable, credible, and generally accepted field sobriety
tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including
but not limited to any testing standards then in effect that were set by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply:
            1.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
            2.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field
sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding.
            3.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (d)(4)B.1. or (d)(4)B.2. of this section and if the testimony or
evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the
testimony or evidence and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the
trier of fact considers to be appropriate.
         C.   Division (d)(4)B. of this section does not limit or preclude a
court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (d)(4)B. of this section.
   (e)   Laboratory report.
      (1)   Subject to division (e)(3) of this section, in any criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of division (a)(1)B.,
(a)(1)C., (a)(1)D., (a)(1)E., (a)(1)F., (a)(1)G., (a)(1)H., (a)(1)I. or (a)
(1)J. or (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3) or (b)(4) of this section or for an equivalent
offense that is substantially equivalent to any of those divisions, a
laboratory report from any laboratory personnel issued a permit by the
Department of Health authorizing an analysis as described in this division that
contains an analysis of the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine
or other bodily substance tested and that contains all of the information
specified in this division shall be admitted as prima facie evidence of the
information and statements that the report contains. The laboratory report
shall contain all of the following:
         A.   The signature, under oath, of any person who performed the
analysis;
         B.   Any findings as to the identity and quantity of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, a controlled substance, a metabolite of a controlled substance, or a
combination of them that was found;
         C.   A copy of a notarized statement by the laboratory director or a
designee of the director that contains the name of each certified analyst or
test performer involved with the report, the analyst’s or test performer’s
employment relationship with the laboratory that issued the report, and a
notation that performing an analysis of the type involved is part of the
analyst’s or test performer’s regular duties;
         D.   An outline of the analyst’s or test performer’s education,
training and experience in performing the type of analysis involved and a
certification that the laboratory satisfies appropriate quality control
standards in general and, in this particular analysis, under rules of the
Department of Health.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the admission
of evidence, a report of the type described in division (e)(1) of this section
is not admissible against the defendant to whom it pertains in any proceeding,
other than a preliminary hearing or a grand jury proceeding, unless the
prosecutor has served a copy of the report on the defendant’s attorney or, if
the defendant has no attorney, on the defendant.
      (3)   A report of the type described in division (e)(1) of this section
shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity or amount of any
substance if, within seven days after the defendant to whom the report pertains
or the defendant’s attorney receives a copy of the report, the defendant or the
defendant’s attorney demands the testimony of the person who signed the report.
The judge in the case may extend the seven-day time limit in the interest of
justice.
   (f)   Limitation of liability.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, any physician,
registered nurse, emergency medical technician-intermediate, emergency medical
technician-paramedic, or qualified technician, chemist or phlebotomist who
withdraws blood from a person pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.19,
4511.191 or 4511.192, and any hospital, first-aid station or clinic at which
blood is withdrawn from a person pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.19,
4511.191 or 4511.192, is immune from criminal liability and civil liability
based upon a claim of assault and battery or any other claim that is not a
claim of malpractice, for any act performed in withdrawing blood from the
person. The immunity provided in this division also extends to an emergency
medical service organization that employs an emergency medical technician-
intermediate or emergency medical technician-paramedic who withdraws blood
under this section. The immunity provided in this division is not available to
a person who withdraws blood if the person engages in willful or wanton
misconduct.
      (2)   As used in division (f)(1), “Emergency medical technician-
intermediate” and “Emergency medical technician-paramedic” have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 4765.01.
(R.C. § 4511.19(A) - (F))
   (g)   Implied consent.
      (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this division (g), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         A.   “Alcohol monitoring device.” Any device that provides for
continuous alcohol monitoring, any ignition interlock device, any immobilizing
or disabling device other than an ignition interlock device that is constantly
available to monitor the concentration of alcohol in a person’s system, or any
other device that provides for the automatic testing and periodic reporting of
alcohol consumption by a person and that a court orders a person to use as a
sanction imposed as a result of the person’s conviction of or plea of guilty to
an offense.
         B.   “Community addiction services provider.” Has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 5119.01.
         C.   “Physical control.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.194.
      (2)   Implied consent to chemical tests. Any person who operates a
vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for
vehicular travel or parking within this municipality or who is in physical
control of a vehicle shall be deemed to have given consent to a chemical test
or tests of the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, oral
fluid, or urine to determine the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance,
metabolite of a controlled substance, or combination content of the person's
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine if arrested
for a violation of division (a), (b) or (o) of this section, R.C. § 4511.19(A)
or (B), 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or any other
municipal O.V.I. ordinance.
      (3)   Tests at request of law enforcement agent. The chemical test or
tests under division (g)(2) of this section shall be administered at the
request of a law enforcement officer having reasonable grounds to believe the
person was operating or in physical control of a vehicle in violation of a
division, section or ordinance identified in division (g)(2) of this section.
The law enforcement agency by which the officer is employed shall designate
which of the tests shall be administered.
      (4)   Effect of death or unconsciousness. Any person who is dead or
unconscious, or who otherwise is in a condition rendering the person incapable
of refusal, shall be deemed to have consented as provided in division (g)(2) of
this section and the test or tests may be administered, subject to R.C. §§
313.12 to 313.16.
      (5)   Chemical tests.
         A.   If a law enforcement officer arrests a person for a violation of
R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, or a municipal O.V.I. ordinance and if the person if convicted would
be required to be sentenced under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(c), (G)(1)(d) or (G)(1)
(e), the law enforcement officer shall request the person to submit, and the
person shall submit, to a chemical test or tests of the person's whole blood,
blood serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine for the purpose of
determining the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a
controlled substance, or combination content of the person's whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine. A law enforcement officer who
makes a request pursuant to this division that a person submit to a chemical
test or tests is not required to advise the person of the consequences of
submitting to, or refusing to submit to, the test or tests and is not required
to give the person the form described in division (g)(7) of this section, but
the officer shall advise the person at the time of the arrest that if the
person refuses to take a chemical test the officer may employ whatever
reasonable means are necessary to ensure that the person submits to a chemical
test of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. The officer shall
also advise the person at the time of the arrest that the person may have an
independent chemical test taken at the person's own expense. Divisions (g)(3)
and (g)(4) of this section apply to the administration of a chemical test or
tests pursuant to this division.
         B.   If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test upon a request
made pursuant to division (g)(5)A. of this section, the law enforcement officer
who made the request may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary to
ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma. A law enforcement officer who acts pursuant to this
division to ensure that a person submits to a chemical test of the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma is immune from criminal and civil
liability based upon a claim for assault and battery or any other claim for the
acts, unless the officer so acted with malicious purpose, in bad faith, or in a
wanton or reckless manner.
(R.C. § 4511.191(A))
      (6)   Advice required. Except as provided in division (g)(5) of this
section, the arresting law enforcement officer shall give advice in accordance
with this division to any person under arrest for a violation of division (a),
(b) or (o) of this section, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or any other municipal OVI
ordinance. The officer shall give that advice in a written form that contains
the information described in division (g)(7) of this section and shall read the
advice to the person. The form shall contain a statement that the form was
shown to the person under arrest and read to the person by the arresting
officer. One or more persons shall witness the arresting officer’s reading of
the form, and the witnesses shall certify to this fact by signing the form. The
person must submit to the chemical test or tests, subsequent to the request of
the arresting officer, within two hours of the time of the alleged violation
and, if the person does not submit to the test or tests within that two-hour
time limit, the failure to submit automatically constitutes a refusal to submit
to the test or tests.
      (7)   Certification of arrest. Except as provided in division (g)(5) of
this section, if a person is under arrest as described in division (g)(6) of
this section, before the person may be requested to submit to a chemical test
or tests to determine the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance,
metabolite of a controlled substance or combination content of the person's
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine, the arresting
officer shall read the following form to the person:
“You now are under arrest for (specifically state the offense under state law
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for which the person was
arrested – operating a vehicle under the influence of alcohol, a drug, or a
combination of them; operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed
controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance;
operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption; or having physical
control of a vehicle while under the influence).
“If you refuse to take any chemical test required by law, your Ohio driving
privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay a fee to
have the privileges reinstated. If you have a prior conviction of OVI or
operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed controlled substance
or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance under state or municipal law
within the preceding 20 years, you are now under arrest for state OVI, and, if
you refuse to take a chemical test, you will face increased penalties if you
subsequently are convicted of the state OVI.
(Read this part unless the person is under arrest for solely having physical
control of a vehicle while under the influence.) “If you take any chemical test
required by law and are found to be at or over the prohibited amount of
alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
your whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as set by law, your
Ohio driving privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay
a fee to have the privileges reinstated.
“If you take a chemical test, you may have an independent chemical test taken
at your own expense.”
      (8)   Actions required by arresting officer. If the arresting law
enforcement officer does not ask a person under arrest as described in division
(g)(5) of this section or division (g)(6) of this section to submit to a
chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191 or this section, the arresting
officer shall seize the Ohio or out-of-state driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit of the person and immediately forward it to the court in
which the arrested person is to appear on the charge. If the arrested person is
not in possession of the person’s license or permit or it is not in the
person’s vehicle, the officer shall order the person to surrender it to the law
enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24 hours after the arrest,
and, upon the surrender, the agency immediately shall forward the license or
permit to the court in which the person is to appear on the charge. Upon
receipt of the license or permit, the court shall retain it pending the
arrested person’s initial appearance and any action taken under R.C. §
4511.196.
      (9)   Duties of officer.
         A.   If a law enforcement officer asks a person under arrest as
described in division (g)(5) of this section to submit to a chemical test or
tests under that division and the test results indicate a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine at the time of the alleged offense, or if a law enforcement
officer asks a person under arrest as described in division (g)(6) of this
section to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191 or this
section, if the officer advises the person in accordance with this section of
the consequences of the person’s refusal or submission, and if either the
person refuses to submit to the test or tests or, unless the arrest was for a
violation of division (o) of this section, R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the person submits to the test or tests and the
test results indicate a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine at the time of the alleged
offense, the arresting officer shall do all of the following:
            1.   On behalf of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, notify the
person that, independent of any penalties or sanctions imposed upon the person,
the person’s Ohio driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege is suspended immediately, that the suspension
will last at least until the person’s initial appearance on the charge, which
will be held within five days after the date of the person’s arrest or the
issuance of a citation to the person, and that the person may appeal the
suspension at the initial appearance or during the period of time ending 30
days after that initial appearance;
            2.   Seize the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit of
the person and immediately forward it to the Registrar. If the arrested person
is not in possession of the person’s license or permit or it is not in the
person’s vehicle, the officer shall order the person to surrender it to the law
enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24 hours after the person is
given notice of the suspension, and, upon the surrender, the officer’s
employing agency immediately shall forward the license or permit to the
Registrar;
            3.   Verify the person’s current residence and, if it differs from
that on the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit, notify
the Registrar of the change;
            4.   Send to the Registrar, within 48 hours after the arrest of the
person, a sworn report that includes all of the following statements:
               a.   That the officer had reasonable grounds to believe that, at
the time of the arrest, the arrested person was operating a vehicle in
violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B) or a municipal OVI ordinance or for being
in physical control of a stationary vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.194 or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
               b.   That the person was arrested and charged with a violation
of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, or a municipal OVI ordinance;
               c.   Unless division (g)(9)A.4.e. of this section applies, that
the officer asked the person to take the designated chemical test or tests,
advised the person in accordance with this section of the consequences of
submitting to, or refusing to take, the test or tests, and gave the person the
form described in division (g)(7) of this section;
               d.   Unless division (g)(9)A.4.e. of this section applies, that
either the person refused to submit to the chemical test or tests or, unless
the arrest was for a violation of R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the person submitted to the chemical test or tests and the
test results indicate a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine at the time of the alleged
offense;
               e.   If the person was under arrest as described in division (g)
(5) of this section and the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance
with that division, that the person was under arrest as described in that
division, that the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance with
that division, and that test results indicated a prohibited concentration of
alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine at the time
of the alleged offense.
         B.   Division (g)(9)A. of this section does not apply to a person who
is arrested for a violation of division (o) of this section, R.C. § 4511.194 or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or any other substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, who is asked by a law enforcement officer to
submit to a chemical test or tests under this section, and who submits to the
test or tests, regardless of the amount of alcohol, a controlled substance, or
a metabolite of a controlled substance that the test results indicate is
present in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid,
or urine.
      (10)   Sworn report of arresting officer.
         A.   The arresting officer shall give the officer’s sworn report that
is completed under this section to the arrested person at the time of the
arrest, or the Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall send the report to the person
by regular first-class mail as soon as possible after receipt of the report,
but not later than 14 days after receipt of it. An arresting officer may give
an unsworn report to the arrested person at the time of the arrest, provided
the report is complete when given to the arrested person and subsequently is
sworn to by the arresting officer. As soon as possible, but not later than 48
hours after the arrest of the person, the arresting officer shall send a copy
of the sworn report to the court in which the arrested person is to appear on
the charge for which the person was arrested.
         B.   The sworn report of an arresting officer completed under this
section is prima facie proof of the information and statements that it
contains. It shall be admitted and considered as prima facie proof of the
information and statements that it contains in any appeal under R.C. § 4511.197
relative to any suspension of a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit or nonresident operating privilege that results from the
arrest covered by the report.
(R.C. § 4511.192)
      (11)   Suspension effective immediately. A suspension of a person’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege under this section for the time described in R.C. § 4511.191(B) or
(C) is effective immediately from the time at which the arresting officer
serves the notice of suspension upon the arrested person. Any subsequent
finding that the person is not guilty of the charge that resulted in the
person’s being requested to take the chemical test or tests under division (g)
(1) through (g)(5) of this section does not affect the suspension.
      (12)   Initial appearance. If a person arrested for operating a vehicle
in violation of division (a) or (b) of this section, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B),
or any other municipal OVI ordinance, or for being in physical control of a
vehicle in violation of division (o) of this section or R.C. § 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, regardless of whether the
person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege is or is not suspended under R.C. § 4511.191(B) or (C) or
R.C. Chapter 4510, the person’s initial appearance on the charge resulting from
the arrest shall be held within five days of the person’s arrest or the
issuance of the citation to him or her, subject to any continuance granted by
the court pursuant to R.C. § 4511.197 regarding the issues specified in that
section.
(R.C. § 4511.191(D))
   (h)   Penalty for driving under the influence.
      (1)   Whoever violates any provisions of divisions (a)(1)A. through (a)
(1)I. or (a)(2) of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them. Whoever
violates division (a)(1)J. of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle
while under the influence of a listed controlled substance or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance. The court shall sentence the offender for
either offense under R.C. Chapter 2929, except as otherwise authorized or
required by divisions (h)(1)A. through (h)(1)E. of this section:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)B., (h)(1)C., (h)
(1)D. or (h)(1)E. of this section, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree and the court shall sentence the offender to all of the
penalties and sanctions provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a)(i) to (G)(1)(a)
(iv).
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)E. of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of division (a) of this
section, or one other equivalent offense is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and
sanctions provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) to (G)(1)(b)(v).
         C.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)E. of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division (a) of this
section or other equivalent offenses is guilty of a misdemeanor. The court
shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and sanctions provided in
R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(c)(i) to (G)(1)(c)(vi).
         D.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)E. of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of division (a) of
this section or other equivalent offenses or an offender who, within 20 years
of the offense, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to five or
more violations of that nature, or an offender who previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a specification of the type described in R.C.
§ 2941.1413, is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
         E.   An offender who previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) that was a felony, regardless of
when the violation and the conviction or guilty plea occurred, is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   An offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (a) of this section and who subsequently seeks reinstatement of the
driver’s or occupational driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege suspended under this section or R.C. § 4511.19 as a result of the
conviction or guilty plea shall pay a reinstatement fee as provided in R.C. §
4511.191(F)(2).
      (3)   A.   If an offender is sentenced to a jail term under R.C. §
4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) or (G)(1)(b)(ii) or (G)(1)(c)(i) or (G)(1)(c)(ii) and if,
within 60 days of sentencing of the offender, the court issues a written
finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail
where the offender is required to serve the term, the offender will not be able
to begin serving that term within the 60-day period following the date of
sentencing, the court may impose an alternative sentence as specified in R.C. §
4511.19(G)(3) that includes a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring,
with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and
continuous alcohol monitoring.
         B.   As an alternative to the mandatory jail terms as required by R.C.
§ 4511.19(G)(1), the court may sentence the offender as provided in R.C. §
4511.19(G)(3).
      (4)   If an offender’s driver’s or occupational driver’s license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended under division (h) of
this section or R.C. § 4511.19(G) and if R.C. § 4510.13 permits the court to
grant limited driving privileges, the court may grant the limited driving
privileges in accordance with that section. If division (A)(7) of that section
requires the court impose as a condition of the privileges that the offender
must display on the vehicle that is driven subject to the privileges restricted
license plates that are issued under R.C. § 4503.231, except as provided in
division (B) of that section, the court shall impose that condition as one of
the conditions of the limited driving privileges granted to the offender,
except as provided in R.C. § 4503.231(B).
      (5)   Fines imposed under this section for a violation of division (a) of
this section shall be distributed as provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(5).
      (6)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order of criminal
forfeiture under division (h)(1)C., (h)(1)D. or (h)(1)E. of this section is
assigned or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in
addition to or independent of any other penalty established by law, the court
may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of
the National Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds of any fine so
imposed shall be distributed in accordance with division (C)(2) of that
section.
      (7)   In all cases in which an offender is sentenced under division (h)
of this section, the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, the court, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, may order restitution pursuant to § 698.02(f) or
R.C. § 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under division (h)
of this section.
      (8)   A court may order an offender to reimburse a law enforcement agency
for any costs incurred by the agency with respect to a chemical test or tests
administered to the offender if all of the following apply:
         A.   The offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (a) of this section.
         B.   The test or tests were of the offender's whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, oral fluid, or urine.
         C.   The test or tests indicated that the offender had one of the
following at the time of the offense:
            1.   A prohibited concentration of a controlled substance or a
metabolite of a controlled substance in the offender's whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, or urine;
            2.   A drug of abuse or a metabolite of a drug of abuse in the
offender's oral fluid.
      (9)   A court may warn any person who is convicted of or who pleads
guilty to a violation of division (a) of this section or an equivalent offense
that a subsequent violation of this section or an equivalent offense that
results in the death of another or the unlawful termination of another's
pregnancy may result in the person being guilty of aggravated vehicular
homicide under R.C. § 2903.06. The court may warn the person of the applicable
penalties for that violation under R.C. §§ 2903.06 and 2929.142.
      (10)   As used in division (h) of this section, “electronic monitoring”
has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   (i)   Penalty for operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption.
Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of operating a motor
vehicle after underage alcohol consumption and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (i)(2) of this section,
the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. In addition to
any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class six
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6). The court may grant
limited driving privileges relative to the suspension under R.C. §§ 4510.021
and 4510.13. The court may grant unlimited driving privileges with an ignition
interlock device relative to the suspension and may reduce the period of
suspension as authorized under R.C. § 4510.022. If the court grants unlimited
driving privileges under R.C. § 4510.022, the court shall suspend any jail term
imposed under division (i)(1) of this section as required under that section.
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of division (a)
of this section or other equivalent offense or offenses, the offender is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the third degree. In addition to any other sanction imposed
for the offense, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4). The court may grant limited driving
privileges relative to the suspension under R.C. §§ 4510.021 and 4510.13.
      (3)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to § 698.02
(f) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing
the violation of division (b) of this section.
   (j)   Treatment programs.
      (1)   No court shall sentence an offender to an alcohol treatment program
under this section unless the treatment program complies with the minimum
standards for alcohol treatment programs adopted under R.C. Chapter 5119 by the
Director of Mental Health and Addiction Services.
      (2)   An offender who stays in a drivers’ intervention program or in an
alcohol treatment program under an order issued under this section shall pay
the cost of the stay in the program. However, if the court determines that an
offender who stays in an alcohol treatment program under an order issued under
this section is unable to pay the cost of the stay in the program, the court
may order that the cost be paid from the court’s Indigent Drivers’ Alcohol
Treatment Fund.
   (k)   Appeal; effect on suspension. If a person whose driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended
under this section or R.C. § 4511.19 files an appeal regarding any aspect of
the person’s trial or sentence, the appeal itself does not stay the operation
of the suspension.
   (l)   Exception; direction of health professional. Division (a)(1)J. of this
section does not apply to a person who operates a vehicle while the person has
a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds the amount specified in that division, if both of
the following apply:
      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
      (2)   The person injected, ingested or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
   (m)   Applicability to R.C. § 2923.16(D). The prohibited concentrations of a
controlled substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance listed in
division (a)(1)J. of this section also apply in a prosecution of a violation of
R.C. § 2923.16(D) in the same manner as if the offender is being prosecuted for
a prohibited concentration of alcohol.
   (n)   Applicability of terms. All terms defined in R.C. § 4510.01 apply to
this section. If the meaning of a term defined in R.C. § 4510.01 conflicts with
the meaning of the same term as defined in R.C. § 4510.01 or 4511.01, the term
as defined in R.C. § 4510.01 applies to this section.
(R.C. § 4511.19(G) - (M))
   (o)   Physical control of vehicle while under the influence.
      (1)   Definition. As used in this division (o), “physical control” means
being in the driver’s position of the front seat of a vehicle and having
possession of the vehicle’s ignition key or other ignition device.
      (2)   Generally. No person shall be in physical control of a vehicle if,
at the time of the physical control, any of the following apply:
         A.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
a combination of them.
         B.   The person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine
contains at least the concentration of alcohol specified in divisions (a)(1)B.,
(a)(1)C., (a)(1)D. or (a)(1)E. of this section.
         C.   Except as provided in division (o)(5) of this section, the person
has a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of
a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds the concentration specified in division (a)(1)J.
of this section.
      (3)   Field sobriety test.
         A.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of this section, if a law enforcement officer has administered a
field sobriety test to the person in physical control of the vehicle involved
in the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the
officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing
standards for any reliable, credible and generally acceptable field sobriety
tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including
but not limited to any testing standards then in effect that were set by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply:
            1.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
            2.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field
sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding.
            3.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (o)(3)A.1. or (o)(3)A.2. of this section and if the testimony or
evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the
testimony or evidence, and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the
trier of fact considers to be appropriate.
         B.   Division (o)(3)A. of this section does not limit or preclude a
court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (o)(3)A. of this section.
      (4)   Penalty. Whoever violates this division (o) is guilty of having
physical control of a vehicle while under the influence, a misdemeanor of the
first degree. In addition to other sanctions imposed, the court may impose on
the offender a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license
or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02
(A)(7).
      (5)   Exception. Division (o)(2)C. of this section does not apply to a
person who is in physical control of a vehicle while the person has a
concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds the amount specified in division (a)(1)J. of this
section if both of the following apply:
         A.   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
         B.   The person injected, ingested or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
(R.C. § 4511.194)
   (p)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   “Community residential sanction,” “continuous alcohol monitoring,”
“jail,” “mandatory prison term,” “mandatory term of local incarceration,”
“prison term” and “sanction.” Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      (2)   “Drug of abuse.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4506.01.
      (3)   “Equivalent offense.” Any of the following:
         A.   A violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A);
         B.   A violation of a municipal OVI ordinance;
         C.   A violation of R.C. § 2903.04 in a case in which the offender was
subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that section;
         D.   A violation of R.C. § 2903.06(A)(1) or 2903.08 or a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to either of those divisions;
         E.   A violation of R.C. § 2903.06(A)(2), (A)(3) or (A)(4), 2903.08(A)
(2), or former R.C. § 2903.07, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any of those divisions or that former section, in a case in which
a judge or jury as the trier of fact found that the offender was under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;
         F.   A violation of R.C. § 1547.11(A);
         G.   A violation of a municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from
operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or from
manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or similar device on the waters of this
state while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them or prohibiting a person from operating or being in physical control of
any vessel underway or from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or similar
device on the waters of this state with a prohibited concentration of alcohol,
a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine;
         H.   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
R.C. § 4511.19(A) or 1547.11(A);
         I.   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A) or 1547.11(A).
      (4)   “Equivalent offense that is vehicle-related.” An equivalent offense
that is any of the following:
         A.   A violation described in division A., B., C., D. or E. of the
definition for “equivalent offense” provided in this division (p);
         B.   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
R.C. § 4511.19(A);
         C.   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A).
      (5)   “Mandatory jail term.” The mandatory term in jail of three, six,
ten, 20, 30 or 60 days that must be imposed under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a), (G)
(1)(b), or (G)(1)(c) upon an offender convicted of a violation of division (A)
of that section and in relation to which all of the following apply:
         A.   Except as specifically authorized under R.C. § 4511.19, the term
must be served in a jail.
         B.   Except as specifically authorized under R.C. § 4511.19, the term
cannot be suspended, reduced or otherwise modified pursuant to R.C. §§ 2929.21
through 2929.28 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (6)   “Municipal OVI ordinance” and “municipal OVI offense.” Any
municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or
prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration
of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance
in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine.
(R.C. § 4511.181)
§ 434.02 IMMOBILIZING OR DISABLING DEVICE VIOLATION.
   (a)   (1)   No offender who has been granted limited or unlimited driving
privileges, during any period that the offender is required to operate only a
motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device, shall request
or permit any other person to breathe into the device if it is an ignition
interlock device or another type of device that monitors the concentration of
alcohol in a person’s breath or to otherwise start the motor vehicle equipped
with the device, for the purpose of providing the offender with an operable
motor vehicle.
      (2)   No person shall breathe into an immobilizing or disabling device
that is an ignition interlock device or another type of device that monitors
the concentration of alcohol in a person’s breath or otherwise start a motor
vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device, for the purpose of
providing an operable motor vehicle to another person who has been granted
limited or unlimited driving privileges under the condition that the person
operate only a motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device.
      (3)   No unauthorized person shall tamper with or circumvent the
operation of an immobilizing or disabling device.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an immobilizing or
disabling device violation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4510.44) (Prior Code, § 434.011)
§ 434.03 RECKLESS OPERATION ON STREETS, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any street or highway in willful
or wanton disregard of the safety of persons or property.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any public or private
property other than streets or highways in willful or wanton disregard of the
safety of persons or property.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to the competitive
operation of vehicles on public or private property when the owner of the
property knowingly permits such operation thereon.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates any
provision of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates any
provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates any
provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. §§ 4511.20, 4511.201) (Prior Code, § 434.02)
§ 434.04 REASONABLE CONTROL.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, agricultural tractor or
agricultural tractor that is towing, pulling or otherwise drawing a unit of
farm machinery on any street, highway or property open to the public for
vehicular traffic without being in reasonable control of the vehicle,
agricultural tractor or unit of farm machinery.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
or agricultural tractor without being in control of it, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.202) (Prior Code, § 434.025)
§ 434.05 MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS; ASSURED CLEAR DISTANCE AHEAD.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater or less
than is reasonable or proper, having due regard for the traffic, surface and
width of the street or highway and any other conditions, and no person shall
drive any motor vehicle in and upon any street or highway at a greater speed
than will permit him or her to bring it to a stop within the assured clear
distance ahead.
   (b)   It is prima facie lawful, in the absence of a lower limit declared or
established pursuant to this section by the Director of Transportation or local
authorities, for the operator of a motor vehicle to operate the same at a speed
not exceeding the following:
      (1)   A.   Twenty miles per hour in school zones during school recess and
while children are going to or leaving school during the opening or closing
hours, and when 20 miles per hour school speed limit signs are erected, except
that on controlled-access highways and expressways, if the right-of-way line
fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed
by division (b)(4) of this section, and on freeways, if the right-of-way line
fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed
by divisions (b)(10) and (b)(11) of this section. The end of every school zone
may be marked by a sign indicating the end of the zone. Nothing in this section
or in the Manual and Specifications for a Uniform System of Traffic-Control
Devices shall be construed to require school zones to be indicated by signs
equipped with flashing or other lights, or giving other special notice of the
hours in which the school zone speed limit is in effect.
         B.   As used in this section, “school” means all of the following:
            1.   Any school chartered under R.C. § 3301.16;
            2.   Any nonchartered school that during the preceding year filed
with the Ohio Department of Education and Workforce in compliance with O.A.C.
3301-35-08, a copy of the school’s report for the parents of the school’s
pupils certifying that the school meets state minimum standards for
nonchartered, nontax-supported schools and presents evidence of this filing to
the jurisdiction from which it is requesting the establishment of a school
zone;
            3.   Any special elementary school that in writing requests the
County Engineer to create a school zone at the location of the school. Upon
receipt of the written request, the County Engineer shall create a school zone
at that location by erecting appropriate signs;
            4.   Any preschool education program operated by an educational
service center that is located on a street or highway with a speed limit of 45
miles per hour or more, when the educational service center in writing requests
that either the Director of Transportation or the County Engineer, as
applicable based on who has jurisdiction of the street or highway, to create a
school zone at the location of that program. Upon receipt of such a written
request, the Director of Transportation or the County Engineer shall create a
school zone at that location by erecting the appropriate signs.
         C.   As used in this section, “school zone” means that portion of a
street or highway passing a school fronting upon the street or highway that is
encompassed by projecting the school property lines to the fronting street or
highway, and also includes that portion of a state highway. Upon request from
local authorities for streets and highways under their jurisdiction and that
portion of a state highway under the jurisdiction of the Director of
Transportation or a request from a County Engineer in the case of a school zone
for a special elementary school, the Director may extend the traditional school
zone boundaries. The distances in divisions (b)(1)C.1. through (b)(1)C.3. below
shall not exceed 300 feet per approach per direction, and are bounded by
whichever of the following distances or combination thereof the Director
approves as most appropriate:
            1.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school building
lines normal to the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction;
            2.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school property
lines intersecting the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction;
            3.   The distance encompassed by the special marking of the
pavement for a principal school pupil crosswalk plus a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction of the highway.
         D.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the
Director’s initial action on August 9, 1976, establishing all school zones at
the traditional school zone boundaries defined by projecting school property
lines, except when those boundaries are extended as provided in divisions (b)
(1)A. and (b)(1)C. of this section.
         E.   As used in this division, “crosswalk” has the meaning given that
term in R.C. § 4511.01(LL)(2).
         F.   The Director may, upon request by resolution of the legislative
authority and upon submission by the municipality of such engineering, traffic
and other information as the Director considers necessary, designate a school
zone on any portion of a state route lying within the municipality that
includes a crosswalk customarily used by children going to or leaving a school
during recess and opening and closing hours, whenever the distance, as measured
in a straight line, from the school property line nearest the crosswalk to the
nearest point of a crosswalk is no more than 1,320 feet. Such a school zone
shall include the distance encompassed by the crosswalk and extending 300 feet
in each appropriate direction of the state route.
         G.   As used in this section, “special elementary school” means a
school that meets all of the following:
            1.   It is not chartered and does not receive tax revenue from any
source.
            2.   It does not educate children beyond the eighth grade.
            3.   It is located outside the limits of a municipal corporation.
            4.   A majority of the total number of students enrolled at the
school are not related by blood.
            5.   The principal or other person in charge of the special
elementary school annually sends a report to the superintendent of the school
district in which the special elementary school is located indicating the total
number of students enrolled at the school, but otherwise the principal or other
person in charge does not report any other information or data to the
superintendent.
      (2)   Twenty-five miles per hour in all other portions of the
municipality, except on state routes outside business districts, through
highways outside business districts and alleys;
      (3)   Thirty-five miles per hour on all state routes or through highways
within the municipality outside business districts, except as provided in
divisions (b)(4) and (b)(6) of this section;
      (4)   Fifty miles per hour on controlled-access highways and expressways
within the municipality, except as provided in divisions (b)(12), (b)(13), (b)
(14), (b)(15), and (b)(16) of this section;
      (5)   Fifty-five miles per hour on highways outside the municipality,
other than highways within island jurisdictions as provided in division (b)(8)
of this section, highways as provided in divisions (b)(9) and (b)(10) of this
section, and highways, expressways and freeways as provided in divisions (b)
(12), (b)(13), (b)(14), and (b)(16) of this section;
      (6)   Fifty miles per hour on state routes within the municipality
outside urban districts unless a lower prima facie speed is established as
further provided in this section;
      (7)   Fifteen miles per hour on all alleys within the municipality;
      (8)   Thirty-five miles per hour on highways outside the municipality
that are within an island jurisdiction;
      (9)   Thirty-five miles per hour on through highways, except state
routes, that are outside municipal corporations and that are within a national
park with boundaries extending through two or more counties;
      (10)   Sixty miles per hour on two-lane state routes outside municipal
corporations as established by the Director under R.C. § 4511.21(H)(2);
      (11)   Fifty-five miles per hour on freeways with paved shoulders inside
the municipality, other than freeways as provided in divisions (b)(14) and (b)
(16) of this section;
      (12)   Sixty miles per hour on rural expressways with traffic control
signals and on all portions of rural divided highways, except as provided in
divisions (b)(13) and (b)(14) of this section;
      (13)   Sixty-five miles per hour on all rural expressways without traffic
control signals;
      (14)   Seventy miles per hour on all rural freeways;
      (15)   Fifty-five miles per hour on all portions of freeways or
expressways in congested areas as determined by the Director and that are
located within a municipal corporation or within an interstate freeway
outerbelt, except as provided in division (b)(16) of this section;
      (16)   Sixty-five miles per hour on all portions of freeways or
expressways without traffic control signals in urbanized areas.
   (c)   It is prima facie unlawful for any person to exceed any of the speed
limitations in divisions (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7), (b)
(8) and (b)(9) of this section or any declared or established pursuant to this
section by the Director or local authorities and it is unlawful for any person
to exceed any of the speed limitations in division (d) of this section. No
person shall be convicted of more than one violation of this section for the
same conduct, although violations of more than one provision of this section
may be charged in the alternative in a single affidavit.
   (d)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon a street or highway as
follows:
      (1)   At a speed exceeding 55 miles per hour, except upon a two-lane
state route as provided in division (b)(10) of this section and upon a highway,
expressway or freeway as provided in divisions (b)(12), (b)(13), (b)(14), and
(b)(16) of this section;
      (2)   At a speed exceeding 60 miles per hour upon a two-lane state route
as provided in division (b)(10) of this section and upon a highway as provided
in division (b)(12) of this section;
      (3)   At a speed exceeding 65 miles per hour upon an expressway as
provided in division (b)(13) of this section or upon a freeway as provided in
division (b)(16) of this section, except upon a freeway as provided in division
(b)(14) of this section;
      (4)   At a speed exceeding 70 miles per hour upon a freeway as provided
in division (b)(14) of this section;
      (5)   At a speed exceeding the posted speed limit upon a highway,
expressway or freeway for which the Director has determined and declared a
speed limit pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(I)(2) or (L)(2).
   (e)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(E), in every charge of violating this
section, the affidavit and warrant shall specify the time, place and speed at
which the defendant is alleged to have driven, and in charges made in reliance
upon division (c) of this section also the speed which division (b)(1)A., (b)
(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7), (b)(8) or (b)(9) of, or a limit declared
or established pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21 declares is prima
facie lawful at the time and place of the alleged violation, except that in
affidavits where a person is alleged to have driven at a greater speed than
will permit the person to bring the vehicle to stop within the assured clear
distance ahead, the affidavit and warrant need not specify the speed at which
the defendant is alleged to have driven.
   (f)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(F), when a speed in excess of both a prima
facie limitation and a limitation in division (d) of this section is alleged,
the defendant shall be charged in a single affidavit, alleging a single act,
with a violation indicated of both division (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4),
(b)(6), (b)(7), (b)(8) or (b)(9) of this section, or of a limit declared or
established pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.21 by the Director or local
authorities, and of the limitation in division (d) of this section. If the
court finds a violation of division (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6),
(b)(7), (b)(8) or (b)(9) of, or a limit declared or established pursuant to,
this section or R.C. § 4511.21 has occurred, it shall enter a judgment of
conviction under that division and dismiss the charge under division (d) of
this section. If it finds no violation of division (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3),
(b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7), (b)(8) or (b)(9) of, or a limit declared or established
pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21, it shall then consider whether the
evidence supports a conviction under division (d) of this section.
   (g)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(G), points shall be assessed for a
violation of a limitation under division (d) of this section in accordance with
R.C. § 4510.036.
(R.C. § 4511.21(A) - (G))
   (h)   Whenever, in accordance with R.C. § 4511.21(H) through (N), the
maximum prima facie speed limitations as established herein have been altered,
either higher or lower, and the appropriate signs giving notice have been
erected as required, operators of motor vehicles shall be governed by the speed
limitations set forth on those signs. It is prima facie unlawful for any person
to exceed the speed limits posted upon the signs.
   (i)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Commercial bus.” A motor vehicle designed for carrying more than
nine passengers and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
      (2)   “Divided.” Means a roadway having two or more travel lanes for
vehicles moving in opposite directions and that is separated by a median of
more than four feet, excluding turn lanes.
      (3)   “Interstate system.” Has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C. 101.
      (4)   “Noncommercial bus.” Includes but is not limited to a school bus,
or a motor vehicle operated solely for the transportation of persons associated
with a charitable or nonprofit organization.
      (5)   “Outerbelt.” A portion of a freeway that is part of the interstate
system and is located in the outer vicinity of a major municipal corporation or
group of municipal corporations, as designated by the Director.
      (6)   “Rural.” Means an area outside urbanized areas and outside of a
business or urban district, and areas that extend within urbanized areas where
the roadway characteristics remain mostly unchanged from those outside the
urbanized areas.
      (7)   “Urbanized area.” Has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C. § 101.
(R.C. § 4511.21(O))
   (j)   Penalty.
      (1)   A violation of any provision of this section is one of the
following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (j)(1)B., (j)(1)C., and
(j)(2) and (j)(3) of this section, a minor misdemeanor;
         B.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of any provision of this
section, R.C. § 4511.21, or any provision of any other municipal ordinance that
is substantially equivalent to any provision of that section, a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree;
         C.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of any
provision of this section, R.C. § 4511.21, or any provision of any other
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any provision of that
section, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   If the offender operated a motor vehicle faster than 35 miles an
hour in a business district of the municipality, faster than 50 miles an hour
in other portions of the municipality, or faster than 35 miles an hour in a
school zone during recess or while children are going to or leaving school
during the school’s opening or closing hours, a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. This division does not apply if penalties may be imposed under division
(j)(1)B. or (j)(1)C. of this section.
      (3)   Notwithstanding division (j)(1) of this section, if the offender
operated a motor vehicle in a construction zone where a sign was then posted in
accordance with R.C. § 4511.98, the court, in addition to all other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a fine of two times the usual
amount imposed for the violation. No court shall impose a fine of two times the
usual amount imposed for the violation upon an offender if the offender
alleges, in an affidavit filed with the court prior to the offender’s
sentencing, that the offender is indigent and is unable to pay the fine imposed
pursuant to this division and if the court determines that the offender is an
indigent person and unable to pay the fine.
      (4)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under § 408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.21(P))
(Prior Code, § 434.03)
§ 434.06 SPEED LIMITS ON PRIVATE ROADS.
   (a)   The owner of a private road located in a private residential area
containing 20 or more dwelling units may establish a speed limit on the road by
complying with all of the following requirements:
      (1)   The speed limit is not less than 25 miles per hour and is indicated
by a sign that is in a proper position, is sufficiently legible to be seen by
an ordinarily observant person, and meets the specifications for the basic
speed limit sign included in the Manual adopted by the Department of
Transportation pursuant to R.C. § 4511.09;
      (2)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road
that is in plain view and clearly informs persons entering the road that they
are entering private property, a speed limit has been established for the road,
and the speed limit is enforceable by law enforcement officers under state law.
   (b)   No person shall operate a vehicle upon a private road as provided in
division (a) of this section at a speed exceeding any speed limit established
and posted pursuant to division (a).
   (c)   When a speed limit is established and posted in accordance with
division (a) of this section, a law enforcement officer may apprehend a person
violating the speed limit of the residential area by utilizing any of the means
described in R.C. § 4511.091 or by any other accepted method of determining the
speed of a motor vehicle and may stop and charge the person with exceeding the
speed limit.
   (d)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.211(D), points shall be assessed for violation
of a speed limit established and posted in accordance with division (a) of this
section in accordance with R.C. § 4510.036.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Owner.” Includes but is not limited to a person who holds title to
the real property in fee simple, a condominium owners’ association, a property
owners’ association, a board of directors or trustees of a private community,
and a nonprofit corporation governing a private community.
      (2)   “Private residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units.”
Does not include a Chautauqua assembly as defined in R.C. § 4511.90.
   (f)   Penalty.
      (1)   A violation of division (b) of this section is one of the
following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (f)(1)B. and (f)(1)C.
of this section, a minor misdemeanor;
         B.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this section, R.C. §
4511.211(B), or any other municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent
to that division, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
         C.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this
section, R.C. § 4511.211(B), or any other municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to that division, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.211) (Prior Code, § 434.035)
§ 434.07 SLOW SPEED; POSTED MINIMUM SPEEDS.
   (a)   No person shall stop or operate a vehicle at such an unreasonably slow
speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic,
except when stopping or reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or to
comply with law.
   (b)   Whenever the Director of Transportation or local authorities determine
on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that slow speeds on
any part of a controlled-access highway, expressway or freeway consistently
impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the Director or local
authority may declare a minimum speed limit below which no person shall operate
a motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe operation or in compliance with
the law. No minimum speed limit established hereunder shall be less than 30
miles per hour, greater than 50 miles per hour, nor effective until the
provisions of R.C. § 4511.21 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
relating to appropriate signs, have been fulfilled and local authorities have
obtained the approval of the Director.
   (c)   In a case involving a violation of this section, the trier of fact, in
determining whether the vehicle was being operated at an unreasonably slow
speed, shall consider the capabilities of the vehicle and its operator.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (e)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.22) (Prior Code, § 434.04)
§ 434.08 SPEED LIMITATIONS OVER BRIDGES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle over any bridge or other
elevated structure constituting a part of a highway at a speed which is greater
than the maximum speed that can be maintained with safety to the bridge or
structure, when the structure is posted with signs as provided in this section.
      (2)   The Department of Transportation upon request from any local
authority shall, or upon its own initiative may, conduct an investigation of
any bridge or other elevated structure constituting a part of a highway, and if
it finds that the structure cannot with safety withstand traffic traveling at
the speed otherwise permissible under this traffic code, the Department shall
determine and declare the maximum speed of traffic which the structure can
withstand, and shall cause or permit suitable signs stating the maximum speed
to be erected and maintained at a distance of a least 100 feet before each end
of the structure.
      (3)   Upon the trial of any person charged with a violation of this
section, proof of such determination of the maximum speed by the Department and
the existence of the signs shall constitute prima facie evidence of the maximum
speed which can be maintained with safety to the bridge or structure.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.23) (Prior Code, § 434.05)
§ 434.09 SPEED EXCEPTIONS FOR EMERGENCY OR SAFETY VEHICLES.
   The prima facie speed limitations set forth in R.C. § 4511.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance do not apply to emergency vehicles
or public safety vehicles when they are responding to emergency calls and are
equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating
light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet
to the front of the vehicle, and when the drivers thereof sound audible signals
by bell, siren or exhaust whistle. This section does not relieve the driver of
an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons using the street or highway.
(R.C. § 4511.24) (Prior Code, § 434.06)
§ 434.10 STREET RACING, STUNT DRIVING AND STREET TAKEOVERS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Burnout.” A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby
the vehicle is kept in a stationary position, but the wheels of the vehicle are
spun, which may cause the tires of the vehicle to become heated and emit smoke
from the friction.
      (2)   “Doughnut.” A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby
the front or rear of the vehicle is rotated around the opposite set of wheels
in a continuous motion, which may cause a circular skid-mark pattern of rubber
on the driving surface, or the tires of the vehicle to become heated and emit
smoke from the friction, or both.
      (3)   “Drifting.” A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby
the vehicle is driven in a manner that causes a controlled, sideways skid
during a turn, with the front wheels pointing in a direction that is the
opposite of the direction of the turn.
      (4)   “Street racing.” The operation of two or more vehicles from a point
side by side at accelerating speeds in a competitive attempt to out-distance
each other or the operation of one or more vehicles over a common selected
course, from the same point to the same point, wherein timing is made of the
participating vehicles involving competitive accelerations or speeds. The
operation of two or more vehicles side by side either at speeds in excess of
prima-facie lawful speeds established by R.C. § 4511.21(B)(1)(a) to (B)(9) or
rapidly accelerating from a common starting point to a speed in excess of such
prima-facie lawful speeds shall be prima-facie evidence of street racing.
      (5)   “Street takeover.” Blocking or impeding the regular flow of vehicle
or pedestrian traffic on a public road, street, or highway or on private
property that is open to the general public for the purpose of street racing or
stunt driving.
      (6)   “Stunt driving.” Performing or engaging in burnouts, doughnuts,
drifting, or wheelies, or allowing a passenger to ride either partially or
fully outside of the vehicle while operating that vehicle.
      (7)   “Wheelie.” A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby
the front wheel or wheels of the vehicle are raised off of the ground or
whereby two wheels that are on the same side of the vehicle are raised off of
the ground.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly participate in street racing, stunt driving,
or street takeover upon any public road, street, or highway, or on private
property that is open to the general public.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of street racing, stunt
driving, or street takeover, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to
any other sanctions, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege for not less than 30 days or more
than three years. No judge shall suspend the first 30 days of any suspension of
an offender’s license, permit, or privilege imposed under this division.
   (d)   Persons rendering assistance in any manner to street racing, stunt
driving, or street takeover shall be equally charged as the participants.
   (e)   This section does not apply to the competitive operation of vehicles
on public or private property when the political subdivision with jurisdiction
of the location or owner of the property knowingly permits such operation
thereon.
(R.C. § 4511.251) (Prior Code, § 434.07)
§ 434.11 VEHICULAR HOMICIDE; VEHICULAR MANSLAUGHTER.
   (a)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a
motor vehicle, motorcycle, utility vehicle, mini-truck, snowmobile, locomotive,
watercraft, or aircraft, shall cause the death of another or the unlawful
termination of another’s pregnancy in any of the following ways:
      (1)   As the proximate result of committing an OVI offense.
      (2)   In one of the following ways:
         A.   Recklessly;
         B.   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle, utility vehicle, mini-truck,
or motorcycle in a construction zone, a reckless operation offense, provided
that this division applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose
pregnancy is unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of
the offender’s commission of the reckless operation offense in the construction
zone and does not apply as described in division (d) of this section.
      (3)   In one of the following ways:
         A.   Negligently;
         B.   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle, utility vehicle, mini-truck,
or motorcycle in a construction zone, a speeding offense, provided that this
division applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is
unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of the offender’s
commission of the speeding offense in the construction zone and does not apply
as described in division (d) of this section.
      (4)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of any provision
of any section contained in R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor or of a
municipal ordinance that, regardless of the penalty set by ordinance for the
violation, is substantially equivalent to any provision of any section
contained in R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is
guilty of aggravated vehicular homicide, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (a)(3) of this section is guilty of
vehicular homicide. Except as otherwise provided in this division, vehicular
homicide is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular homicide committed in
violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving
under a suspension or cancellation imposed under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other
provision of the Ohio Revised Code or was operating a motor vehicle or
motorcycle, did not have a valid driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the offender’s driver’s license
or commercial driver’s license without examination under R.C. § 4507.10 or if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation
of this section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault
offense.
         B.   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class four suspension of
the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates division (a)(4) of this section is guilty of
vehicular manslaughter. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
vehicular manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the second degree. Vehicular
manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the first degree if, at the time of the
offense, the offender was driving under a suspension or cancellation imposed
under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Revised Code or was
operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have a valid driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license
or nonresident operating privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the
offender’s driver’s license or commercial driver’s license without examination
under R.C. § 4507.10 or if the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or any traffic-related homicide,
manslaughter or assault offense.
         B.   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class six suspension of
the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6); or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this
section, any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter or assault offense, or a
traffic-related murder, felonious assault or attempted murder offense, a class
four suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
   (c)   The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least 15 days on an
offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation of
division (a)(3)B. of this section and may impose upon the offender a longer
jail term as authorized pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24.
   (d)   Divisions (a)(2)B. and (a)(3)B. of this section do not apply in a
particular construction zone unless signs of the type described in R.C. §
2903.081 are erected in that construction zone in accordance with the
guidelines and design specifications established by the Director of
Transportation under R.C. § 5501.27. The failure to erect signs of the type
described in R.C. § 2903.081 in a particular construction zone in accordance
with those guidelines and design specifications does not limit or affect the
application of division (a)(1), (a)(2)A., (a)(3)A. or (a)(4) of this section in
that construction zone or the prosecution of any person who violates any of
those divisions in that construction zone.
   (e)   (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   “Construction zone.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5501.27.
         B.   “Mandatory prison term” and “mandatory jail term.” Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2929.01.
         C.   “Motor vehicle”, “Mini-Truck”, and “Utility Vehicle”. Have the
same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
         D.   "OVI offense". Means a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), a
violation R.C. § 1547.11(A), a violation of R.C. § 4561.15(A)(3), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
         E.   “Reckless operation offense.” A violation of R.C. § 4511.20 or a
municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.20.
         F.   “Speeding offense.” A violation of R.C. § 4511.21 or a municipal
ordinance pertaining to speed.
         G.   “Traffic-related homicide, manslaughter or assault offense.” A
violation of R.C. § 2903.04 in circumstances in which division (D) of that
section applies, a violation of R.C. § 2903.06 or 2903.08, or a violation of
R.C. § 2903.06, 2903.07 or 2903.08 as they existed prior to March 23, 2000.
         H.   “Traffic-related murder, felonious assault or attempted murder
offense.” A violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or 2903.02 in circumstances in which
the offender used a motor vehicle as the means to commit the violation, a
violation of R.C. § 2903.11(A)(2) in circumstances in which the deadly weapon
used in the commission of the violation is a motor vehicle, or an attempt to
commit aggravated murder or murder in violation of R.C. § 2923.02 in
circumstances in which the offender used a motor vehicle as the means to
attempt to commit the aggravated murder or murder.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, when a penalty or suspension is
enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a prior
or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the specified
law or the specified offense includes any violation of any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or current or former
law of this or another state or the United States.
         (R.C. § 2903.06)   
   (f)   Vehicular assault.
      (1)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a
motor vehicle, motorcycle, utility vehicle, or mini-truck, shall cause serious
physical harm to another person or another’s unborn as the proximate result of
committing, while operating or participating in the operation of a motor
vehicle, utility vehicle, mini-truck, or motorcycle in a construction zone, a
speeding offense, provided that this division applies only if the person to
whom the serious physical harm is caused or to whose unborn the serious
physical harm is caused is in the construction zone at the time of the
offender’s commission of the speeding offense in the construction zone and does
not apply as described in division (f)(4) of this section.
      (2)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, vehicular
assault committed in violation of division (f)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular assault committed in violation of
division (f)(1) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving under a
suspension imposed under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Ohio
Revised Code or if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (f)(1) of this section, R.C. § 2903.08, or
any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense.
         B.   In addition to any other sanctions imposed, the court shall
impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender’s driver’s
license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
      (3)   The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least seven days
on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation
of division (f)(1) of this section and may impose upon the offender a longer
jail term as authorized pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24.
      (4)   Division (f)(1) of this section does not apply in a particular
construction zone unless signs of the type described in R.C. § 2903.081 are
erected in that construction zone in accordance with the guidelines and design
specifications established by the Director of Transportation under R.C. §
5501.27.
      (5)   As used in this division (f):
         A.   “Construction zone.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5501.27.
         B.   “Mandatory jail term.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
         C.   “Speeding offense.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.06.
         D.   “Traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense.” Has
the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.06.
      (6)   For the purposes of this division (f), when a penalty or suspension
is enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a
prior or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the
specified law or the specified offense includes any violation of any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or
current or former law of another state or the United States.
(R.C. 2903.08(A)(3), (C)(3), (D)(3), (E) - (G)) (Prior Code, § 434.08)
Statutory reference:
   Trial court to suspend driver’s license, see R.C. § 4510.05
   Vehicular assault and aggravated vehicular assault, felony offenses, see
R.C. § 2903.08
§ 434.12 OPERATION RESTRICTED FOR MINI-TRUCKS AND LOW-SPEED, UNDER-SPEED, OR
UTILITY VEHICLES.
   (a)   As used in this section, "low-speed vehicle," "mini-truck," "under-
speed vehicle," and "utility vehicle" have the same meanings as in R.C. §
4501.01.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall operate a low-speed vehicle upon any street or
highway having an established speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour.
      (2)   No person shall operate an under-speed or utility vehicle or a
mini-truck upon any street or highway except as follows:
         A.   Upon a street or highway having an established speed limit not
greater than 35 miles per hour and only upon such streets or highways where the
municipality has granted permission for such operation in accordance with
division (f) of this section;
         B.   A state park or political subdivision employee or volunteer
operating a utility vehicle exclusively within the boundaries of state parks or
political subdivision parks for the operation or maintenance of state or
political subdivision park facilities.
      (3)   No person shall operate a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter upon
any street or highway having an established speed limit greater than 45 miles
per hour.
   (c)   This section does not prohibit either of the following:
      (1)   A person operating a low-speed, under-speed, or utility vehicle or
a mini-truck from proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway
having a speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour;
      (2)   A person operating a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter from
proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway having a speed limit
greater than 45 miles per hour.
   (d)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the municipality from adopting
more stringent local ordinances, resolutions, or regulations governing the
operation of a low-speed vehicle or a mini-truck, or a motor-driven cycle or
motor scooter.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.214)
   (f)   By ordinance or resolution, the municipality may authorize the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on a public street
or highway under its jurisdiction. The municipality shall do all of the
following:
      (1)   Limit the operation of those vehicles to streets and highways
having an established speed limit not greater than 35 miles per hour;
      (2)   Require the vehicle owner who wishes to operate an under-speed or
utility vehicle or a mini-truck on the public streets or highways to submit the
vehicle to an inspection conducted by a local law enforcement agency that
complies with inspection requirements established by the Department of Public
Safety under R.C. § 4513.02;
      (3)   Permit the operation on public streets or highways of only those
vehicles that successfully pass the required vehicle inspection, are registered
in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4503, and are titled in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 4505;
      (4)   Notify the Director of Public Safety, in a manner the Director
determines, of the authorization for the operation of under-speed or utility
vehicles or mini-trucks.
   (g)   The municipality may establish additional requirements for the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on its streets and
highways.
(R.C. § 4511.215)
   (h)   Notwithstanding divisions (b) through (g) of this section, a person
may operate a utility vehicle on any public roads or right-of-way, other than a
freeway, when traveling from one farm field to another for agricultural
purposes if the vehicle is displaying a triangular slow-moving vehicle emblem
as described in R.C. § 4513.112.
(R.C. § 4511.216)
   (i)   (1)   Except as provided in this division (i) and divisions (f) and
(g) of this section, no person shall operate a mini-truck within this
municipality.
      (2)   A person may operate a mini-truck on a farm for agricultural
purposes only when the owner of the farm qualifies for the current agricultural
use valuation tax credit. A mini-truck may be operated by or on behalf of such
a farm owner on public roads and rights-of-way only when traveling from one
farm field to another.
      (3)   A person may operate a mini-truck on property owned or leased by a
dealer who sells mini-trucks at retail.
      (4)   Whoever violates this division (i) shall be penalized as provided
in division (e) of this section.
(R.C. § 4519.401)
(Prior Code, § 434.09)
§ 434.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 436: LICENSING; ACCIDENTS
Section
436.01 Driver’s or commercial driver’s license required
436.02 Possession of more than one license prohibited
436.03 Driving with temporary instruction permit
436.04 Driving with probationary license
436.05 Certain acts prohibited
436.06 Owner or operator allowing another to drive
436.07 Display of license
436.08 Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction
436.09 Operating motor vehicle or motorcycle without valid license
436.10 Driving under OVI suspension
436.11 Driving under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation;
driving under a nonpayment of judgment suspension
436.12 Failure to reinstate license
436.13 Operation or sale without certificate of title
436.14 Display of license plates; registration; obstructions
436.15 Use of illegal license plates
436.16 Failure to stop after accident
436.17 Stopping after accident on other than public roads or highways
436.18 Vehicle accident resulting in damage to realty
436.19 Removal of vehicles after accidents
436.99 Penalty
§ 436.01 DRIVER’S OR COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall permit the operation of a motor vehicle upon any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking, knowing the operator does not have a valid driver’s license issued
to the operator by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a deputy registrar under
R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid commercial driver’s license issued under R.C.
Chapter 4506. Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this division is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an
unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03, R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02 (A) that may be filed in the underlying case. If, within three years of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
two or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.02(A)(1))
   (b)   (1)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license for the purpose of temporarily driving, operating, drawing,
moving or propelling a road roller or road machinery upon a street or highway.
      (2)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license for the purpose of temporarily driving, operating, drawing,
moving or propelling any agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a
street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
      (3)   No person shall drive, operate, draw, move or propel any
agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a street or highway at a
speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the person has a current, valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license.
      (4)   No person having a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license
shall be required to have a motorcycle operator’s endorsement to operate a
motorcycle having three wheels with a motor of not more than 50 cubic
centimeters piston displacement.
      (5)   No person having a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license
shall be required to have a motorcycle operator’s endorsement to operate an
autocycle or a cab-enclosed motorcycle.
      (6)   Every person on active duty in the military or naval forces of the
United States, when furnished with a driver’s permit and when operating an
official motor vehicle in connection with that duty, is exempt from the license
requirements of R.C. Chapters 4506 and 4507. Every person on active duty in the
military or naval forces of the United States or in service with the Peace
Corps, Volunteers in Service to America or the foreign service of the United
States is exempt from the license requirements of such sections for the period
of the person’s active duty or service and for six months thereafter, provided
the person was a licensee under such sections at the time the person commenced
the person’s active duty or service. This section does not prevent such a
person or the person’s spouse or dependent from making an application, as
provided in R.C. § 4507.10(C), for the renewal of a driver’s license or
motorcycle operator’s endorsement or as provided in R.C. § 4506.14 for the
renewal of a commercial driver’s license during the period of the person’s
active duty or service.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (b)(3) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.03)
   (c)   Nonresidents, permitted to drive upon the highways of their own state,
may operate any motor vehicle upon any highway in this state without
examination or license under R.C. §§ 4507.01 to 4507.39, inclusive, upon
condition that the nonresident may be required at any time or place to prove
lawful possession or their right to operate the motor vehicle, and to establish
proper identity.
(R.C. § 4507.04)
   (d)   Surrender of driver’s license from another state.
      (1)   Any person who becomes a resident of this state, within 30 days of
becoming a resident, shall surrender any driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card issued by another state to the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a deputy registrar. If such a person intends to
operate a motor vehicle upon the public roads or highways, the person shall
apply for a temporary instruction permit or driver’s license in this state. If
the person fails to apply for a driver’s license or temporary instruction
permit or within 30 days of becoming a resident, the person shall not operate
any motor vehicle in this state under a license or permit issued by another
state.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (d)(1) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
         B.   The offense established under division (d)(2)A. of this section
is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable mental state
for purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of this offense as a strict
liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
      (3)   For purposes of division (d)(1) of this section, “resident” means
any person to whom any of the following applies:
         A.   The person maintains their principal residence in this state and
does not reside in this state as a result of the person’s active service in the
United States armed forces.
         B.   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to be
a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the Registrar under R.C. §
4507.01.
(R.C. § 4507.213)
§ 436.02 POSSESSION OF MORE THAN ONE LICENSE PROHIBITED.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall receive a driver’s license, or a motorcycle
operator’s endorsement of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card unless and until the person
surrenders to the Registrar or a deputy registrar all valid licenses, temporary
instruction permits, and identification cards issued to the person by another
jurisdiction recognized by this state.
      (2)   The Registrar shall report the cancellation of a license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card to the issuing authority, together
with information that the license, temporary instruction permit, or
identification card is now issued in this state. The Registrar or a deputy
registrar shall destroy any such license, temporary instruction permit, or
identification card that is not returned to the issuing authority.
      (3)   No person shall possess more than one valid license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card at any time.
(R.C. § 4507.02(A)(2))
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4507.99)
§ 436.03 DRIVING WITH TEMPORARY INSTRUCTION PERMIT.
   (a)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under R.C. §
4507.05(A) shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking
in violation of the conditions established under R.C. § 4507.05(A).
   (b)   Except as provided in division (c) of this section, no holder of a
temporary instruction permit that is issued under R.C. § 4507.05(A) and that is
issued on or after July 1, 1998, and who has not attained the age of 18 years,
shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property
used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m.
   (c)   The holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under R.C. §
4507.05(A) on or after July 1, 1998, who has not attained the age of 18 years,
may operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property
used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. if, at the time of the operation, the holder is
accompanied by the holder’s parent, guardian or custodian, and the parent,
guardian or custodian holds a current valid driver’s or commercial driver’s
license issued by this state, is actually occupying a seat beside the permit
holder, and does not have a prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as provided in R.C. § 4511.19
(A).
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4507.05(F), (I))
§ 436.04 DRIVING WITH PROBATIONARY LICENSE.
   (a)   (1)   A.   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held
the license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a
highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. unless
the holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
         B.   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held the
license for 12 months or longer shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless the
holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
      (2)   A.   Subject to division (c)(1) of this section, division (a)(1)A.
of this section does not apply to the holder of a probationary driver’s license
who is doing either of the following:
            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours of midnight and 6:
00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession
written documentation from the holder’s employer.
            2.   Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the
school the holder attends between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided
that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession written documentation
from an appropriate official of the school;
            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious event between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official
affiliated with the event.
         B.   Division (a)(1)B. of this section does not apply to the holder of
a probationary driver’s license who is doing either of the following:
            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession
written documentation from the holder’s employer.
            2.   Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the
school the holder attends between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.,
provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession written
documentation from an appropriate official of the school;
            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious event between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official
affiliated with the event.
      (3)   An employer, school official, or official affiliated with a
religious event is not liable in damages in a civil action for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that allegedly arises from, or is related
to, the fact that the employer, school official, or official affiliated with a
religious event provided the holder of a probationary driver’s license with the
written documentation described in division (a)(2) of this section. The
Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall make available at no cost a form to serve as
the written documentation described in division (a)(2) of this section, and
employers, school officials, officials affiliated with religious events, and
holders of probationary driver’s licenses may utilize that form or may choose
to utilize any other written documentation to meet the requirements of that
division.
      (4)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held the
license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking with more than one person who is not a family member
occupying the vehicle unless the probationary license holder is accompanied by
the probationary license holder’s parent, guardian, or custodian.
   (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of division (a)(1)A. or
(a)(1)B. of this section if, at the time of the violation, an emergency existed
that required the holder of the probationary driver’s license to operate a
motor vehicle in violation of division (a)(1)A. or (a)(1)B. of this section or
the holder was an emancipated minor.
   (c)   (1)   If a person is issued a probationary driver’s license prior to
attaining the age of 17 years and the person pleads guilty to, is convicted of,
or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a moving violation
during the six-month period commencing on the date on which the person is
issued the probationary driver’s license, the court with jurisdiction over the
violation may order that the holder must be accompanied by the holder’s parent
or guardian whenever the holder is operating a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking for a period not to exceed six months or the date the holder
attains the age of 17 years, whichever occurs first.
      (2)   Any person who is subject to the operating restrictions established
under division (c)(1) of this section as a result of a first moving violation
may petition the court for driving privileges without being accompanied by the
holder’s parent or guardian during the period of time determined by the court
under that division. In granting the driving privileges, the court shall
specify the purposes of the privileges and shall issue the person appropriate
forms setting forth the privileges granted. If a person is convicted of, pleads
guilty to, or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a second or
subsequent moving violation, the court with jurisdiction over the violation may
terminate any driving privileges previously granted under this division.
      (3)   No person shall violate any operating restriction imposed under
division (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section.
   (d)   No holder of a probationary license shall operate a motor vehicle upon
a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking unless the total number of occupants of the vehicle
does not exceed the total number of occupant restraining devices originally
installed in the motor vehicle by its manufacturer, and each occupant of the
vehicle is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted
occupant restraining device.
   (e)   A restricted license may be issued to a person who is 14 or 15 years
of age under proof of hardship satisfactory to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.
   (f)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether each occupant of the motor vehicle is wearing all of the
available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device as
required by division (d) of this section, or for the sole purpose of issuing a
ticket, citation or summons if that requirement has been or is being violated,
or for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a
violation of that requirement.
   (g)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (a)(1)A. or (a)(1)B. of this
section has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a
ticket, citation or summons for such a violation or for causing the arrest or
commencing a prosecution of a person for such a violation.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Family member” of a probationary license holder. Includes any of
the following:
         A.   A spouse;
         B.   A child or stepchild;
         C.   A parent, stepparent, grandparent or parent-in-law;
         D.   An aunt or uncle;
         E.   A sibling, whether of the whole or half blood or by adoption, a
brother-in-law or a sister- in-law;
         F.   A son or daughter of the probationary license holder’s stepparent
if the stepparent has not adopted the probationary license holder;
         G.   An eligible adult, as defined in R.C. § 4507.05.
      (2)   “Moving violation.” Any violation of any statute or ordinance that
regulates the operation of vehicles on the highways or streets. “Moving
violation” does not include a violation of R.C. § 4513.263 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of any statute or ordinance
regulating pedestrians or the parking of vehicles, vehicle size or load
limitations, vehicle fitness requirements or vehicle registration.
      (3)   “Occupant restraining device.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4513.263.
   (i)   Whoever violates divisions (a)(1), (a)(4), (c)(3), or (d) of this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4507.071(B) - (J)) (Prior Code, § 436.035)
§ 436.05 CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Display or cause or permit to be displayed, or possess any
identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit
knowing the same to be fictitious, or to have been canceled, suspended or
altered;
      (2)   Lend to a person not entitled thereto, or knowingly permit a person
not entitled thereto to use any identification card, driver’s or commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver’s license
temporary instruction permit issued to the person so lending or permitting the
use thereof;
      (3)   Display, or represent as one’s own, any identification card,
driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit or
commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit not issued to the
person so displaying the same;
      (4)   Fail to surrender to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, upon the
Registrar’s demand, any identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit that has been suspended or canceled;
      (5)   In any application for an identification card, driver's or
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit or commercial
driver's license temporary instruction permit or any renewal, reprint, or
duplicate thereof, knowingly conceal a material fact or present any statement
required under R.C. § 4507.08 or 4507.081 when knowing the same to be false or
fictitious.
   (b)   Whoever violates any division of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.30) (Prior Code, § 436.04)
§ 436.06 OWNER OR OPERATOR ALLOWING ANOTHER TO DRIVE.
   (a)   No person shall permit a motor vehicle owned by the person or under
the person’s control to be driven by another if any of the following apply:
      (1)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person does not have a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit or valid nonresident driving privileges.
      (2)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privileges have been suspended or canceled under R.C. Chapter 4510 or
any other provision of the Revised Code.
      (3)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s act of driving the motor vehicle would violate any prohibition
contained in R.C. Chapter 4509.
      (4)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s act of driving would violate R.C. § 4511.19 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (5)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
vehicle is the subject of an immobilization waiver order issued under R.C.
4503.235 and the other person is prohibited from operating the vehicle under
that order.
   (b)   Without limiting or precluding the consideration of any other evidence
in determining whether a violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4)
or (a)(5) of this section has occurred, it shall be prima facie evidence that
the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the operator of the
motor vehicle owned by the offender or under the offender’s control is in a
category described in division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4) or (a)(5) of this
section if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (a)(1), (a)(3) or (a)(5) of this section, the offender and the
operator of the motor vehicle reside in the same household and are related by
consanguinity or affinity.
      (2)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (a)(2) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle reside in the same household, and the offender knows or has reasonable
cause to believe that the operator has been charged with or convicted of any
violation of law or ordinance, or has committed any other act or omission, that
would or could result in the suspension or cancellation of the operator’s
license, permit, or privilege.
      (3)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (a)(4) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle occupied the motor vehicle together at the time of the offense.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of wrongful entrustment of a
motor vehicle, and shall be punished as provided in divisions (c) to (h) of
this section.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, whoever
violates division (a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) of this section is guilty of an
unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the
offender shall be sentenced pursuant to § 698.02, § 698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21
to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the
offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to
§ 698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding § 698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. §
2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to $1,000; and, notwithstanding
§ 698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to § 698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of
up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community
service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt
under R.C. § 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   A.   If, within three years of a violation of division (a)(1), (a)
(2), or (a)(3) of this section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to
or been convicted of two or more violations of division (a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)
(3) of this section, R.C. § 4511.203(A)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   Whoever violates division (a)(4) or (a)(5) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   For any violation of this section, in addition to the penalties
imposed under this Code or R.C. Chapter 2929, the court may impose a class
seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7), and, if
the vehicle involved in the offense is registered in the name of the offender,
the court may order one of the following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(3)B. or (c)(3)C. of
this section, the court may order, for 30 days, the immobilization of the
vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license
plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §
4503.233.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4511.203, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order, for 60 days, the
immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of
that vehicle’s license plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and
enforced under R.C. § 4503.233.
         C.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4511.203, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order the criminal
forfeiture to the state of the vehicle involved in the offense. If issued, the
order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234.
      (4)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order for
criminal forfeiture under division (c)(3)C. of this section is assigned or
transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in addition to or
independent of any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the
offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the National
Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine imposed under this
division shall be distributed in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234(C)(2).
   (d)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under division
(c)(3)A. or (c)(3)B. of this section, the court shall not release the vehicle
from the immobilization before the termination of the period of immobilization
ordered unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
   (e)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under division
(c)(3)C. of this section, upon receipt of the order from the court, neither the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor any deputy registrar shall accept any
application for the registration or transfer of registration of any motor
vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the order. The period of denial
shall be five years after the date the order is issued, unless, during that
five-year period, the court with jurisdiction of the offense that resulted in
the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar of the
termination. If the court terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar,
the Registrar shall take all necessary measures to permit the person to
register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to transfer the
registration of the vehicle.
   (f)   This section does not apply to motor vehicle rental dealers or motor
vehicle leasing dealers, as defined in R.C. § 4549.65.
   (g)   Evidence of a conviction of, plea of guilty to, or adjudication as a
delinquent child for a violation of this section shall not be admissible as
evidence in any civil action that involves the offender or delinquent child who
is the subject of the conviction, plea or adjudication and that arises from the
wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle.
   (h)   For purposes of this section, a vehicle is owned by a person if, at
the time of a violation of this section, the vehicle is registered in the
person’s name.
(R.C. § 4511.203) (Prior Code, § 436.05)
§ 436.07 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   (a)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall display the operator’s driver’s
license, or furnish satisfactory proof that the operator has a driver’s
license, upon demand of any peace officer or of any person damaged or injured
in any collision in which the licensee may be involved. When a demand is
properly made, and the operator has the operator’s driver’s license on or about
the operator’s person, the operator shall not refuse to display the license. A
person’s failure to furnish satisfactory evidence that the person is licensed
under R.C. Chapter 4507 when the person does not have the person’s license on
or about the person’s person shall be prima facie evidence of the person’s not
having obtained a driver’s license.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this section, whoever
violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to § 698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding
§ 698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and notwithstanding § 698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the
offender may be ordered pursuant to § 698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to
serve a term of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an
offender to complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be
punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. § 2705.02(A) that may be
filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section,
R.C. § 4507.35, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.35) (Prior Code, § 436.06)
§ 436.08 DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR IN VIOLATION OF LICENSE RESTRICTION.
   (a)   Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) of this section, division (b)
of this section, §
436.11 and in R.C. §§ 4510.111 and 4510.16, no person whose driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege has
been suspended under any provision of the Revised Code, other than R.C. Chapter
4509, or under any applicable law in any other jurisdiction in which the
person’s license or permit was issued shall operate any motor vehicle upon the
public roads and highways or upon any public or private property used by the
public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking within this municipality
during the period of suspension unless the person is granted limited driving
privileges and is operating the vehicle in accordance with the terms of the
limited driving privileges.
      (2)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this municipality in violation of any restriction of the person’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit imposed under R.C. § 4506.10
(D) or § 4507.14.
      (3)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under
suspension at the time of the alleged violation of division (a)(1) of this
section or the person operated a motor vehicle in violation of a restriction at
the time of the alleged violation of division (a)(2) of this section. The
person charged with a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
      (4)   A.   Whoever violates division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court may impose upon the
offender a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(7).
         B.   1.   Except as provided in division (a)(4)B.2. or (a)(4)B.3. of
this section, the court, in addition to any other penalty that it imposes on
the offender and if the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111
or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to or independent of any other sentence that it imposes upon the
offender, may order the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense
for 30 days and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license plates for 30 days in
accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
            2.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this section, or any combination of
two violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to any
other sentence that it imposes on the offender, may order the immobilization of
the vehicle involved in the offense for 60 days and the impoundment of that
vehicle’s license plates for 60 days in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
            3.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section, or any
combination of three or more violations of this section or R.C. § 4510.11,
4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the
court, in addition to any other sentence that it imposes on the offender, may
order the criminal forfeiture of the vehicle involved in the offense to the
state.
      (5)   Any order for immobilization and impoundment under this section
shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §§ 4503.233 and 4507.02, as applicable.
The court shall not release a vehicle from immobilization ordered under this
section unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
      (6)   Any order of criminal forfeiture under this section shall be issued
and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234. Upon receipt of the copy of the order from
the court, neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor a deputy registrar shall
accept any application for the registration or transfer of registration of any
motor vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the declaration of
forfeiture. The period of registration denial shall be five years after the
date of the order, unless, during that period, the court having jurisdiction of
the offense that led to the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the
registrar of the termination. The registrar then shall take necessary measures
to permit the person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to
transfer registration of the vehicle.
      (7)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to § 698.02
(f) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing
the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.11)
   (b)   Driving under suspension in violation of other provisions.
      (1)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this municipality whose driver's or commercial driver's license
has been suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2151.354, 2935.27, 3123.58, 4301.99,
4510.032, 4510.22, or 4510.33, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
      (2)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (b)(1) of this section may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under suspension at the
time of the alleged violation of division (b)(1) of this section. The person
charged with a violation of division (b)(1) of this section may offer evidence
to rebut this prima facie evidence.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (b)(1) of this section is guilty of
driving under suspension and shall be punished as provided in division (b)(3)A.
or division (b)(3)B. of this section.
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(3)B. of this
section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. The offender shall be
sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding § 698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. §
2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to $1,000; and, notwithstanding
§ 698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
         B.   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously
was convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (b)(1)
of this section, or any combination of two or more violations of division (b)
(1) of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree, and the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 in
an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident
or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s
operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for
which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.111)
   (c)   Repeat traffic offender; point system suspension. Any person whose
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privileges are suspended as a repeat traffic offender under R.C. § 4510.037 and
who, during the suspension, operates any motor vehicle upon any public roads
and highways is guilty of driving under a 12-point suspension, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to a minimum term of
three days in jail. No court shall suspend the first three days of jail time
imposed pursuant to this division.
(R.C. § 4510.037(J))
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
(Prior Code, § 436.071)
§ 436.09 OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE OR MOTORCYCLE WITHOUT VALID LICENSE.
   (a)   (1)   No person, except those expressly exempted under R.C. §§
4507.03, 4507.04 and 4507.05, shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public
road or highway or any public or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the person
has a valid driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a commercial
driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4506.
      (2)   No person, except a person expressly exempted under R.C. §§
4507.03, 4507.04 and 4507.05, shall operate any motorcycle upon a public road
or highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the person has a valid
license as a motorcycle operator that was issued upon application by the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. Chapter 4507. The license shall be in
the form of an endorsement, as determined by the Registrar, upon a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, if the person has a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle, or in the form of a restricted
license as provided in R.C. § 4507.14, if the person does not have a valid
license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle.
   (b)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the person did not have either a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license at the time of the alleged violation of
division (a)(1) of this section or a valid license as a motorcycle operator
either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or a restricted license at the time of the alleged violation of
division (a)(2) of this section. The person charged with a violation of
division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this
prima facie evidence.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
or motorcycle without a valid license and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   If the trier of fact finds that the offender never has held a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license issued by this state or any other
jurisdiction, or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the
offender, if the offender has never held a valid license as a motorcycle
operator, either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or in the form of a restricted license, except as otherwise
provided in this division, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 292.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding § 698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. §
2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to $1,000; and, notwithstanding
§
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case. If the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of this section or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
      (2)   If the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the offender, the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license bearing the motorcycle
endorsement or the offender’s restricted license was expired at the time of the
offense, except as otherwise provided in this division, the offense is a minor
misdemeanor. If within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
   (d)   The court shall not impose a license suspension for a first violation
of this section or if more than three years have passed since the offender’s
last violation of R.C. § 4510.12, this section, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (e)   If the offender is sentenced under division (c)(2) of this section, if
within three years of the offense the offender previously was convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one or more violations of R.C. § 4510.12, this section, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance within the past three years, and
if the offender’s license was expired for more than six months at the time of
the offense, the court may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s
driver license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
(R.C. § 4510.12) (Prior Code, § 436.072)
§ 436.10 DRIVING UNDER OVI SUSPENSION.
   (a)   No person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under R.C. § 4511.19,
4511.191 or 4511.196 or under R.C. § 4510.07 for a conviction of a violation of
a municipal OVI ordinance shall operate any motor vehicle upon the public roads
or highways within this municipality during the period of the suspension.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of driving under OVI
suspension. The court shall sentence the offender under R.C. Chapter 2929,
subject to the differences authorized or required by this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this
section, driving under OVI suspension is a misdemeanor of the first degree. The
court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         A.   A mandatory jail term of three consecutive days. The three-day
term shall be imposed, unless, subject to division (c) of this section, the
court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 30 consecutive days of house
arrest with electronic monitoring. A period of house arrest with electronic
monitoring imposed under this division shall not exceed six months. If the
court imposes a mandatory three-day jail term under this division, the court
may impose a jail term in addition to that term, provided that in no case shall
the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense exceed six months;
         B.   A fine of not less than $250 and not more than $1,000;
         C.   A license suspension under division (e) of this section;
         D.   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, immobilization for 30 days of the
offender’s vehicle and impoundment for 30 days of the identification license
plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment shall be
issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
      (2)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section or one
equivalent offense, driving under OVI suspension is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         A.   A mandatory jail term of ten consecutive days. Notwithstanding
the jail terms provided in R.C. § 2929.21 to 2929.28, the court may sentence
the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The ten-day
mandatory jail term shall be imposed unless, subject to division (c) of this
section, the court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 90 consecutive
days of house arrest with electronic monitoring. The period of house arrest
with electronic monitoring shall not exceed one year;
         B.   Notwithstanding the fines provided for in R.C. Chapter 2929, a
fine of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500;
         C.   A license suspension under division (e) of this section;
         D.   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, immobilization of the offender’s
vehicle for 60 days and the impoundment for 60 days of the identification
license plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment
shall be issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
      (3)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section
or two or more equivalent offenses, driving under OVI suspension is a
misdemeanor. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         A.   A mandatory jail term of 30 consecutive days. Notwithstanding the
jail terms provided in R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, the court may sentence the
offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The court shall not
sentence the offender to a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring in
lieu of the mandatory portion of the jail term;
         B.   Notwithstanding the fines set forth in R.C. Chapter 2929, a fine
of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500;
         C.   A license suspension under division (e) of this section;
         D.   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, criminal forfeiture to the state
of the offender’s vehicle. The order of criminal forfeiture shall be issued and
enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234. If title to a motor vehicle that
is subject to an order for criminal forfeiture under this division is assigned
or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, the court may fine
the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the
National Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine so imposed
shall be distributed in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234(C)(2).
   (c)   (1)   No court shall impose an alternative sentence of house arrest
with electronic monitoring under division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section
unless, within 60 days of the date of sentencing, the court issues a written
finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail
where the offender is required to serve the jail term imposed, the offender
will not be able to begin serving that term within the 60-day period following
the date of sentencing.
      (2)   An offender sentenced under this section to a period of house
arrest with electronic monitoring shall be permitted work release during that
period.
   (d)   Fifty percent of any fine imposed by a court under division (b)(1),
(b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section shall be deposited into the Municipal Indigent
Drivers’ Alcohol Treatment Fund under the control of that court, as created by
the municipality pursuant to R.C. § 4511.191(H).
   (e)   In addition to or independent of all other penalties provided by law
or ordinance, the trial judge of any court of record or the Mayor of a Mayor’s
Court shall impose on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of this section a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
      (1)   When permitted as specified in R.C. § 4510.021, if the court grants
limited driving privileges during a suspension imposed under this section, the
privileges shall be granted on the additional condition that the offender must
display restricted license plates, issued under R.C. § 4503.231, on the vehicle
driven subject to the privileges, except as provided in R.C. § 4503.231(B).
      (2)   A suspension of a commercial driver’s license under this section
shall be concurrent with any period of suspension or disqualification under
R.C. § 3123.58 or 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from holding
a commercial driver’s license under R.C. § 4506.16 shall be issued a driver’s
license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for which the commercial
driver’s license was suspended under this section, and no person whose
commercial driver’s license is suspended under this section shall be issued a
driver’s license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period of the suspension.
   (f)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
698.02(f) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree under this
section for which the offender is sentenced.
   (g)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Electronic monitoring.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      (2)   “Equivalent offense.” Any of the following:
         A.   A violation of a municipal ordinance, law of another state, or
law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to division (a) of
this section;
         B.   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to division (a) of this section.
      (3)   “Jail.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      (4)   “Mandatory jail term.” The mandatory term in jail of three, ten or
30 consecutive days that must be imposed under division (b)(1), (b)(2) or (b)
(3) of this section upon an offender convicted of a violation of division (a)
of this section and in relation to which all of the following apply:
         A.   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
must be served in a jail.
         B.   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified pursuant to any provision
of the Ohio Revised Code.
(R.C. § 4510.14)
   (h)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
(Prior Code, § 436.073)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see R.C. § 4510.161
§ 436.11 DRIVING UNDER FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LAW SUSPENSION OR CANCELLATION;
DRIVING UNDER A NONPAYMENT OF JUDGMENT SUSPENSION.
   (a)   No person, whose driver's or commercial driver's license or temporary
instruction permit or nonresident's operating privilege has been suspended or
canceled pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4509, shall operate any motor vehicle within
this municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the person to
be operated by another person in the municipality, during the period of the
suspension or cancellation, except as specifically authorized by R.C. Chapter
4509.
   (b)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any public
or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking in this municipality if the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or temporary instruction permit or nonresident operating privilege has
been suspended pursuant to R.C. § 4509.37 or 4509.40 for nonpayment of a
judgment.
   (c)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (a) or (b) of this section may be admitted into evidence
as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under either a
financial responsibility law suspension at the time of the alleged violation of
division (a) of this section or a nonpayment of judgment suspension at the time
of the alleged violation of division (b) of this section. The person charged
with a violation of division (a) or (b) of this section may offer evidence to
rebut this prima facie evidence.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of driving
under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation and shall be
punished as provided in division (d)(1) to (d)(3) of this section. Whoever
violates division (b) of this section is guilty of driving under a nonpayment
of judgment suspension and shall be punished as provided in division (d)(1) to
(d)(3) of this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (d)(2) of this
section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an
unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously was
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section, or
any combination of two violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or
4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (3)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 in
an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident
or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s
operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for
which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.16)
   (e)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
(Prior Code, § 436.074)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see R.C. § 4510.161
§ 436.12 FAILURE TO REINSTATE LICENSE.
   (a)   No person whose driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit or nonresident’s operating privilege has been
suspended shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public road or highway or any
public or private property after the suspension has expired unless the person
has complied with all license reinstatement requirements imposed by the court,
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles or another provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (b)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (a) of this section may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the license of the person had not been reinstated by
the person at the time of the alleged violation of division (a) of this
section. The person charged with a violation of division (a) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to reinstate a
license, and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, whoever
violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of a violation of division (a) of this
section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two
or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.21 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (3)   In all cases, the court may impose upon the offender a class seven
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
(R.C. § 4510.21)
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
(Prior Code, § 436.075)
§ 436.13 OPERATION OR SALE WITHOUT CERTIFICATE OF TITLE.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this municipality a motor vehicle for which a
certificate of title is required without having that certificate in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 4505 or, if a physical certificate of title has not been
issued for a motor vehicle, operate the motor vehicle in this state knowing
that the ownership information relating to the vehicle has not been entered
into the automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common
Pleas;
      (2)   Display or display for sale or sell as a dealer or acting on behalf
of a dealer, a motor vehicle without having obtained a manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate, a certificate of title or an assignment of a
certificate of title for it as provided in R.C. Chapter 4505;
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title or any certificate of
registration or license plates upon cancellation of the same by the Registrar
of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed in R.C. Chapter
4505;
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapter 4505 in case of the destruction or
dismantling or change of a motor vehicle in such respect that it is not the
motor vehicle described in the certificate of title;
      (5)   Violate any rules adopted pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4505;
      (6)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapters 4505 and 4517, sell
at wholesale a motor vehicle ownership of which is not evidenced by an Ohio
certificate of title, or the current certificate of title issued for the motor
vehicle, or the manufacturer’s certificate of origin, and all title assignments
that evidence the seller’s ownership of the motor vehicle, and an odometer
disclosure statement that complies with R.C. § 4505.06 and subchapter IV of the
“Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act”, 86 Stat. 961 (1972), 15
U.S.C. 1981;
      (7)   Operate in this state a motor vehicle knowing that the certificate
of title to the vehicle or ownership of the vehicle as otherwise reflected in
the automated title processing system has been canceled.
   (b)   This section does not apply to persons engaged in the business of
warehousing or transporting motor vehicles for the purpose of salvage
disposition.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $200,
imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4505.18) (Prior Code, § 436.08)
§ 436.14 DISPLAY OF LICENSE PLATES; REGISTRATION; OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (a)   (1)   Subject to R.C. § 4503.211, no person who is the owner or
operator of a motor vehicle shall fail to display in plain view on the rear of
the motor vehicle a license plate that displays the distinctive number and
registration mark assigned to the motor vehicle by the Ohio Director of Public
Safety, including any county identification sticker and any validation sticker
when required by and issued under R.C. §§ 4503.19 and 4503.191. However, a
commercial tractor shall display the license plate on the front of the
commercial tractor.
      (2)   The license plate shall be securely fastened so as not to swing,
and shall not be covered by any material that obstructs its visibility.
      (3)   Subject to R.C. § 4503.211, no person to whom a temporary motor
vehicle license registration has been issued for the use of a motor vehicle
under R.C. § 4503.182, and no operator of that motor vehicle, shall fail to
display the temporary motor vehicle license registration in plain view from the
rear of the vehicle either in the rear window or on an external rear surface of
the motor vehicle.
      (4)   No person shall cover a temporary motor vehicle license
registration by any material that obstructs its visibility.
(R.C. § 4503.21(A))
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided by R.C. §§ 4503.103, 4503.107, 4503.173,
4503.41, 4503.43 and 4503.46, no person who is the owner or chauffeur of a
motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways shall fail
to file annually the application for registration or to pay the tax therefor.
(R.C. § 4503.11(A))
   (c)   (1)   Within 30 days of becoming a resident of this state, any person
who owns a motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways
shall register the vehicle in this state. If such a person fails to register a
vehicle owned by the person, the person shall not operate any motor vehicle in
this state under a license issued by another state.
      (2)   For purposes of division (c)(1) of this section, “resident” means
any person to whom any of the following applies:
         A.   The person maintains their principal residence in this state and
does not reside in this state as a result of the person’s active service in the
United States armed forces.
         B.   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to be
a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the Registrar under R.C. §
4507.01.
(R.C. § 4503.111(A), (C))
   (d)   Upon the transfer of ownership of a motor vehicle, the registration of
the motor vehicle expires, and the original owner immediately shall remove the
license plates from the motor vehicle, except as otherwise provided in R.C. §
4503.12.
(R.C. § 4503.12(A))
   (e)   No person shall operate or drive upon the highways of this
municipality a motor vehicle acquired from a former owner who has registered
the motor vehicle, while the motor vehicle displays the distinctive number or
identification mark assigned to it upon its original registration.
(R.C. § 4549.11(A))
   (f)   No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle and a resident of this
state shall operate or drive the motor vehicle upon the highways of this
municipality while it displays a distinctive number or identification mark
issued by or under the authority of another state, without complying with the
laws of this state relating to the registration and identification of motor
vehicles.
(R.C. § 4549.12(A))
   (g)   (1)   A.   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
   B.   The offenses established under division (a) of this section are strict
liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of these
offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply that any
other offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a
strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4503.21(B), (C))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4503.11(D))
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
         B.   The offense established under division (g)(3)A. of this section
is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable mental state
for purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of this offense as a strict
liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
(R.C. § 4503.111(B))
      (4)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4503.12(D))
      (5)   Whoever violates division (e) of this section is guilty of
operation of a motor vehicle bearing license plates or an identification mark
issued to another, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.11(B))
      (6)   Whoever violates division (f) of this section is guilty of illegal
operation by a resident of this state of a motor vehicle bearing the
distinctive number or identification mark issued by a foreign jurisdiction, a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4549.12(B))
(Prior Code, § 436.09)
§ 436.15 USE OF ILLEGAL LICENSE PLATES.
   (a)   No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle upon the public roads
and highways in this municipality if it displays a license plate or a
distinctive number or identification mark that meets any of the following
criteria:
      (1)   It is fictitious;
      (2)   It is a counterfeit or an unlawfully made copy of any distinctive
number or identification mark;
      (3)   It belongs to another motor vehicle, provided that this section
does not apply to a motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads and
highways in this municipality when the motor vehicle displays license plates
that originally were issued for a motor vehicle that previously was owned by
the same person who owns the motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads
and highways in this municipality during the 30-day period described in R.C. §
4503.12(A)(4).
   (b)   A person who fails to comply with the transfer of registration
provisions of R.C. § 4503.12 and is charged with a violation of that section
shall not be charged with a violation of this section.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section is
guilty of operating a motor vehicle bearing an invalid license plate or
identification mark, this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the third degree on each
subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.08) (Prior Code, § 436.10)
§ 436.16 FAILURE TO STOP AFTER ACCIDENT.
   (a)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision with
persons or property on a public road or highway, the operator of the motor
vehicle, having knowledge of the accident or collision, immediately shall stop
the operator’s motor vehicle at the scene of the accident or collision. The
operator shall remain at the scene of the accident or collision until the
operator has given the operator’s name and address and, if the operator is not
the owner, the name and address of the owner of that motor vehicle, together
with the registered number of that motor vehicle, to all of the following:
         A.   Any person injured in the accident or collision;
         B.   The operator, occupant, owner, or attendant of any motor vehicle
damaged in the accident or collision;
         C.   The police officer at the scene of the accident or collision.
      (2)   In the event an injured person is unable to comprehend and record
the information required to be given under division (a)(1) of this section, the
other operator involved in the accident or collision shall notify the nearest
police authority concerning the location of the accident or collision, and the
operator’s name, address, and the registered number of the motor vehicle the
operator was operating. The operator shall remain at the scene of the accident
or collision until a police officer arrives, unless removed from the scene by
an emergency vehicle operated by a political subdivision or an ambulance.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required to be given in this section, in writing, to a
conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident. Except as otherwise provided in division (b)
(2) or (b)(3) of this section, failure to stop after an accident is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a
person, failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a person,
failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six months
of suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege required by this
division.
      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. §
2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.02) (Prior Code, § 436.11)
§ 436.17 STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT ON OTHER THAN PUBLIC ROADS OR HIGHWAYS.
   (a)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision resulting
in injury or damage to persons or property on any public or private property
other than a public road or highway, the operator of the motor vehicle, having
knowledge of the accident or collision, shall stop at the scene of the accident
or collision. Upon request of any person who is injured or damaged, or any
other person, the operator shall give that person the operator’s name and
address, and, if the operator is not the owner, the name and address of the
owner of that motor vehicle, together with the registered number of that motor
vehicle, and, if available, exhibit the operator’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license.
      (2)   If the operator of the motor vehicle involved in the accident or
collision does not provide the information specified in division (a)(1) of this
section, the operator shall give that information, within 24 hours after the
accident or collision, to the police department of the city or village in which
the accident or collision occurred, or if it occurred outside the corporate
limits of a city or village, to the sheriff of the county in which the accident
or collision occurred.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required under division (a)(1) of this section, in
writing, to a conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor
vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident. Except as otherwise provided
in division (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section, failure to stop after a nonpublic
road accident is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a
person, failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a person,
failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six months
of suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege required by this
division.
      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. §
2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.021) (Prior Code, § 436.12)
§ 436.18 VEHICLE ACCIDENT RESULTING IN DAMAGE TO REALTY.
   (a)   (1)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in
damage to real property, or personal property attached to real property,
legally upon or adjacent to a public road or highway immediately shall stop and
take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of the
property of that fact, of the driver’s name and address, and of the
registration number of vehicle the driver is driving and, upon request and if
available, shall exhibit the driver’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license.
      (2)   If the owner or person in charge of the property cannot be located
after reasonable search, the driver of the vehicle involved in the accident
resulting in damage to the property within 24 hours after the accident, shall
forward to the Police Department of the municipality the same information
required to be given to the owner or person in control of the property and give
the location of the accident and a description of the damage insofar as it is
known.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident involving the property of others, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
698.02(f) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or
after committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.03)
(Prior Code, § 436.13)
§ 436.19 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES AFTER ACCIDENTS.
   (a)   If a motor vehicle accident occurs on any highway, public street, or
other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel and if any
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that has been damaged or spilled as
a result of the motor vehicle accident is blocking the highway, street, or
other property or is otherwise endangering public safety, a public safety
official may do either of the following without the consent of the owner but
with the approval of the law enforcement agency conducting any investigation of
the accident:
      (1)   Remove, or order the removal of, the motor vehicle if the motor
vehicle is unoccupied, cargo, or personal property from the portion of the
highway, public street, or property ordinarily used for vehicular travel on the
highway, public street, or other property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel.
      (2)   If the motor vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle, allow the owner
or operator of the vehicle the opportunity to arrange for the removal of the
motor vehicle within a period of time specified by the public safety official.
If the public safety official determines that the motor vehicle cannot be
removed within the specified period of time, the public safety official shall
remove or order the removal of the motor vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this section, the
Department of Transportation, any employee of the Department of Transportation,
or a public safety official who authorizes or participates in the removal of
any unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as authorized by
division (a) of this section, regardless of whether the removal is executed by
a private towing service, is not liable for civil damages for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that results from the removal of that
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property. Further, except as
provided in division (b)(2) of this section, if a public safety official
authorizes, employs, or arranges to have a private towing service remove any
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as authorized by division
(a) of this section, that private towing service is not liable for civil
damages for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that results from
the removal of that unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
         A.   Any person or entity involved in the removal of an unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property pursuant to division (a) of this
section if that removal causes or contributes to the release of a hazardous
material or to structural damage to the roadway;
         B.   A private towing service that was not authorized, employed, or
arranged by a public safety official to remove an unoccupied motor vehicle,
cargo, or personal property under this section;
         C.   Except as provided in division (b)(2)D. of this section, a
private towing service that was authorized, employed, or arranged by a public
safety official to perform the removal of the unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo,
or personal property but the private towing service performed the removal in a
negligent manner;
         D.   A private towing service that was authorized, employed, or
arranged by a public safety official to perform the removal of the unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that was endangering public safety
but the private towing service performed the removal in a reckless manner.
   (c)   As used in divisions (a) and (b) of this section:
      (1)   “Hazardous material.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.232.
      (2)   “Public safety official.” Means any of the following:
         A.   The sheriff of the county, or the chief of a law enforcement
agency in the municipal corporation, township, port authority, conservancy
district, university campus police department, park district police force, or
township or joint police district, in which the accident occurred;
         B.   A state highway patrol trooper;
         C.   The chief of the fire department having jurisdiction where the
accident occurred;
         D.   A duly authorized subordinate acting on behalf of an official
specified in divisions A. to C. of this definition.
         E.   A natural resources officer or a wildlife officer.
(R.C. § 4513.66)
   (d)   If a towing service is removing a motor vehicle, and the removal was
not authorized under R.C. § 4513.60, 4513.601, 4513.61, or 4513.66, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, prior to removing the motor
vehicle, the towing service shall provide a written estimate of the price for
the removal to the operator of the motor vehicle, if requested.
   (e)   The towing service shall ensure that any estimate provided under
division (d) of this section includes the fees, services to be rendered, and
destination of the vehicle.
   (f)   If a towing service fails to provide a written estimate as required by
this section, the towing service shall not charge fees for the towing and
storage of the motor vehicle that exceed 25% of any applicable fees established
by the public utilities commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25(B)(4)
or, if the vehicle was towed within a municipal corporation that has
established vehicle removal and storage fees, 25% of the fees established by
the municipal corporation.
   (g)   Any storage facility that accepts towed vehicles shall conspicuously
post a notice at the entrance to the storage facility that states the
limitation on fees established under division (f) of this section.
(R.C. § 4513.68)
(Prior Code, § 436.14)
§ 436.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 438: SAFETY AND EQUIPMENT
Section
438.01 Driving unsafe vehicles; application
438.02 Lighted lights; measurement of distances and heights
438.03 Headlights on motor vehicles and motorcycles
438.04 Tail light; illumination of rear license plate
438.05 Rear red reflectors
438.06 Safety lighting on commercial vehicles
438.07 Obscured lights on vehicles in combination
438.08 Red light or red flag on extended loads
438.09 Lights on parked or stopped vehicles
438.10 Lights on slow-moving vehicles; emblem required; lights and reflectors
on multi-wheel agricultural tractors or farm machinery
438.11 Spotlight and auxiliary lights
438.12 Cowl, fender and back-up lights
438.13 Two lights displayed
438.14 Use of headlight beams
438.15 Lights of less intensity on slow-moving vehicles
438.16 Number of lights permitted; red and flashing lights
438.17 Lights and sound-producing devices on coroners’ vehicles
438.18 Vehicles transporting preschool children
438.19 Focus and aim of headlights
438.20 Motor vehicle and motorcycle brakes
438.21 Horn, siren and theft alarm signal
438.22 Muffler; muffler cutout; excessive smoke, gas or noise
438.23 Rear-view mirror; clear view to front, both sides and rear
438.24 Windshield required; sign or poster upon windshield; windshield wiper
438.25 Tinted glass; materials on glass
438.26 Limited load extension on left side of passenger vehicle
438.27 Motor vehicle stop lights
438.28 Bumpers
438.29 Air cleaner required
438.30 Use of child restraints
438.31 Use of occupant restraining devices
438.32 Air bags
 
438.99 Penalty
§ 438.01 DRIVING UNSAFE VEHICLES; APPLICATION.
   (a)   No person shall drive or move, or cause or knowingly permit to be
driven or moved, on any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is
in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.02(A), (H))
§ 438.02 LIGHTED LIGHTS; MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCES AND HEIGHTS.
   (a)   Every vehicle, other than a motorized bicycle, operated upon a street
or highway within this state shall display lighted lights and illuminating
devices as required by R.C. §§ 4513.04 through 4513.37 during all of the
following times:
      (1)   The time from sunset to sunrise;
      (2)   At any other time when, due to insufficient natural light or
unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons, vehicles and substantial objects
on the highway are not discernible at a distance of 1,000 feet ahead;
      (3)   At any time when the windshield wipers of the vehicle are in use
because of precipitation on the windshield.
   (b)   Every motorized bicycle shall display at such times lighted lights
meeting the rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under R.C. §
4511.521. No motor vehicle, during any time specified in this section, shall be
operated upon a street or highway within this state using only parking lights
as illumination.
   (c)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the distance
from which certain lamps and devices shall render objects visible, or within
which such lamps or devices shall be visible, such distance shall be measured
upon a straight level unlighted highway under normal atmospheric conditions
unless a different condition is expressly stated.
   (d)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the mounted
height of lights or devices, it shall mean from the center of such light or
device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a vehicle being operated upon a
street or highway within this state to stop the vehicle solely because the
officer observes that a violation of division (a)(3) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of that division, or causing the arrest of or
commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of that division.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.03)
§ 438.03 HEADLIGHTS ON MOTOR VEHICLES AND MOTORCYCLES.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, shall be equipped
with at least two headlights with at least one near each side of the front of
the motor vehicle.
      (2)   Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one and not more
than two headlights.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.04)
§ 438.04 TAIL LIGHT; ILLUMINATION OF REAR LICENSE PLATE.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or
vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles shall be
equipped with at least one tail light mounted on the rear which, when lighted,
shall emit a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear,
provided that in the case of a train of vehicles only the tail light on the
rearmost vehicle need be visible from the distance specified.
      (2)   Either a tail light or a separate light shall be so constructed and
placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate, when
the registration plate is required, and render it legible from a distance of 50
feet to the rear. Any tail light, together with any separate light for
illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted
whenever the headlights or auxiliary driving lights are lighted, except where
separate lighting systems are provided for trailers for the purpose of
illuminating the registration plate.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.05)
§ 438.05 REAR RED REFLECTORS.
   (a)   (1)   Every new motor vehicle sold after September 6, 1941, and
operated on a highway, other than a commercial tractor to which a trailer or
semitrailer is attached, shall carry at the rear, either as a part of the tail
lamps or separately, two red reflectors meeting the requirements of this
section, except that vehicles of the type mentioned in R.C. § 4513.07 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be equipped with reflectors
as required by the regulations provided for in that section.
      (2)   Every such reflector shall be of a size and characteristics and so
maintained as to be visible at night from all distances within 300 feet to 50
feet from the vehicle.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.06)
§ 438.06 SAFETY LIGHTING ON COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   When the Director of Public Safety prescribes and promulgates
regulations relating to clearance lights, marker lights, reflectors and stop
lights on buses, trucks, commercial tractors, trailers, semitrailers and pole
trailers, when operated upon any highway, these vehicles shall be equipped as
required by the regulations, and the equipment shall be lighted at all times
mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
except that clearance lights and side marker lights need not be lighted on any
such vehicle when it is operated within the municipality where there is
sufficient light to reveal any person or substantial object on the highway at a
distance of 500 feet.
      (2)   This equipment shall be in addition to all other lights
specifically required by R.C. §§ 4513.03 through 4513.16, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinances.
      (3)   Vehicles operated under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities
Commission are not subject to this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.07)
§ 438.07 OBSCURED LIGHTS ON VEHICLES IN COMBINATION.
   Whenever motor and other vehicles are operated in combination during the
time that lights are required, any light, except tail lights, which by reason
of its location on a vehicle of the combination would be obscured by another
vehicle of the combination, need not be lighted, but this section does not
affect the requirement that lighted clearance lights be displayed on the front
of the foremost vehicle required to have clearance lights or that all lights
required on the rear of the rearmost vehicle of any combination shall be
lighted.
(R.C. § 4513.08)
§ 438.08 RED LIGHT OR RED FLAG ON EXTENDED LOADS.
   (a)   Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or
more beyond the bed or body of this vehicle, there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of the load, at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a red light or lantern plainly
visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the sides and rear. The red
light or lantern required by this section is in addition to the red rear light
required upon every vehicle. At any other time there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of the load a red flag or cloth not less than 16 inches
square.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.09)
§ 438.09 LIGHTS ON PARKED OR STOPPED VEHICLES.
   (a)   Except in case of an emergency, whenever a vehicle is parked or
stopped upon a roadway open to traffic or a shoulder adjacent thereto, whether
attended or unattended, during the times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the vehicle shall be equipped
with one or more lights which shall exhibit a white or amber light on the
roadway side visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle,
and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. No lights need
be displayed upon any such vehicle when it is stopped or parked within the
municipality where there is sufficient light to reveal any person or
substantial object within a distance of 500 feet upon the highway. Any lighted
headlights upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.
(R.C. § 4513.10)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 438.10 LIGHTS ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES; EMBLEM REQUIRED; LIGHTS AND REFLECTORS
ON MULTI-WHEEL AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS OR FARM MACHINERY.
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      (1)   “Boat trailer.” Means any vehicle designed and used exclusively to
transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a
marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of no more
than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
      (2)   “Slow-moving vehicle” and “SMV”. Mean a boat trailer, unit of farm
machinery, road construction machinery, or other machinery designed by the
manufacturer to operate at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less. The term does
not include a bicycle, motorized bicycle, electric bicycle, or animal-drawn
vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.11)
   (b)   Generally.
      (1)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall operate
either of the following vehicles unless it is equipped with and displays the
lamps described in division (b)(2) of this section:
         A.   A vehicle not specifically required to be equipped with lamps or
other lighting devices by R.C. §§ 4513..03 to 4513.10;
         B.   A vehicle referred to in R.C. § 4513.02(G).
      (2)   Vehicles described in division (b)(1) of this section shall be
equipped with both of the following:
         A.   At least one lamp displaying a white light visible from a
distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the vehicle;
         B.   Two lamps displaying red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the vehicle, or as an alternative, one lamp
displaying a red light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to
the rear and two red reflectors visible from all distances of 600 feet to 100
feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams of headlamps.
      (3)   A.   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall
operate a multi-wheel agricultural tractor model year 2001 or earlier on a
street or highway unless it is equipped with and displays reflectors and
illuminated amber lamps so that the extreme left and right projections of the
tractor are indicated by all of the following:
            1.   Flashing lamps displaying amber light, visible to the front
and the rear. The lamps need not flash simultaneously and need not flash in
conjunction with any directional signals of the tractor.
            2.   Amber reflectors, all visible to the front;
            3.   Red reflectors, all visible to the rear.
         B.   Rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under R.C. §
4513.111 governing the lamps and reflectors described in division (b)(3)A. of
this section and their placement correlate with and, as far as possible,
conform with paragraphs 4.1.4.1, 4.1.7.1, and 4.1.7.2 respectively of the
American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S279.10 OCT 98,
Lighting and Marking of Agricultural Equipment on Highways.
      (4)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall operate a
unit of farm machinery model year 2002 or later on a street or highway unless
it is equipped with and displays markings and illuminated lamps that meet or
exceed the lighting, illumination, and marking standards and specifications
that are applicable to that type of farm machinery for the unit’s model year
specified in the American society of agricultural engineers standard ANSI/ASAE
S279.10 OCT 98, lighting and marking of agricultural equipment on highways.
      (5)   Any unit of farm machinery designed by its manufacturer to operate
at a speed of 25 miles per hour or greater or any SMV may be equipped with and
display a red flashing light that is visible from a distance of not less than
1,000 feet to the rear at all times specified in R.C. § 4513.03. When a double-
faced light is used, it shall display amber light to the front and red light to
the rear.
      (6)   Lights and reflectors required under divisions (b)(3) and (b)(4) of
this section and authorized under division (b)(5) of this section are in
addition to other lights required or permitted by this division (b) or R.C. §
4513.17.
      (7)   The Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 that establish standards and specifications for lamps and
reflectors required or authorized by this section. Lamps and reflectors
required or authorized by this section shall meet those standards and
specifications.
      (8)   This division (b) does not apply to a bicycle, motorized bicycle,
electric bicycle, or animal- drawn vehicle.
      (9)   Whoever violates this division (b) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.111)
   (c)   Slow-moving vehicles.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall
operate an SMV on a street or highway as follows:
         A.   At a speed exceeding 25 miles per hour;
         B.   Without displaying the triangular SMV emblem mounted in
accordance with division (c)(2) of this section.
      (2)   The SMV emblem shall be mounted so as to be visible from a distance
of not less than 500 feet to the rear. In accordance with R.C. Chapter 119, the
Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt standards and specifications for the
design and position of mounting the SMV emblem. The standards and
specifications for the SMV emblem correlate with and, so far as possible,
conform with those approved by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers.
      (3)   A person may operate an SMV on a street or highway without
displaying the triangular SMV emblem when any of the following apply:
         A.   The SMV is being used in actual construction and maintenance work
in an area guarded by a flagperson, or where flares are used.
         B.   The SMV is operating or traveling within the limits of a
construction area designated by the Ohio Director of Transportation, a city
engineer, or the county engineer of the several counties, when such
construction area is marked in accordance with requirements of the Ohio
Director of Transportation and the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices,
as set forth in R.C. § 4511.09.
      (4)   No person shall display an SMV emblem on any of the following:
         A.   Any vehicle not required to use the SMV emblem by this division
(c) or R.C. § 4513.113 or 4513.114;
         B.   An SMV being transported upon any other vehicle;
         C.   Any stationary object on the highway.
      (5)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate an SMV, except a unit
designed to be completely mounted on a primary power unit that is manufactured
or assembled on or after April 1, 1966, unless it is equipped with an SMV
emblem mounting device.
      (6)   Whoever violates this division (c) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.112)
   (d)   Farm machinery and agricultural tractors.
      (1)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate on a street or
highway any unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the unit displays both
of the following:
         A.   The SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. § 4513.112(B);
         B.   A speed identification symbol that does both of the following:
            1.   Meets the specifications contained in the American Society of
Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, Agricultural Equipment:
Speed Identification Symbol (SIS);
            2.   Indicates the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the
unit of farm machinery is designed by its manufacturer to operate.
      (2)   No person operating a tractor on a street or highway that is
designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per
hour and that is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit of farm machinery
while operating at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour shall fail to display
both of the following on the unit of farm machinery:
         A.   The SMV emblem;
         B.   The speed identification symbol that matches the speed
identification symbol required to be displayed on the agricultural tractor.
      (3)   No person shall operate an agricultural tractor that is designed by
its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless
the person possesses documentation published or provided by the manufacturer
indicating the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the manufacturer
designed the agricultural tractor to operate.
      (4)   Whoever violates this division (d) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.113)
   (e)   Animal-drawn vehicles.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (e)(4) of this section, no
person shall operate an animal-drawn vehicle on a street or highway unless it
is equipped with and displays, at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, both
of the following:
         A.   At least one lamp displaying a white light visible from a
distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the animal-drawn vehicle;
         B.   Two lamps displaying red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the animal-drawn vehicle, or as an
alternative, one lamp displaying a red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear and two red reflectors visible from all
distances of 600 feet to 100 feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful
lower beams of headlamps.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (e)(4) of this section, no
person shall operate an animal-drawn vehicle on a street or highway unless it
is equipped with and displays, at all times, all of the following:
         A.   One yellow flashing lamp displaying yellow light that is visible
from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet and that is mounted in either of
the following positions:
            1.   On the top most portion of the rear of the animal-drawn
vehicle;
            2.   On the top of the animal-drawn vehicle.
         B.   At least one of the following:
            1.   An SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. § 4513.112(B);
            2.   Micro-prism reflective tape that is visible from a distance of
not less than 500 feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams
of headlamps;
            3.   Both an SMV emblem and micro-prism reflective tape, as
specified in this division.
         C.   Lamps and micro-prism reflective tape required by this section
shall meet standards and specifications adopted by the Ohio Director of Public
Safety under R.C. § 4513.114.
      (3)   The Ohio Director of Public Safety, in accordance with R.C. Chapter
119, shall adopt rules establishing standards and specifications for the
position and mounting of the lamps and micro-prism reflective tape required by
R.C. § 4513.114. The rules permit the micro-prism reflective tape to be red,
amber, white, or silver in color.
      (4)   A.   Divisions (e)(1) and (e)(2) of this section do not apply to
the operator of animal-drawn agricultural equipment who is not transporting any
livestock or a person other than the operator.
         B.   No operator described in division (e)(4)A. of this section shall
operate animal-drawn agricultural equipment unless it is equipped with and
displays, at all times, the SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. §
4513.112(B).
         C.   As used in division (e)(4) of this section, “animal-drawn
agricultural equipment” means equipment drawn by the muscular power of an
animal that is used solely for agricultural purposes. “Animal-drawn
agricultural equipment” includes any of the following:
            1.   A plow;
            2.   A manure spreader;
            3.   A thresher.
      (5)   Whoever violates this division (e) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.114)
   (f)   Strict liability offenses. The offenses established under this section
are strict liability offenses, and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The
designation of these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be
construed to imply that any other offense, for which there is no specified
degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4513.115)
§ 438.11 SPOTLIGHT AND AUXILIARY LIGHTS.
   (a)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one
spotlight and every lighted spotlight shall be so aimed and used upon
approaching another vehicle that no part of the high-intensity portion of the
beam will be directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side
of the vehicle, nor more than 100 feet ahead of the vehicle.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than three
auxiliary driving lights mounted on the front of the vehicle. Any such lights
which do not conform to the specifications for auxiliary driving lights and the
regulations for their use prescribed by the Director of Public Safety shall not
be used.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.12)
§ 438.12 COWL, FENDER AND BACK-UP LIGHTS.
   (a)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with side cowl or fender
lights which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with lights on each side thereof
which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
      (3)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with back-up lights, either
separately or in combination with another light. No back-up lights shall be
continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.13)
§ 438.13 TWO LIGHTS DISPLAYED.
   (a)   At all times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, at least two lighted lights shall be displayed, one near
each side of the front of every motor vehicle, except when the vehicle is
parked subject to the regulations governing lights on parked vehicles.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.14)
§ 438.14 USE OF HEADLIGHT BEAMS.
   (a)   Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or shoulder
adjacent thereto during the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the driver shall use a
distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and of
sufficient intensity to reveal persons, vehicles and substantial objects at a
safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle,
the driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed that
the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming driver.
      (2)   Every new motor vehicle registered in this state which has
multiple-beam road lighting equipment shall be equipped with a beam indicator,
which shall be lighted whenever the uppermost distribution of light from the
headlights is in use, and shall not otherwise be lighted. This indicator shall
be so designed and located that, when lighted, it will be readily visible
without glare to the driver of the vehicle.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.15)
§ 438.15 LIGHTS OF LESS INTENSITY ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES.
   (a)   Any motor vehicle may be operated under the conditions specified in
R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance when it is
equipped with two lighted lights upon the front thereof capable of revealing
persons and substantial objects 75 feet ahead, in lieu of lights required in
R.C. § 4513.14, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, provided
that the vehicle shall not be operated at a speed in excess of 20 miles per
hour.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.16)
§ 438.16 NUMBER OF LIGHTS PERMITTED; RED AND FLASHING LIGHTS.
   (a)   Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlights is also equipped
with any auxiliary lights or spotlight or any other light on the front thereof
projecting a beam of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower, not more than a
total of five of any such lights on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at
any one time when the vehicle is upon a highway.
   (b)   Any lighted light or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle, other
than headlights, spotlights, signal lights or auxiliary driving lights, that
projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower shall be
so directed that no part of the beam will strike the level of the roadway on
which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than 75 feet from the vehicle.
   (c)   (1)   Flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles, except as a
means for indicating a right or a left turn, or in the presence of a vehicular
traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, or overtaking or passing.
      (2)   The prohibition in division (c)(1) of this section does not apply
to any of the following:
         A.   Emergency vehicles, road service vehicles servicing or towing a
disabled vehicle, stationary waste collection vehicles actively collecting
garbage, refuse, trash, or recyclable materials on the roadside, rural mail
delivery vehicles, vehicles as provided in R.C. § 4513.182, highway maintenance
vehicles, and similar equipment operated by state or local authorities,
provided such vehicles are equipped with and display, when used on a street or
highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights, a flashing,
oscillating, or rotating amber light;
         B.   Vehicles or machinery permitted by R.C. § 4513.111 to have a
flashing red light;
         C.   Farm machinery and vehicles escorting farm machinery, provided
such machinery and vehicles are equipped with and display, when used on a
street or highway, a flashing, oscillating, or rotating amber light. Farm
machinery also may display the lights described in R.C. § 4513.111.
         D.   A funeral hearse or funeral escort vehicle, provided that the
funeral hearse or funeral escort vehicle is equipped with and displays, when
used on a street or highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights,
a flashing, oscillating, or rotating purple or amber light.
         E.   A vehicle being used for emergency preparedness, response, and
recovery activities, as those terms are defined in R.C. § 5502.21, that is
equipped with and displays, when used on a street or highway for the special
purpose necessitating such lights, a flashing, oscillating, or rotating amber
or red and white light, provided that the vehicle is being operated by a person
from one of the following and the vehicle is clearly marked with the applicable
agency’s or authority’s insignia:
            1.   The Ohio Emergency Management Agency;
            2.   A countywide emergency management agency established under
R.C. § 5502.26;
            3.   A regional authority for emergency management established
under R.C. § 5502.27;
            4.   A program for emergency management established under R.C. §
5502.271.
      (3)   Division (c)(1) of this section does not apply to animal-drawn
vehicles subject to R.C. § 4513.114.
   (d)   (1)   Except a person operating a public safety vehicle, as defined in
R.C. § 4511.01(E), an emergency management agency vehicle, as described in
division (c)(2)E. of this section, or a school bus, no person shall operate,
move, or park upon, or permit to stand within the right- of-way of any public
street or highway any vehicle or equipment that is equipped with and displaying
a flashing red or a flashing combination red and white light, or an oscillating
or rotating red light, or a combination red and white oscillating or rotating
light.
      (2)   Except a public law enforcement officer, or other person sworn to
enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state, operating a public safety
vehicle when on duty, no person shall operate, move, or park upon, or permit to
stand within the right-of-way of any street or highway any vehicle or equipment
that is equipped with, or upon which is mounted, and displaying a flashing blue
or a flashing combination blue and white light, or an oscillating or rotating
blue light, or a combination blue and white oscillating or rotating light.
   (e)   This section does not prohibit the use of warning lights required by
law or the simultaneous flashing of turn signals on disabled vehicles or on
vehicles being operated in unfavorable atmospheric conditions in order to
enhance their visibility. This section also does not prohibit the simultaneous
flashing of turn signals or warning lights whether on farm machinery or
vehicles escorting farm machinery when used on a street or highway.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.17)
§ 438.17 LIGHTS AND SOUND-PRODUCING DEVICES ON CORONERS’ VEHICLES.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a motor vehicle operated
by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator may be equipped with a
flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and siren, whistle or bell
capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of
not less than 500 feet. Such a vehicle may display the flashing, oscillating or
rotating red or blue light and may give the audible signal of the siren,
whistle or bell only when responding to a fatality or a fatal motor vehicle
accident on a street or highway and only at those locations where the stoppage
of traffic impedes the ability of the coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s
investigator to arrive at the site of the fatality.
   (b)   This section does not relieve the coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s
investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard
for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.171) (Prior Code, § 438.165)
§ 438.18 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING PRESCHOOL CHILDREN.
   (a)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle owned, leased or hired by a
nursery school, kindergarten or child care center, while transporting preschool
children to or from such an institution, unless the motor vehicle is equipped
with and displaying two amber flashing lights mounted on a bar attached to the
top of the vehicle, and a sign bearing the designation “caution — children,”
which shall be attached to the bar carrying the amber flashing lights in such a
manner as to be legible to persons both in front of and behind the vehicle. The
lights and sign shall meet standards and specifications adopted by the Ohio
Director of Public Safety.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle displaying the lights and sign
required by this section for any purpose other than the transportation of
preschool children as provided in this section.
(R.C. § 4513.182)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
(Prior Code, § 438.17)
§ 438.19 FOCUS AND AIM OF HEADLIGHTS.
   (a)   No person shall use any lights mentioned in R.C. §§ 4513.03 through
4513.18, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, upon any motor
vehicle, trailer or semitrailer unless these lights are equipped, mounted and
adjusted as to focus and aim in accordance with regulations which are
prescribed by the Director of Public Safety.
   (b)   The headlights on any motor vehicle shall comply with the headlamp
color requirements contained in Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number
108, 49 C.F.R. § 571.108. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in violation
of this division.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.19) (Prior Code, § 438.18)
§ 438.20 MOTOR VEHICLE AND MOTORCYCLE BRAKES.
   (a)   The following requirements govern as to brake equipment on vehicles:
      (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, when operated upon a
highway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and
to stop and hold the motor vehicle, including two separate means of applying
the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at
least two wheels. If these two separate means of applying the brakes are
connected in any way, then on those motor vehicles, manufactured or assembled
after January 1, 1942, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one
part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without
brakes on at least two wheels.
      (2)   Every motorcycle, when operated upon a highway shall be equipped
with at least one adequate brake, which may be operated by hand or by foot.
      (3)   Every motorized bicycle shall be equipped with brakes meeting the
rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety under R.C. § 4511.521.
      (4)   When operated upon the highways, the following vehicles shall be
equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to
hold the vehicle, designed to be applied by the driver of the towing motor
vehicle from its cab, and also designed and connected so that, in case of a
breakaway of the towed vehicle, the brakes shall be automatically applied:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every trailer or
semitrailer, except a pole trailer, with an empty weight of 2,000 pounds or
more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1942;
   B.   Every manufactured home or travel trailer with an empty weight of 2,000
pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 2001.
      (5)   Every watercraft trailer with a gross weight or manufacturer’s
gross vehicle weight rating of 3,000 pounds or more that is manufactured or
assembled on or after January 1, 2008, shall have separate brakes equipped with
hydraulic surge or electrically operated brakes on two wheels.
      (6)   In any combination of motor-drawn trailers or semitrailers equipped
with brakes, means shall be provided for applying the rearmost brakes in
approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing vehicle, and developing
the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at the fastest rate; or
means shall be provided for applying braking effort first on the rearmost
brakes; or both of the above means, capable of being used alternatively, may be
employed.
      (7)   Every vehicle and combination of vehicles, except motorcycles and
motorized bicycles, and except trailers and semitrailers of a gross weight of
less than 2,000 pounds, and pole trailers, shall be equipped with parking
brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is operated, under
all conditions of loading, on a surface free from snow, ice or loose material.
The parking brakes shall be capable of being applied in conformance with the
foregoing requirements by the driver’s muscular effort or by spring action or
by equivalent means. Their operation may be assisted by the service brakes or
other source of power provided that failure of the service brake actuation
system or other power assisting mechanism will not prevent the parking brakes
from being applied in conformance with the foregoing requirements. The parking
brakes shall be so designed that when once applied they shall remain applied
with the required effectiveness despite exhaustion of any source of energy or
leakage of any kind.
      (8)   The same brake drums, brake shoes and lining assemblies, brake shoe
anchors, and mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism normally associated with
the wheel brake assemblies may be used for both the service brakes and the
parking brakes. If the means of applying the parking brakes and the service
brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of
any one part shall not leave the vehicle without operative brakes.
      (9)   Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn vehicles shall,
at all times and under all conditions of loading, be capable of being stopped
on a dry, smooth, level road free from loose material, upon application of the
service or foot brake, within the following specified distances, or shall be
capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate corresponding to these
distances:
   A.   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles having brakes on all wheels shall
come to a stop in 30 feet or less from a speed of 20 miles per hour.
   B.   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles not having brakes on all wheels
shall come to a stop in 40 feet or less from a speed of 20 miles per hour.
      (10)   All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be
so adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect to the wheels
on opposite sides of the vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.20)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
(Prior Code, § 438.19)
§ 438.21 HORN, SIREN AND THEFT ALARM SIGNAL.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle when operated upon a highway shall be
equipped with a horn which is in good working order and capable of emitting
sound audible, under normal conditions, from a distance of not less than 200
feet.
      (2)   No motor vehicle shall be equipped with, nor shall any person use
upon a vehicle, any siren, whistle or bell. Any vehicle may be equipped with a
theft alarm signal device which shall be so arranged that it cannot be used as
an ordinary warning signal. Every emergency vehicle shall be equipped with a
siren, whistle or bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal
conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet and of a type approved by
the Director of Public Safety. The equipment shall not be used except when the
vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or is in the immediate
pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in which case the driver
of the emergency vehicle shall sound the equipment when it is necessary to warn
pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.21) (Prior Code, § 438.20)
§ 438.22 MUFFLER; MUFFLER CUTOUT; EXCESSIVE SMOKE, GAS OR NOISE.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle with an internal combustion
engine shall at all times be equipped with a muffler which is in good working
order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise, and no
person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon a motor
vehicle on a highway. Every motorcycle muffler shall be equipped with baffle
plates.
      (2)   No person shall own, operate or have in the person’s possession any
motor vehicle or motorcycle equipped with a device for producing excessive
smoke or gas, or so equipped as to permit oil or any other chemical to flow
into or upon the exhaust pipe or muffler of the vehicle, or equipped in any way
to produce or emit smoke or dangerous or annoying gases from any portion of the
vehicle, other than the ordinary gases emitted by the exhaust of an internal
combustion engine under normal operation.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.22) (Prior Code, § 438.21)
§ 438.23 REAR-VIEW MIRROR; CLEAR VIEW TO FRONT, BOTH SIDES AND REAR.
   (a)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle shall be equipped with a mirror so
located as to reflect to the operator a view of the highway to the rear of the
vehicle or motorcycle. Operators of vehicles and motorcycles shall have a clear
and unobstructed view to the front and to both sides of their vehicles and
motorcycles and shall have a clear view to the rear of their vehicles and
motorcycles by mirror.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.23) (Prior Code, § 438.22)
§ 438.24 WINDSHIELD REQUIRED; SIGN OR POSTER UPON WINDSHIELD; WINDSHIELD WIPER.
   (a)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle on a street or highway in this
municipality, other than a motorcycle or motorized bicycle, that is not
equipped with a windshield.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle, other than a bus, with
any sign, poster or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield,
sidewings, side or rear windows of the vehicle other than a certificate or
other paper required to be displayed by law, except that there may be in the
lower left-hand or right-hand corner of the windshield a sign, poster or decal
not to exceed four inches in height by six inches in width. No sign, poster or
decal shall be displayed in the front windshield in such a manner as to conceal
the vehicle identification number for the motor vehicle when, in accordance
with federal law, that number is located inside the vehicle passenger
compartment and so placed as to be readable through the vehicle glazing without
moving any part of the vehicle.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a passenger car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if either of
the following apply to the device:
         A.   It is a “vehicle safety technology” as defined in 49 C.F.R. §
393.5 and complies with 49 C.F.R. § 393.60(e)(1)(ii).
         B.   It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals, and it does not conceal the vehicle
identification number.
      (3)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a commercial car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if either of
the following apply to the device:
         A.   It is a “vehicle safety technology” as defined in 49 C.F.R. §
393.5 and complies with 49 C.F.R. § 393.60(e)(1)(ii).
         B.   It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals, and it is mounted not more than 8.5 inches
below the upper edge of the windshield.
   (c)   The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device
for cleaning rain, snow or other moisture from the windshield. The device shall
be maintained in good working order and so constructed as to be controlled or
operated by the operator of the vehicle.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.24) (Prior Code, § 438.23)
§ 438.25 TINTED GLASS; MATERIALS ON GLASS.
   (a)   No person shall operate, on any highway or other public or private
property open to the public for vehicular travel or parking, lease or rent any
motor vehicle that is registered in this state unless the motor vehicle
conforms to the requirements concerning tinted glass and reflectorized material
of R.C. § 4513.241 and of any applicable rule adopted under that section.
   (b)   No person shall install in or on any motor vehicle any glass or other
material that fails to conform to the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any
rule adopted under that section.
   (c)   (1)   No used motor vehicle dealer or new motor vehicle dealer, as
defined in R.C. § 4517.01, shall sell any motor vehicle that fails to conform
to the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any rule adopted under that
section.
      (2)   No manufacturer, remanufacturer, or distributor, as defined in R.C.
§ 4517.01, shall provide to a motor vehicle dealer licensed under R.C. Chapter
4517 or to any other person, a motor vehicle that fails to conform to the
requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any rule adopted under that section.
   (d)   No reflectorized materials shall be permitted upon or in any front
windshield, side windows, sidewings or rear window.
   (e)   This section does not apply to the manufacturer’s tinting or glazing
of motor vehicle windows or windshields that is otherwise in compliance with or
permitted by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 205.
   (f)   With regard to any side window behind a driver’s seat or any rear
window other than any window on an emergency door, this division (b) does not
apply to any school bus used to transport a child with disabilities pursuant to
R.C. Chapter 3323, whom it is impossible or impractical to transport by regular
school bus in the course of regular route transportation provided by a school
district. As used in this division, “child with disabilities” has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 3323.01.
   (g)   This section does not apply to any school bus that is to be sold and
operated outside the municipality.
   (h)   (1)   This section does not apply to a motor vehicle used by a law
enforcement agency when the motor vehicle is used by the law enforcement agency
for a purpose within the scope of the law enforcement agency's duties.
      (2)   As used in this division, “law enforcement agency” means a police
department, the office of a sheriff, the State Highway Patrol, a county
prosecuting attorney, or a federal, state, or local governmental body that
enforces criminal laws and that has employees who have a statutory power of
arrest.
(R.C. § 4513.241(C) - (J))
   (i)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a), (c)(2) or (d) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c)(1) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor if the dealer or the dealer’s agent knew of the nonconformity
at the time of sale.
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree, except that an organization may not be
convicted unless the act of installation was authorized by the board of
directors, trustees, partners, or by a high managerial officer acting on behalf
of the organization, and installation was performed by an employee of the
organization acting within the scope of the person’s employment.
         B.   In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section,
whoever violates division (b) of this section is liable in a civil action to
the owner of a motor vehicle on which was installed the nonconforming glass or
material for any damages incurred by that person as a result of the
installation of the nonconforming glass or material, costs of maintaining the
civil action, and attorney fees.
         C.   In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section, if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation
of division (b) of this section and the offender is a motor vehicle repair
operator registered under R.C. Chapter 4775 or a motor vehicle dealer licensed
under R.C. Chapter 4517, whoever violates division (b) of this section is
subject to a registration or license suspension, as applicable, for a period of
not more than 180 days.
(R.C. § 4513.241(K))
(Prior Code, § 438.235)
Statutory reference:
   Administrative regulations, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-41
§ 438.26 LIMITED LOAD EXTENSION ON LEFT SIDE OF PASSENGER VEHICLE.
   (a)   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on a highway with any load
carried on the vehicle which extends more than six inches beyond the line of
the fenders on the vehicle’s left side.
(R.C. § 4513.30)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
(Prior Code, § 438.24)
§ 438.27 MOTOR VEHICLE STOP LIGHTS.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer and pole trailer when
operated upon a highway shall be equipped with two or more stop lights, except
that passenger cars manufactured or assembled prior to January 1, 1967,
motorcycles and motor-driven cycles shall be equipped with at least one stop
light. Stop lights shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle, actuated upon
application of the service brake, and may be incorporated with other rear
lights. These stop lights when actuated shall emit a red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear; provided that in the case of a train of
vehicles only the stop lights on the rearmost vehicle need be visible from the
distance specified.
      (2)   These stop lights when actuated shall give a steady warning light
to the rear of a vehicle or train of vehicles to indicate the intention of the
operator to diminish the speed of or stop a vehicle or train of vehicles.
      (3)   When stop lights are used as required by this section, they shall
be constructed or installed so as to provide adequate and reliable illumination
and shall conform to the appropriate rules and regulations established under
R.C. § 4513.19.
      (4)   A historical motor vehicle that was not originally manufactured
with stop lights or a replica motor vehicle that replicates a motor vehicle
that was not originally manufactured with stop lights is not subject to this
section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
   (c)   As used in this section, "replica motor vehicle" means a replica motor
vehicle for which a certificate of title is issued under R.C. § 4505.072.
(R.C. § 4513.071) (Prior Code, § 438.25)
§ 438.28 BUMPERS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Gross vehicle weight rating.” The manufacturer’s gross vehicle
weight rating established for that vehicle.
      (2)   “Manufacturer.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      (3)   “Multipurpose passenger vehicle.” A motor vehicle with motive
power, except a motorcycle, designed to carry ten persons or less, that is
constructed either on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional
off-road operation.
      (4)   “Passenger car.” Any motor vehicle with motive power, designed for
carrying ten persons or less, except a multipurpose passenger vehicle or
motorcycle.
      (5)   “Truck.” Every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers,
designed and used to carry property and having a gross vehicle weight rating of
10,000 pounds or less.
   (b)   Rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety, in accordance with
R.C. Chapter 119, shall govern the maximum bumper height or, in the absence of
bumpers and in cases where bumper height has been lowered or modified, the
maximum height to the bottom of the frame rail of any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck.
   (c)   No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this state that does not
conform to the requirements of this section or any applicable rule adopted
pursuant to R.C. § 4513.021.
   (d)   No person shall modify any motor vehicle registered in this state in
such a manner as to cause the vehicle body or chassis to come in contact with
the ground, expose the fuel tank to damage from collision, or cause the wheels
to come in contact with the body under normal operation, and no person shall
disconnect any part of the original suspension system of the vehicle to defeat
the safe operation of that system.
   (e)   Nothing contained in this section or in the rules adopted pursuant to
R.C. § 4513.021 shall be construed to prohibit either of the following:
      (1)   The installation upon a passenger car, multipurpose passenger
vehicle or truck registered in this state of heavy duty equipment, including
shock absorbers and overload springs.
      (2)   The operation on a street or highway of a passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle, or truck registered in this state with normal
wear to the suspension system if the normal wear does not adversely affect the
control of the vehicle.
   (f)   This section and the rules adopted pursuant to R.C. § 4513.021 do not
apply to any specially designed or modified passenger car, multipurpose
passenger vehicle or truck when operated off a street or highway in races and
similar events.
   (g)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.021) (Prior Code, § 438.26)
Statutory reference:
   Maximum height on bumpers, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-43
§ 438.29 AIR CLEANER REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate upon any street, alley or other public place any
motor vehicle which is not equipped with a functioning air cleaner, except for
motor vehicles equipped with electronic fuel-injection engines.
(Prior Code, § 438.27)
§ 438.30 USE OF CHILD RESTRAINTS.
   (a)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child
restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (b)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, that is owned,
leased or otherwise under the control of a nursery school or child care center,
the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child restraint system
that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (c)   When any child who is less than eight years of age and less than four
feet nine inches in height, who is not required by division (a) or (b) of this
section to be secured in a child restraint system, is being transported in a
motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 4511.01 or a vehicle that is regulated under R.C. § 5104.015, that is
required by the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with
seat belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor
vehicle shall have the child properly secured in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions on a booster seat that meets federal motor vehicle
safety standards.
   (d)   When any child who is at least eight years of age but not older than
15 years of age, and who is not otherwise required by division (a), (b), or (c)
of this section to be secured in a child restraint system or booster seat, is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly restrained either in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions
in a child restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards
or in an occupant restraining device as defined in R.C. § 4513.263.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (c) or (d) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or
summons for a violation of division (c) or (d) of this section or causing the
arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of division
(c) or (d) of this section, and absent another violation of law, a law
enforcement officer’s view of the interior or visual inspection of a motor
vehicle being operated on any street or highway may not be used for the purpose
of determining whether a violation of division (c) or (d) of this section has
been or is being committed.
   (f)   The Director of Public Safety shall adopt such rules as are necessary
to carry out this section.
   (g)   The failure of an operator of a motor vehicle to secure a child in a
child restraint system, a booster seat or in an occupant restraining device as
required in this section is not negligence imputable to the child, is not
admissible as evidence in any civil action involving the rights of the child
against any other person allegedly liable for injuries to the child, is not to
be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the operator of the motor
vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section, and is not
admissible as evidence in any criminal action involving the operator of the
motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
   (h)   This section does not apply when an emergency exists that threatens
the life of any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle that is being
used to transport a child who otherwise would be required to be restrained
under this section. This section does not apply to a person operating a motor
vehicle who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4731, a clinical nurse specialist or certified nurse
practitioner licensed to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter 4723, or a
chiropractor licensed to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter 4734 that
states that the child who otherwise would be required to be restrained under
this section has a physical impairment that makes use of a child restraint
system, booster seat, or an occupant restraining device impossible or
impractical, provided that the person operating the vehicle has safely and
appropriately restrained the child in accordance with any recommendations of
the physician, nurse, or chiropractor as noted on the affidavit.
   (i)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any person to
carry with the person the birth certificate of a child to prove the age of the
child, but the production of a valid birth certificate for a child showing that
the child was not of an age to which this section applies is a defense against
any ticket, citation or summons issued for violating this section.
   (j)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a), (b), (c), or (d) of this section
shall be punished as follows, provided that the failure of an operator of a
motor vehicle to secure more than one child in a child restraint system,
booster seat or occupant restraining device as required by this section that
occurred at the same time, on the same day and at the same location is deemed
to be a single violation of this section:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (j)(1)B. of this
section, the offender is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not
less than $25 nor more than $75.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (a), (b),(c) or (d) of this section or of a
state law or municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent any of those
divisions, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   All fines imposed pursuant to division (j)(1) of this section shall
be forwarded to the State Treasurer for deposit in the Child Highway Safety
Fund created by R.C. § 4511.81(I).
(R.C. § 4511.81(A) - (H), (K), (L)) (Prior Code, § 438.28)
§ 438.31 USE OF OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICES.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   “Automobile.” Any commercial tractor, passenger car, commercial car
or truck that is required to be factory-equipped with an occupant restraining
device for the operator or any passenger by regulations adopted by the United
States Secretary of Transportation pursuant to the “National Traffic and Motor
Vehicle Safety Act of 1966”, 80 Stat. 719, 15 U.S.C. 1392.
      (2)   “Commercial tractor,” “passenger car” and “commercial car.” Have
the same meanings as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      (3)   “Occupant restraining device.” A seat safety belt, shoulder belt,
harness or other safety device for restraining a person who is an operator of
or passenger in an automobile and that satisfies the minimum federal vehicle
safety standards established by the United States Department of Transportation.
      (4)   “Passenger.” Any person in an automobile, other than its operator,
who is occupying a seating position for which an occupant restraining device is
provided.
      (5)   “Tort action.” A civil action for damages for injury, death or loss
to person or property. “Tort action” includes a product liability claim, as
defined in R.C. § 2307.71, and as asbestos claim, as defined in R.C. § 2307.91,
but does not include a civil action for damages for breach of contract or
another agreement between persons.
      (6)   “Vehicle” and “motor vehicle.” As used in the definitions of the
terms set forth above, have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (b)   Prohibited acts. No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless he or she is
wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device, or operate a school bus that has an occupant restraining
device installed for use in its operator’s seat unless he or she is wearing all
of the available elements of the device, as properly adjusted.
      (2)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless each
passenger in the automobile who is subject to the requirement set forth in
division (b)(3) of this section is wearing all of the available elements of a
properly adjusted occupant restraining device.
      (3)   Occupy, as a passenger, a seating position on the front seat of an
automobile being operated on any street or highway unless he or she is wearing
all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining
device.
      (4)   Operate a taxicab on any street or highway unless all factory-
equipped occupant restraining devices in the taxicab are maintained in usable
form.
   (c)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Division (b)(3) of this section does not apply to a person who is
required by R.C. § 4511.81 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to
be secured in a child restraint device or booster seat.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
an employee of the United States Postal Service or of a newspaper home delivery
service, during any period in which the person is engaged in the operation of
an automobile to deliver mail or newspapers to addressees.
      (3)   Divisions (b)(1) and (b)(3) of this section do not apply to a
person who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4734 that states the following:
         A.   That the person has a physical impairment that makes use of an
occupant restraining device impossible or impractical;
         B.   Whether the physical impairment is temporary, permanent, or
reasonably expected to be permanent;
         C.   If the physical impairment is temporary, how long the physical
impairment is expected to make the use of an occupant restraining device
impossible or impractical.
      (4)   Divisions (b)(1) and (b)(3) of this section do not apply to a
person who has registered with the Registrar of Motor Vehicles in accordance
with division (c)(5) of this section.
      (5)   A person who has received an affidavit under division (c)(3) of
this section stating that the person has a permanent or reasonably expected to
be permanent physical impairment that makes use of an occupant restraining
device impossible or impracticable may register with the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles attesting to that fact. Upon such registration, the Registrar shall
make that information available in the law enforcement automated data system. A
person included in the database under division (c)(5) of this section is not
required to have the affidavit obtained in accordance with division (c)(3) of
this section in their possession while operating or occupying an automobile.
      (6)   A physician or chiropractor who issues an affidavit for the
purposes of division (c)(3) or (c)(4) of this section is immune from civil
liability arising from any injury or death sustained by the person who was
issued the affidavit due to the failure of the person to wear an occupant
restraining device unless the physician or chiropractor, in issuing the
affidavit, acted in a manner that constituted willful, wanton, or reckless
misconduct.
      (7)   The Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 establishing a process for a person to be included in the
database under division (c)(5) of this section. The information provided and
included in the database under division (c)(5) of this section is not a public
record subject to inspection or copying under R.C. § 149.43.
   (d)   Officers not permitted to stop cars to determine violation.
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement
officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on any street
or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of determining whether a
violation of division (b) of this section has been or is being committed or for
the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or summons for the violation or
for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for the
violation. No law enforcement officer shall view the interior or visually
inspect any automobile being operated on any street or highway for the sole
purpose of determining whether the violation has been or is being committed.
   (e)   Use of fines for educational program. All fines collected for
violations of division (b) of this section shall be forwarded to the State
Treasurer for deposit in the funds as set forth in R.C. § 4513.263(E).
   (f)   Limitations on evidence used for prosecution.
      (1)   Subject to division (f)(2) of this section, the failure of a person
to wear all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device in violation of division (b)(1) or (b)(3) of this section or
the failure of a person to ensure that each minor who is a passenger of an
automobile being operated by that person is wearing all of the available
elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device in violation of
division (b)(2) of this section shall not be considered or used by the trier of
fact in a tort action as evidence of negligence or contributory negligence.
But, the trier of fact may determine based on evidence admitted consistent with
the Ohio Rules of Evidence that the failure contributed to the harm alleged in
the tort action and may diminish a recovery of compensatory damages that
represents non- economic loss, as defined in R.C. § 2307.011, in a tort action
that could have been recovered but for the plaintiff’s failure to wear all of
the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device.
Evidence of that failure shall not be used as a basis for a criminal
prosecution of the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this
section; and shall not be admissible as evidence in a criminal action involving
the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
      (2)   If, at the time of an accident involving a passenger car equipped
with occupant restraining devices, any occupant of the passenger car who
sustained injury or death was not wearing an available occupant restraining
device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a device, or was
not wearing such a device as properly adjusted, then, consistent with the Rules
of Evidence, the fact that the occupant was not wearing the available occupant
restraining device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a
device, or was not wearing such a device as properly adjusted is admissible in
evidence in relation to any claim for relief in a tort action to the extent
that the claim for relief satisfies all of the following:
         A.   It seeks to recover damages for injury or death to the occupant;
         B.   The defendant in question is the manufacturer, designer,
distributor or seller of the passenger car;
         C.   The claim for relief against the defendant in question is that
the injury or death sustained by the occupant was enhanced or aggravated by
some design defect in the passenger car or that the passenger car was not
crashworthy.
   (g)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (b)(1) of this section shall be fined
$30.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b)(2) of this section shall be subject
to the penalty set forth in §
408.02.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (b)(3) of this section shall be fined
$20.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b)(4) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (b)(4) of this section, whoever violates division (b)(4) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4513.263) (Prior Code, § 438.29)
§ 438.32 AIR BAGS.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Air bag.” Has the same meaning as in 49 C.F.R. § 579.4, as
amended.
      (2)   “Counterfeit air bag.” An air bag displaying a mark identical or
similar to the genuine mark of a motor vehicle manufacturer, without the
authorization of the motor vehicle manufacturer.
      (3)   “Nonfunctional air bag.” Any of the following:
         A.   A replacement air bag that has been previously deployed or
damaged;
         B.   A replacement air bag that has an electrical fault that is
detected by the air bag diagnostic system of a vehicle after the air bag is
installed;
         C.   A counterfeit air bag, air bag cover, or some other object that
is installed in a vehicle to deceive an owner or operator of the vehicle into
believing that a functional air bag has been installed.
   (b)   No person shall install or reinstall in any motor vehicle a
counterfeit or nonfunctional air bag or any object intended to fulfill the
function of an air bag other than an air bag that was designed in conformance
with or that is regulated by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208
for the make, model, and model year of the vehicle, knowing that the object is
not in accordance with that standard.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly manufacture, import, sell, or offer for sale
any of the following:
      (1)   A counterfeit air bag;
      (2)   A nonfunctional air bag;
      (3)   Any other object that is intended to be installed in a motor
vehicle to fulfill the function of an air bag and that is not in conformance
with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208 for the make, model, and
model year of the vehicle in which the object is intended to be installed.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly sell, install, or reinstall a device in a
motor vehicle that causes the diagnostic system of a vehicle to inaccurately
indicate that the vehicle is equipped with a functional air bag.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) or (d) of this section is guilty
of improper replacement of a motor vehicle air bag, a misdemeanor of the first
degree on a first offense. On each subsequent offense, or if the violation
results in serious physical harm to an individual, the person is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (c) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Each manufacture, importation, installation, reinstallation, sale,
or offer for sale in violation of this section shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation.
(R.C. § 4549.20) (Prior Code, § 438.31)
§ 438.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 440: COMMERCIAL AND HEAVY VEHICLES
Section
440.01 Load limits
440.02 Maximum width, height and length
440.03 Wheel protectors
440.04 Vehicles transporting explosives
440.05 Towing requirements; exception to size and weight restrictions
440.06 Loads dropping or leaking; tracking mud; removal required
440.07 Vehicles with spikes, lugs and chains
440.08 Occupying travel trailer, fifth wheel vehicle, or manufactured or mobile
home while in motion
440.09 Route and load information
440.10 Shifting load; loose loads
440.11 Chauffeured limousines
 
440.99 Penalty
§ 440.01 LOAD LIMITS.
   (a)   State regulations.
      (1)   A.   The municipality, with respect to highways under their
jurisdiction, upon application in writing, shall issue a special regional heavy
hauling permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or
combination of vehicles as follows:
            1.   At a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum
specified in R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with
R.C. §§ 4513.01 to 4513.37;
            2.   Upon any highway under the jurisdiction of the municipality
except those highways with a condition insufficient to bear the weight of the
vehicle or combination of vehicles as stated in the application; or
            3.   Issuance of a special regional heavy hauling permit is subject
to the payment of a fee established by the municipality in accordance with this
section.
         B.   In circumstances where a person is not eligible to receive a
permit under division (a)(1)A. of this section, the municipality, with respect
to highways under its jurisdiction, upon application in writing and for good
cause shown, may issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to
operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight of
vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in R.C. §§ 5577.01 through
5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with R.C. §§ 4513.01 through 4513.37,
upon any highway under its jurisdiction.
      (2)   A.   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 715.22 and 723.01, the holder of a
permit issued by the Director of Transportation under R.C. § 4513.34 may move
the vehicle or combination of vehicles described in the permit on any highway
that is a part of the state highway system when the movement is partly within
and partly without the corporate limits of the municipality. No local authority
shall require any other permit or license or charge any license fee or other
charge against the holder of a permit for the movement of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles on any highway which is a part of the state highway
system. The Ohio Director of Transportation shall not require the holder of a
permit issued by the municipality to obtain a special permit for the movement
of vehicles or combination of vehicles on highways within the jurisdiction of
the municipality.
         B.   Except as provided in R.C. § 4513.34(B)(3), permits may be issued
for any period of time not to exceed one year, as the local authority in its
discretion determines advisable or for the duration of any public construction
project.
      (3)   A.   The application for a permit issued under this section shall
be in the form that the municipality prescribes. The municipality may prescribe
a permit fee to be imposed and collected when any permit described in this
section is issued. The permit fee may be in an amount sufficient to reimburse
the municipality for the administrative costs incurred in issuing the permit,
and also to cover the cost of normal and expected damage caused to the roadway
or a street or highway structure as the result of the operation of the
nonconforming vehicle or combination of vehicles.
         B.   For the purposes of this section and of rules adopted by the
Director under R.C. § 4513.34, milk transported in bulk by vehicle is deemed a
nondivisible load.
         C.   For purposes of this section and of rules adopted by the Director
under R.C. § 4513.34, three or fewer aluminum coils, transported by a vehicle,
are deemed a nondivisible load. The Director shall adopt rules establishing
requirements for an aluminum coil permit that are substantially similar to the
requirements for a steel coil permit under O.A.C. Chapter 5501:2-1.
      (4)   The municipality shall issue a special regional heavy hauling
permit under division (a)(1)A. of this section upon application and payment of
the applicable fee. However, the municipality may issue or withhold a permit
specified in division (a)(1)B. of this section. If a permit is to be issued,
the municipality may limit or prescribe conditions of operation for the vehicle
and may require the posting of a bond or other security conditioned upon the
sufficiency of the permit fee to compensate for damage caused to the roadway or
a street or highway structure. In addition, the municipality, as a condition of
issuance of an overweight permit, may require the applicant to develop and
enter into a mutual agreement with the municipality to compensate for or to
repair excess damage caused to the roadway by travel under the permit.
       (5)   Every permit issued under this section shall be carried in the
vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to
inspection by any police officer or authorized agent of any authority granting
the permit. No person shall violate any of the terms of a permit.
      (6)   The Director of Transportation may debar an applicant from applying
for a special permit under this section upon a finding based on a reasonable
belief that the applicant has done any of the actions specified in R.C. §
4513.34(F).
      (7)   Notice and procedures for debarment shall be as provided in R.C. §
4513.34(G).
      (8)   A.   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under
this section that relate to gross load limits.
         B.   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to axle load by more than 2,000 pounds per axle or group of
axles.
         C.   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to an approved route except upon order of a law enforcement
officer or authorized agent of the issuing authority.
      (9)   A permit issued by the municipality under this section for the
operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles is valid for the purposes of
the vehicle operation in accordance with the conditions and limitations
specified on the permit. Such a permit is voidable by law enforcement only for
operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles in violation of the weight,
dimension, or route provisions of the permit. However, a permit is not voidable
for operation in violation of a route provision of a permit if the operation is
upon the order of a law enforcement officer.
(RC § 4513.34)
   (b)   Heavy-duty streets. No truck, trailer or semitrailer of any weight in
excess of 20,000 pounds gross weight shall be moved on, along or over any
street, road or thoroughfare within the municipality other than Lake Road
(Routes 2 and 6) and Avon Belden Center Road (Route 83), Walker Road, Miller
Road (south of Walker Road) and Moore Road (south of Walker Road).
   (c)   Other local streets.
      (1)   No person shall drive or operate a truck weighing five tons or
more, including its load, upon any of the streets in the municipality, with the
exception only of those areas designated in division (b) of this section,
unless the journey of such truck originates or terminates upon such a municipal
street for the purpose of picking up or making a delivery of a shipment or
partial load.
      (2)   If the driver or operator of such a truck finds it necessary to
drive or operate the truck on a municipal street because of one of the
exceptions enumerated in division (c)(1) of this section, he or she shall use
the shortest possible route to enter from and leave, from the closest available
street designated in division (b) of this section.
      (3)   In order to notify truck drivers of the existence of this section,
the Public Works Department shall post signs in proper places warning drivers
of trucks as to the provisions of this section, but if, for any reason, there
are no such signs posted or if such signs are posted and the same are removed,
broken or destroyed, the absence of such signs shall not relieve any truck
driver of the responsibility of complying with this section and shall not
prevent the driver of such truck, if he or she does not comply with this
section, from being found guilty of violating the same.
   (d)   Permits.
      (1)   The Police Department may, upon application in writing and for good
cause shown, issue special permits authorizing the applicant to operate or move
a vehicle, or combination of vehicles or other heavy equipment, exceeding the
weight limits specified in divisions (b) and (c) of this section.
      (2)   Such permits may be issued for a single or round trip, or in
special instances, for a certain period of time.
      (3)   The fees for such permits shall be as set forth in Chapter 208 of
the Administration Code - the General Fee Schedule.
      (4)   The Department, with the advice and approval of the Municipal
Engineer, may specify in such permits the conditions, times and routes under
which the permittee is allowed to operate or move the vehicles or equipment.
      (5)   The Department may require a prior deposit of money or surety bond
with the municipality to ensure payment of all expenses incident to the
supervision and safeguarding of the movement of vehicles or equipment, and to
ensure the payment of all damages resulting to public or private property by
reason of the moving of vehicles and equipment.
      (6)   The Department may call upon the Municipal Engineer to determine
the extent of possible damages and to determine the amount of deposit or bond
to ensure payment of such possible damages.
   (e)   Penalty. Whoever violates this section shall be fined $80 for the
first 2,000 pounds, or fraction thereof, of overload; for overloads in excess
of 2,000 pounds, but not in excess of 5,000 pounds, such person shall be fined
$100, and, in addition thereto, $1 per 100 pounds of overload; for overloads in
excess of 5,000 pounds, but not in excess of 10,000 pounds, such person shall
be fined $130 and, in addition thereto, $2 per 100 pounds of overload, or
imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both; for all overloads in excess of
10,000 pounds, such person shall be fined $160, and, in addition thereto, $3
per 100 pounds of overload, or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both.
Whoever violates the weight provisions of vehicle and load relating to gross
limits shall be fined not less than $100. No penalty prescribed in this
division (e) shall be imposed in any vehicle combination if the overload on any
axle does not exceed 1,000 pounds, and if the immediately preceding or
following axle, except the front axle of the vehicle combination, is under
loaded by the same or a greater amount. For purposes of this division (e), two
axles on one vehicle less than eight feet apart shall be considered as one
axle.
(Ord. 1233, passed 11-24-1958; Ord. 36-69, passed 4-14-1969; Ord. 120-92,
passed 7-27-1992; Ord. 182-99, passed 10-4-1999; Ord. 114-2014, passed 9-8-
2014)
§ 440.02 MAXIMUM WIDTH, HEIGHT AND LENGTH.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be operated upon the public highways, streets,
bridges and culverts within this municipality whose dimensions exceed those
specified in this section.
   (b)   No such vehicle shall have a width:
      (1)   In excess of 104 inches for passenger bus type vehicles operated
exclusively within the municipality.
      (2)   In excess of 102 inches, excluding such safety devices as are
required by law, for passenger bus type vehicles operated over freeways, and
other state roads with minimum pavement widths of 22 feet, except those roads
or portions of roads over which operation of 102-inch buses is prohibited by
order of the Director of Transportation.
      (3)   In excess of 132 inches for traction engines.
      (4)   In excess of 102 inches for recreational vehicles, excluding safety
devices and retracted awnings and other appurtenances of six inches or less in
width and except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch
recreational vehicles on designated state highways or portions of highways.
      (5)   In excess of 102 inches, including load, for all other vehicles,
except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch vehicles on the
state highways or portions of state highways as the Director designates.
   (c)   No such vehicle shall have a length:
      (1)   In excess of 66 feet for passenger bus type vehicles and
articulated passenger bus type vehicles operated by a regional transit
authority pursuant to R.C. §§ 306.30 to 306.54.
      (2)   In excess of 45 feet for all other passenger bus type vehicles.
      (3)   In excess of 53 feet for any semitrailer when operated in a
commercial tractor-semitrailer combination, with or without load, except that
the Director may prohibit the operation of any such commercial tractor-
semitrailer combination on the state highways or portions of state highways as
the Director designates.
      (4)   In excess of 28.5 feet for any semitrailer or trailer when operated
in a commercial tractor- semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-semitrailer-
semitrailer combination, except that the Director may prohibit the operation of
any such commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-
semitrailer-semitrailer combination on the state highways or portions of state
highways as the Director designates.
      (5)   A.   In excess of 97 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle
transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle
transporter combinations when operated on any interstate, United States route
or state route, including reasonable access travel on all other roadways for a
distance not to exceed one road mile from any interstate, United States route
or state route, not to exceed three saddlemounted vehicles, but which may
include one fullmount;
         B.   In excess of 75 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle
transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle
transporter combinations when operated on any roadway not designated as an
interstate, United States route or state route, not to exceed three
saddlemounted vehicles, but which may include one fullmount.
      (6)   In excess of 65 feet for any other combination of vehicles coupled
together, with or without load, except as provided in division (c)(3) and (c)
(4), and in division (e) below.
      (7)   In excess of 45 feet for recreational vehicles.
      (8)   In excess of 50 feet for all other vehicles, except trailers and
semitrailers, with or without load.
   (d)   No such vehicle shall have a height in excess of 13.5 feet, with or
without load.
   (e)   An automobile transporter or boat transporter shall be allowed a
length of 65 feet, and a stinger- steered automobile transporter or stinger-
steered boat transporter shall be allowed a length of 75 feet, except that the
load thereon may extend no more than four feet beyond the rear of such vehicles
and may extend no more than three feet beyond the front of the vehicles, and
except further that the Director may prohibit the operation of a stinger-
steered automobile transporter, stinger-steered boat transporter, or a B- train
assembly on any state highway or portion of any state highway that the Director
designates.
   (f)   (1)   The widths prescribed in division (b) of this section shall not
include side mirrors, turn signal lamps, marker lamps, handholds for cab entry
and egress, flexible fender extensions, mud flaps, splash and spray suppressant
devices, and load-induced tire bulge.
      (2)   The widths prescribed in division (b)(5) of this section shall not
include automatic covering devices, tarp and tarp hardware, and tiedown
assemblies, provided these safety devices do not extend more than three inches
from either side of the vehicle.
      (3)   The lengths prescribed in divisions (c)(2) to (c)(7) shall not
include safety devices, bumpers attached to the front or rear of the bus or
combination, non-property carrying devices or components that do not extend
more than 24 inches beyond the rear of the vehicle and are needed for loading
or unloading, B-train assembly used between the first and second semitrailer of
a commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination, energy conservation
devices as provided in any regulations adopted by the Secretary of the United
States Department of Transportation, or any noncargo-carrying refrigerator
equipment attached to the front of trailers and semitrailers. In special cases,
vehicles that dimensions exceed those prescribed by this section may operate in
accordance with rules adopted by the Director.
   (g)   (1)   This section does not apply to fire engines, fire trucks or
other vehicles or apparatus belonging to the municipality or to the volunteer
fire department thereof or used by that department in the discharge of its
functions. This section does not apply to vehicles and pole trailers used in
the transportation of wooden and metal poles, nor to the transportation of
pipes or well-drilling equipment, nor to farm machinery and equipment.
      (2)   The owner or operator of any vehicle, machinery or equipment not
specifically enumerated in this section but the dimensions of which exceed the
dimensions provided by this section, when operating the same on the highways
and streets of the municipality, shall comply with the rules of the Director
governing such movement. Any person adversely affected shall have the same
right of appeal as provided in R.C. Chapter 119.
      (3)   This section does not require the municipality or any railroad or
other private corporation to provide sufficient vertical clearance to permit
the operation of the vehicle, or to make any changes in or about existing
structures now crossing streets, roads and other public thoroughfares.
   (h)   As used in this section, “recreational vehicle” has the same meaning
as in R.C. § 4501.01.
(R.C. § 5577.05)
   (i)   No person shall violate any rule or regulation promulgated by the
Director of Transportation in accordance with R.C. § 5577.05.
(R.C. § 5577.06)
   (j)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second or subsequent offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 5577.99(C))
§ 440.03 WHEEL PROTECTORS.
   (a)   No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated,
any commercial car, trailer or semitrailer, used for the transportation of
goods or property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds three tons,
upon the public highways, streets, bridges and culverts within the
municipality, unless the vehicle is equipped with suitable metal protectors or
substantial flexible flaps on the rearmost wheels of the vehicle or combination
of vehicles to prevent, as far as practicable, the wheels from throwing dirt,
water or other materials on the windshields of following vehicles. The
protectors or flaps shall have a ground clearance of not more than one-third of
the distance from the center of the rearmost axle to the center of the flaps
under any conditions of loading of the vehicle, and they shall be at least as
wide as the tires they are protecting. If the vehicle is so designed and
constructed that the requirements are accomplished by means of fenders, body
construction or other means of enclosure, then no such protectors or flaps are
required. Rear wheels not covered at the top by fenders, bodies or other parts
of the vehicle shall be covered at the top by protective means extending at
least to the centerline of the rearmost axle.
(R.C. § 5577.11)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $25.
(R.C. § 5577.99(E))
§ 440.04 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES.
   (a)   Any person operating any vehicle transporting explosives upon a
highway shall at all times comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   The vehicle shall be marked or placarded on each side and on the
rear with the word “EXPLOSIVES” in letters not less than eight inches high, or
there shall be displayed on the rear of the vehicle a red flag not less than 24
inches square marked with the word “DANGER” in white letters six inches high,
or shall be marked or placarded in accordance with § 177.823 of the United
States Department of Transportation regulations.
      (2)   The vehicle shall be equipped with not less than two fire
extinguishers, filled and ready for immediate use, and placed at convenient
points on the vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.29)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 440.05 TOWING REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTION TO SIZE AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   (1)   When one vehicle is towing another vehicle, the drawbar or other
connection shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed
thereby, and the drawbar or other connection shall not exceed 15 feet from one
vehicle to the other, except the connection between any two vehicles
transporting poles, pipe, machinery or other objects of structural nature which
cannot readily be dismembered.
      (2)   When one vehicle is towing another and the connection consists only
of a chain, rope or cable, there shall be displayed upon the connection a white
flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square.   
      (3)   In addition to the drawbar or other connection, each trailer and
each semitrailer which is not connected to a commercial tractor by means of a
fifth wheel shall be coupled with stay chains or cables to the vehicle by which
it is being drawn. These chains or cables shall be of sufficient size and
strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle in
case the drawbar or other connection should break or become disengaged. In case
of a loaded pole trailer, the connecting pole to the drawing vehicle shall be
coupled to the drawing vehicle with stay chains or cables of sufficient size
and strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle.
      (4)   Every trailer or semitrailer, except pole and cable trailers and
pole and cable dollies operated by a public utility as defined in R.C. §
5727.01, shall be equipped with a coupling device which shall be so designed
and constructed that the trailer will follow substantially in the path of the
vehicle drawing it, without whipping or swerving from side to side. Vehicles
used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials
between a local place of storage and supply and the farm, when drawn or towed
on a street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less, and vehicles
designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage
and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or
highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per
hour or less, shall have a drawbar or other connection, including the hitch
mounted on the towing vehicle, which shall be of sufficient strength to pull
all the weight towed thereby. Only one such vehicle used to transport
agricultural produce or agricultural production materials as provided in this
section may be towed or drawn at one time except as follows:
      A.   An agricultural tractor may tow or draw more than one such vehicle;
      B.   A pickup truck or straight truck designed by the manufacturer to
carry a load of not less than one-half ton and not more than two tons may tow
or draw not more than two such vehicles that are being used to transport
agricultural produce from the farm to a local place of storage. No vehicle
being so towed by such a pickup truck or straight truck shall be considered to
be a motor vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.32)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
   (c)   Exception to size and weight restrictions.
      (1)   The size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C. Chapter
5577 do not apply to any of the following:
         A.   A person who is engaged in the initial towing or removal of a
wrecked or disabled motor vehicle from the site of an emergency on a public
highway where the vehicle became wrecked or disabled to the nearest site where
the vehicle can be brought into conformance with the requirements of this
chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577, to the nearest storage facility, or to the
nearest qualified repair facility;
         B.   A person who is en route to the site of an emergency on a public
highway to remove a wrecked or disabled motor vehicle;
         C.   A person who is returning from delivering a wrecked or disabled
motor vehicle to a site, storage facility, or repair facility as specified in
division (c)(1)A. of this section.
      (2)   Any subsequent towing of a wrecked or disabled vehicle shall comply
with the size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577.
      (3)   No court shall impose any penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99 or
the civil liability established in R.C. § 5577.12 upon a person who is
operating a vehicle in the manner described in division (c)(1) of this section.
(R.C. § 5577.15)
§ 440.06 LOADS DROPPING OR LEAKING; TRACKING MUD; REMOVAL REQUIRED.
   (a)   (1)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the
vehicle is so constructed, loaded or covered as to prevent any of its load from
dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand or
other substances may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water
or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining
the roadway.   
      (2)   Except for a farm vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or
agricultural production materials or a rubbish vehicle in the process of
acquiring its load, no vehicle loaded with garbage, swill, cans, bottles, waste
paper, ashes, refuse, trash, rubbish, waste, wire, paper, cartons, boxes,
glass, solid waste or any other material of an unsanitary nature that is
susceptible to blowing or bouncing from a moving vehicle shall be driven or
moved on any highway unless the load is covered with a sufficient cover to
prevent the load or any part of the load from spilling onto the highway.
(R.C. § 4513.31)
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
   (c)   No person shall operate any vehicle so as to track mud on any public
way or place.
   (d)   It shall be the duty of the driver of a vehicle who unlawfully drops
or deposits mud or permits the load or any portion thereof to be dropped or
deposited upon any public way or place to immediately remove the same or cause
it to be removed.
§ 440.07 VEHICLES WITH SPIKES, LUGS AND CHAINS.
   (a)   No person shall drive over the improved highways of this municipality
a traction engine or tractor with tires or wheels equipped with ice picks,
spuds, spikes, chains or other projections of any kind extending beyond the
cleats, and no person shall tow or in any way pull another vehicle over the
improved highways of this municipality which towed or pulled vehicle has tires
or wheels equipped with ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other projections
of any kind. “Traction engine” or “tractor”, as used in this section, applies
to all self-propelling engines equipped with metal-tired wheels operated or
propelled by any form of engine, motor or mechanical power.
   (b)   This municipality shall not adopt, enforce or maintain any ordinance,
rule or regulation contrary to or inconsistent with division (a), nor shall
this municipality require any license tax upon or registration fee for any
traction engine, tractor or trailer, or any permit or license to operate.
Operators of traction engines or tractors shall have the same rights upon the
public streets and highways as the drivers of any other vehicles, unless some
other safe and convenient way is provided, and no public road open to traffic
shall be closed to traction engines or tractors.
(R.C. § 5589.08)
   (c)   For the purposes of this section, “studded tire” means any tire
designed for use on a vehicle and equipped with metal studs or studs of wear-
resisting material that project beyond the tread of the traction surface of the
tire.
   (d)   (1)   Except as provided in division (d)(2) of this section, no person
shall operate any motor vehicle other than a public safety vehicle or school
bus that is equipped with studded tires on any street or highway in this
municipality, except during the period extending from the first day of November
of each year through the fifteenth day of April of the succeeding year.
      (2)   A person may operate a motor vehicle that is equipped with
retractable studded tires with the studs retracted at any time of the year, but
shall operate the motor vehicle with the studs extended only as provided in
division (d)(1) of this section.
   (e)   Division (d) of this section does not apply to the use of tire chains
when there is snow or ice on the streets or highways where the chains are being
used, or the immediate vicinity thereof.
(R.C. § 5589.081)
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 5589.99(B))
§ 440.08 OCCUPYING TRAVEL TRAILER, FIFTH WHEEL VEHICLE, OR MANUFACTURED OR
MOBILE HOME WHILE IN MOTION.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Fifth wheel trailer," "mobile home," and "travel trailer." Have
the same meanings as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      (2)   "Manufactured home." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3781.06(C)
(4).
   (b)   Except as provided in division (c) of this section, no person shall
occupy any travel trailer, fifth wheel trailer, or manufactured or mobile home
while it is being used as a conveyance upon a street or highway.
   (c)   (1)   Division (b) of this section does not apply to a fifth wheel
trailer when both of the following apply:
         A.   Any child riding in the fifth wheel trailer is properly secured
in the manner provided in R.C. § 4511.81.
         B.   The operator of the vehicle towing the fifth wheel trailer has
some means of viable communication with the passengers riding in the trailer.
      (2)   As used in this division, “viable communication” includes a
cellular or satellite telephone, a radio, or any other similar electronic
wireless communications device.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (e)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense as a
strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
(R.C. § 4511.701)
§ 440.09 ROUTE AND LOAD INFORMATION.
   Drivers of vehicles described in this chapter are required, upon request by
a police officer, to give full and true information as to the route they are
following and the name of the consignor and consignee and place of delivery or
removal and the location of any consignment being hauled or goods being
removed, and upon a designation by such police officer of a route to be
followed, shall immediately adopt and pursue the route.
§ 440.10 SHIFTING LOAD; LOOSE LOADS.
   (a)   In addition to any other lawful requirements of load distribution, no
person shall operate any vehicle upon a street or highway unless the vehicle is
so laden as to prevent its contents from shifting or otherwise unbalancing the
vehicle to such an extent as to interfere with the safe operation of the same.
   (b)   No motor vehicle or trailer shall be driven unless the tailboard or
tailgate, tarpaulins, chains (except ground or contact chains), ropes, stakes,
poles and the like, or any part of the load, are securely fastened to prevent
dangling, flapping, swinging or falling from the side, end or top of the load
or body. All projecting cargo shall be properly guarded by a red flag or cloth
or a red light or lantern as required by R.C. § 4513.09, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
§ 440.11 CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINES.
   (a)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine shall accept passengers only
on the basis of prearranged contracts, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, and shall
not cruise in search of patronage unless the limousine is in compliance with
any statute or ordinance governing the operation of taxicabs or other similar
vehicles for hire.
   (b)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine may provide transportation to
passengers who arrange for the transportation through an intermediary,
including a digital dispatching service. Notwithstanding any law to the
contrary, when providing transportation arranged through an intermediary, the
operator of a chauffeured limousine may establish the fare and method of fare
calculation, so long as the method of fare calculation is provided to the
passenger upon request.
   (c)   No person shall advertise or hold himself or herself out as doing
business as a limousine service or livery service or other similar designation
unless each vehicle used by the person to provide the service is registered in
accordance with R.C. § 4503.24 and is in compliance with R.C. § 4509.80.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4511.85)
§ 440.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 442: DRIVERS OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
Section
442.01 Definitions
442.02 Use of actual gross weight in lieu of rating
442.03 Licensing requirements
442.04 Physical qualification to operate commercial motor vehicles
442.05 Criminal offenses
442.06 Application of 49 C.F.R. 383
442.07 Information required of prospective drivers by employers; unauthorized
driving
442.08 Authority of peace officers re drunk driving
442.09 Permitting or driving while fatigued or ill prohibited
442.99 Penalty
§ 442.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   “Alcohol concentration.” The concentration of alcohol in a person’s
blood, breath or urine. When expressed as a percentage, it means grams of
alcohol per the following:
      (1)   One hundred milliliters of whole blood, blood serum or blood
plasma;
      (2)   Two hundred ten liters of breath;
      (3)   One hundred milliliters of urine.
   (b)   “Commercial driver’s license.”
      (1)   A license issued in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4506 that
authorizes an individual to drive a commercial motor vehicle. Except as
otherwise specifically provided, “commercial driver’s license” includes an
“enhanced commercial driver’s license.”
      (2)   “Enhanced commercial driver’s license” means a commercial driver’s
license issued in accordance with R.C. §§ 4507.021 and 4506.072 that denotes
citizenship and identity and is approved by the United States Secretary of
Homeland Security or other designated federal agency for purposes of entering
the United States.
   (c)   “Commercial driver’s license information system.” The information
system established pursuant to the requirements of the “Commercial Motor
Vehicle Safety Act of 1986”, 100 Stat. 3207-171, 49 U.S.C. App. 2701.
   (d)   “Commercial motor vehicle.” Except when used in R.C. § 4506.25, any
motor vehicle designed or used to transport persons or property that meets any
of the following qualifications:
      (1)   Any combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight or combined
gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more, provided that the gross
vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating of the vehicle or vehicles being
towed is in excess of 10,000 pounds;
      (2)   Any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle
weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more;
      (3)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is not a class A
or class B vehicle, but is designed to transport 16 or more passengers
including the driver;
      (4)   Any school bus with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight
rating of less than 26,001 pounds that is designed to transport fewer than 16
passengers including the driver;
      (5)   Is transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is
required under 49 C.F.R. Part 172, Subpart F, as amended; or
      (6)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is designed to
be operated and to travel on a public street or highway and is considered by
the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration to be a commercial motor
vehicle, including but not limited to a motorized crane, a vehicle whose
function is to pump cement, a rig for drilling wells and a portable crane.
   (e)   “Controlled substance.” Includes all of the following:
      (1)   Any substance classified as a controlled substance under the
“Controlled Substances Act”, 80 Stat. 1242 (1970), 21 U.S.C. 802(6), as
amended;
      (2)   Any substance included in Schedules I through V of 21 C.F.R. Part
1308, as amended;
      (3)   Any drug of abuse.
   (f)   “Conviction.” An unvacated adjudication of guilt or a determination
that a person has violated or failed to comply with the law in a court of
original jurisdiction or an authorized administrative tribunal, an unvacated
forfeiture of bail or collateral deposited to secure the person’s appearance in
court, a plea of guilty or nolo contendere accepted by the court, the payment
of a fine or court cost, or violation of a condition of release without bail,
regardless of whether or not the penalty is rebated, suspended or probated.
   (g)   “Disqualification.” Any of the following:
      (1)   The suspension, revocation or cancellation of a person’s privileges
to operate a commercial motor vehicle;
      (2)   Any withdrawal of a person’s privileges to operate a commercial
motor vehicle as the result of a violation of state or local law relating to
motor vehicle traffic control other than parking, vehicle weight or vehicle
defect violations;
      (3)   A determination by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
that a person is not qualified to operate a commercial motor vehicle under 49
C.F.R. 391.
   (h)   “Domiciled.” Having a true, fixed, principal, and permanent residence
to which an individual intends to return.
   (i)   “Downgrade.” Any of the following, as applicable:
      (1)   A change in the commercial driver’s license, or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit, holder’s self-certified status as
described in R.C. § 4506.10(A)(1);
      (2)   A change to a lesser class of vehicle;
      (3)   Removal of commercial driver’s license privileges from the
individual’s driver’s license.
   (j)   “Drive.” To drive, operate or be in physical control of a motor
vehicle.
   (k)   “Driver.” Any person who drives, operates or is in physical control of
a commercial motor vehicle or is required to have a commercial driver’s
license.
   (l)   “Driver’s license.” A license issued by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles
that authorizes an individual to drive.
   (m)   “Drug of abuse.” Any controlled substance, dangerous drug as defined
in R.C. § 4729.01, harmful intoxicant as defined in R.C. § 2925.01, or over-
the-counter medication that, when taken in quantities exceeding the recommended
dosage, can result in impairment of judgment or reflexes.
   (n)   “Electronic device.” Includes a cellular telephone, a personal digital
assistant, a pager, a computer, and any other device used to input, write,
send, receive, or read text.
   (o)   “Eligible unit of local government.” A village, township or county
that has a population of not more than 3,000 persons according to the most
recent federal census.
   (p)   “Employer.” Any person, including the federal government, any state
and a political subdivision of any state, that owns or leases a commercial
motor vehicle or assigns a person to drive such a motor vehicle.
   (q)   “Endorsement.” An authorization on a person’s commercial driver’s
license that is required to permit the person to operate a specified type of
commercial motor vehicle.
   (r)   “Farm truck.” A truck controlled and operated by a farmer for use in
the transportation to or from a farm, for a distance of not more than 150
miles, of products of the farm, including livestock and its products, poultry
and its products, floricultural and horticultural products, and in the
transportation to the farm, from a distance of not more than 150 miles, of
supplies for the farm, including tile, fence and every other thing or commodity
used in agricultural, floricultural, horticultural, livestock and poultry
production, and livestock, poultry and other animals and things used for
breeding, feeding or other purposes connected with the operation of the farm,
when the truck is operated in accordance with this definition and is not used
in the operations of a motor carrier, as defined in R.C. § 4923.01.
   (s)   “Fatality.” The death of a person as the result of a motor vehicle
accident occurring not more than 365 days prior to the date of death.
   (t)   “Felony.” Any offense under federal or state law that is punishable by
death or imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and includes any offense
specifically classified as a felony under the law of this state, regardless of
the penalty that may be imposed.
   (u)   “Foreign jurisdiction.” Any jurisdiction other than a state.
   (v)   “Gross vehicle weight rating.” The value specified by the manufacturer
as the maximum loaded weight of a single or a combination vehicle. The gross
vehicle weight rating of a combination vehicle is the gross vehicle weight
rating of the power unit plus the gross vehicle weight rating of each towed
unit.
   (w)   “Hazardous materials.” Any material that has been designated as
hazardous under 49 U.S.C. 5103 and is required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R.
Part 172, Subpart F or any quantity of a material listed as a select agent or
toxin in 42 C.F.R. Part 73, as amended.
   (x)   “Imminent hazard.” The existence of a condition that presents a
substantial likelihood that death, serious illness, severe personal injury or a
substantial endangerment to health, property or the environment may occur
before the reasonably foreseeable completion date of a formal proceeding begun
to lessen the risk of death, illness, injury or endangerment.
   (y)   “Medical variance.” One of the following received by a driver from the
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration that allows the driver to be issued
a medical certificate:
      (1)   An exemption letter permitting operation of a commercial motor
vehicle under 49 C.F.R. part 381, subpart C or 49 C.F.R. § 391.64;
      (2)   A skill performance evaluation certificate permitting operation of
a commercial motor vehicle pursuant to 49 C.F.R. § 391.49.
   (z)   “Mobile telephone.” A mobile communication device that falls under or
uses any commercial mobile radio service as defined in 47 C.F.R. part 20,
except that mobile telephone does not include two-way or citizens band radio
services.
   (aa)   “Motor vehicle.” A vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer or semitrailer
propelled or drawn by mechanical power used on highways, except that the term
does not include a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer or semitrailer operated
exclusively on a rail.
   (bb)   “Out-of-service order.” A declaration by an authorized enforcement
officer of a federal, state, local, Canadian or Mexican jurisdiction declaring
that the driver, commercial motor vehicle or commercial motor carrier operation
is out of service as defined in 49 C.F.R. 390.5.
   (cc)   “Peace officer.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
   (dd)   “Portable tank.” A liquid or gaseous packaging designed primarily to
be loaded on or temporarily attached to a vehicle and equipped with skids,
mountings or accessories to facilitate handling of the tank by mechanical
means.
   (ee)   “Public safety vehicle.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01(E)
(1) and (E)(3).
   (ff)   “Recreational vehicle.” Includes every vehicle that is defined as a
recreational vehicle in R.C. § 4501.01 and is used exclusively for purposes
other than engaging in business for profit.
   (gg)   “Residence.” Any person’s residence determined in accordance with
standards prescribed in the rules adopted by the Registrar.
   (hh)   “School bus.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (ii)   “Serious traffic violation.” Any of the following:
      (1)   A conviction arising from a single charge of operating a commercial
motor vehicle in violation of any provision of R.C. § 4506.03;
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in division (2)B. of this definition, a
violation while operating a commercial motor vehicle of a law of this state, or
any municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or any other
substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of
another state, prohibiting either of the following:
            1.   Texting while driving;
            2.   Using a handheld mobile telephone.
         B.   It is not a serious traffic violation if the person was texting
or using a handheld mobile telephone to contact law enforcement or other
emergency services.
      (3)   A conviction arising from the operation of any motor vehicle that
involves any of the following:
         A.   A single charge of any speed in excess of the posted speed limit
by 15 miles per hour or more;
         B.   Violations of R.C. § 4511.20 or 4511.201 or any substantially
equivalent ordinance or resolution, or of any substantially equivalent law of
another state or political subdivision of another state;
         C.   Violation of a law of this state or an ordinance or resolution
relating to traffic control, other than a parking violation, or of any
substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of
another state, that results in a fatal accident;
         D.   Violation of R.C. § 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state, that
involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid commercial
driver’s license with the proper class or endorsement for the specific vehicle
group being operated or for the passengers or type of cargo being transported;
         E.   Violation of R.C. § 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state, that
involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid commercial
driver’s license being in the person’s possession;
         F.   Violation of R.C. § 4511.33 or 4511.34, or any municipal
ordinance or county or township resolution substantially equivalent to either
of those sections, or any substantially equivalent law of another state or
political subdivision of another state;
         G.   Violation of any other law of this state, any law of another
state, or any ordinance or resolution of a political subdivision of this state
or another state that meets both of the following requirements:
            1.   It relates to traffic control, other than a parking violation;
            2.   It is determined to be a serious traffic violation by the
United States Secretary of Transportation and is designated by the director as
such by rule.
   (jj)   “State.” A state of the United States and includes the District of
Columbia.
   (kk)   “Tank vehicle.” Any commercial motor vehicle that is designed to
transport any liquid or gaseous materials within a tank or tanks that are
either permanently or temporarily attached to the vehicle or its chassis and
have an individual rated capacity of more than 119 gallons and an aggregate
rated capacity of 1,000 gallons or more. The term does not include a commercial
motor vehicle transporting an empty storage container tank that is not designed
for transportation, has a rated capacity of 1,000 gallons or more, and is
temporarily attached to a flatbed trailer.
   (ll)   “Tester.” A person or entity acting pursuant to a valid agreement
entered into pursuant to R.C. § 4506.09(B).
   (mm)   “Texting.” Manually entering alphanumeric text into, or reading text
from, an electronic device. “Texting” includes short message service (SMS), e-
mail, instant messaging, a command or request to access a world wide web page,
pressing more than a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone, or engaging in any other form of
electronic text retrieval or entry, for present or future communication.
“Texting” does not include the following:
      (1)   Using voice commands to initiate, receive, or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone;
      (2)   Inputting, selecting, or reading information on a global
positioning system or navigation system;
      (3)   Pressing a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone; or
      (4)   Using, for a purpose that is not otherwise prohibited by law, a
device capable of performing multiple functions, such as a fleet management
system, a dispatching device, a mobile telephone, a citizens band radio, or a
music player.
   (nn)   “Texting while driving.” Texting while operating a commercial motor
vehicle, with the motor running, including while temporarily stationary because
of traffic, a traffic control device, or other momentary delays. Texting while
driving does not include operating a commercial motor vehicle with or without
the motor running when the driver has moved the vehicle to the side of, or off,
a highway and is stopped in a location where the vehicle can safely remain
stationary.
   (oo)   “United States.” The 50 states and the District of Columbia.
   (pp)   “Upgrade.” A change in the class of vehicles, endorsements, or self-
certified status as described in R.C. § 4506.10(A)(1) that expands the ability
of a current commercial driver’s license holder to operate commercial motor
vehicles under this chapter or R.C. Chapter 4506.
   (qq)   “Use of a handheld mobile telephone.” Means:
      (1)   Using at least one hand to hold a mobile telephone to conduct a
voice communication;
      (2)   Dialing or answering a mobile telephone by pressing more than a
single button; or
      (3)   Reaching for a mobile telephone in a manner that requires a driver
to maneuver so that the driver is no longer in a seated driving position, or
restrained by a seat belt that is installed in accordance with 49 C.F.R. §
393.93 and adjusted in accordance with the vehicle manufacturer’s instructions.
   (rr)   “Vehicle.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 4506.01)
§ 442.02 USE OF ACTUAL GROSS WEIGHT IN LIEU OF RATING.
   For purposes of this chapter, the actual gross weight of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles may be used in lieu of a gross vehicle weight rating to
determine whether a vehicle or combination of vehicles qualifies as a
commercial motor vehicle if the gross vehicle weight rating specified by the
manufacturer for the vehicle of combination of vehicles is not determinable, or
if the manufacturer of the vehicle has not specified a gross vehicle weight
rating.
(R.C. § 4506.011)
§ 442.03 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having in the person’s
possession or otherwise under the person’s control more than one valid driver’s
license issued by this state, any other state or by a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this municipality
in violation of an out-of- service order while the person’s driving privilege
is suspended, revoked or cancelled, or while the person is subject to
disqualification;
      (3)   Drive a motor vehicle on a highway in the municipality under the
authority of a commercial driver’s license issued by another state or a foreign
jurisdiction, after having been a resident of this state for 30 days or longer;
      (4)   Knowingly give false information in any application or
certification required by R.C. § 4506.07.
      (5)   Knowingly provide false statements or engage in any fraudulent act
related to testing for a commercial driver’s license as required in R.C. §
4506.09.
   (b)   The municipality shall give every conviction occurring out of this
state and notice of which was received by the State Department of Public Safety
after December 31, 1989, full faith and credit and treat it for sanctioning
purposes under this chapter as though the conviction had occurred in this
state.
(R.C. § 4506.04(A), (B))
   (c)   No person shall drive any commercial motor vehicle for which an
endorsement is required under R.C. § 4506.12 unless the proper endorsement
appears on the person’s commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit. No person shall drive a commercial motor
vehicle in violation of a restriction established under R.C. § 4506.12 that
appears on the person’s commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit.
(R.C. § 4506.12(I))
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(4) of this section is guilty of
falsification, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition, the provisions
of R.C. § 4507.19 apply.
(R.C. § 4506.04(C))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (a)(5) of this section is guilty of
falsification, a misdemeanor of the third degree. In addition, the provisions
of R.C. § 4507.19 apply.
      (4)   A.   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   The offenses established under division (c) of this section are
strict liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of
these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply
that any other offense for which there is no specified degree of culpability,
whether in this section or another section of this code or the Ohio Revised
Code, is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4506.12(J))
§ 442.04 PHYSICAL QUALIFICATION TO OPERATE COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   No person who holds a valid commercial driver’s license shall drive a
commercial motor vehicle unless the person is physically qualified to do so.
      (1)   Any person applying for a commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit, the renewal or upgrade of a
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit, or the transfer of a commercial driver’s license from out
of state shall self-certify to the Registrar for purposes of 49 C.F.R. § 383.71
one of the following in regard to the applicant’s operation of a commercial
motor vehicle, as applicable:
         A.   1.   If the applicant operates or expects to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in interstate or foreign commerce and is subject to and meets the
requirements under 49 C.F.R. part 391, the applicant shall self-certify that
the applicant is non-excepted interstate and shall provide the Registrar with
the original or a copy of a medical examiner’s certificate and each
subsequently issued medical examiner’s certificate prepared by a qualified
medical examiner to maintain a medically certified status on the applicant’s
commercial driver licensing system driver record;
            2.   If the applicant operates or expects to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in interstate commerce, but engages in transportation or
operations excepted under 49 C.F.R. §§ 390.3(f), 391.2, 391.68, or 398.3 from
all or parts of the qualification requirements of 49 C.F.R. part 391, the
applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is excepted interstate and is
not required to obtain a medical examiner’s certificate;
         B.   1.   If the applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and is
subject to state driver qualification requirements, the applicant shall self-
certify that the applicant is non- excepted intrastate;
            2.   If the applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and is
excepted from all or parts of the state driver qualification requirements, the
applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is excepted intrastate.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the expiration date on a person’s commercial
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit,
every commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit holder shall provide the Registrar with the certification
required by this section on or after January 30, 2012, but prior to January 30,
2014.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4506.10(A), (E))
§ 442.05 CRIMINAL OFFENSES.
   (a)   No person who holds a commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit or who operates a motor vehicle
for which a commercial driver’s license or permit is required shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having a measurable or
detectable amount of alcohol or of a controlled substance in the person’s
blood, breath or urine;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of 0.04% or more by whole blood or breath;
      (3)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of 0.048% or more by blood serum or blood plasma;
      (4)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of 0.056% or more by urine;
      (5)   Drive a motor vehicle while under the influence of a controlled
substance;
      (6)   Drive a motor vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a municipal
OVI ordinance as defined in R.C. § 4511.181;
      (7)   Use a vehicle in the commission of a felony;
      (8)   Refuse to submit to a test under R.C. § 4506.17 or R.C. § 4511.191,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (9)   Operate a commercial motor vehicle while the person’s commercial
driver’s license or permit or other commercial driving privileges are revoked,
suspended, cancelled, or disqualified;
      (10)   Cause a fatality through the negligent operation of a commercial
motor vehicle, including but not limited to the offenses of aggravated
vehicular homicide, vehicular homicide and vehicular manslaughter;
      (11)   Fail to stop after an accident in violation of R.C. §§ 4549.02 to
4549.03, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (12)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle in violation of any provision of
R.C. §§ 4511.61 to 4511.63 or any federal or local law or ordinance pertaining
to railroad-highway grade crossings;
      (13)   Use a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony involving the
manufacture, distribution, or dispensing of a controlled substance as defined
in R.C. § 3719.01 or the possession with intent to manufacture, distribute, or
dispense a controlled substance;
      (14)   Use a commercial motor vehicle in the commission of a violation of
R.C. § 2905.32 or any other substantially equivalent offense established under
federal law or the laws of another state.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
   (c)   The offenses established under this section are strict liability
offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of these offenses
as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
(R.C. § 4506.15)
Statutory reference:
   Alcohol or controlled substance testing, disqualification of drivers, see
R.C. § 4506.17
   Disqualification of drivers for violations, see R.C. § 4506.16
§ 442.06 APPLICATION OF 49 C.F.R. 383.
   (a)   The provisions of 49 C.F.R. Part 383, Subpart C (Notification
Requirements and Employer Responsibilities), as amended, shall apply to all
commercial drivers or persons who apply for employment as commercial drivers.
No person shall fail to make a report to the person’s employer as required by
this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4506.19)
§ 442.07 INFORMATION REQUIRED OF PROSPECTIVE DRIVERS BY EMPLOYERS; UNAUTHORIZED
DRIVING.
   (a)   Each employer shall require every applicant for employment as a driver
of a commercial vehicle to provide the applicant’s employment history for the
ten years preceding the date the employment application is submitted to the
prospective employer. The following information shall be submitted:
      (1)   A list of the names and addresses of the applicant’s previous
employers for which the applicant was the operator of a commercial motor
vehicle;
      (2)   The dates the applicant was employed by these employers;
      (3)   The reason for leaving each of these employers.
   (b)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize any driver employed by
the employer to drive a commercial motor vehicle during any period in which any
of the following apply:
      (1)   The driver’s commercial driver’s license is suspended, revoked or
cancelled by any state or a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   The driver has lost the privilege to drive, or currently is
disqualified from driving, a commercial motor vehicle in any state or foreign
jurisdiction;
      (3)   The driver, the commercial motor vehicle the driver is driving, or
the motor carrier operation is subject to an out-of-service order in any state
or a foreign jurisdiction;
      (4)   The driver has more than one driver’s license.
   (c)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4506.15.
   (d)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle if the driver does not hold a valid, current
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit bearing the proper class or endorsements for the vehicle. No
employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in violation of the restrictions on the driver’s commercial
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (a), (b) or (d) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 4506.20)
§ 442.08 AUTHORITY OF PEACE OFFICERS RE DRUNK DRIVING.
   (a)   Within the jurisdictional limits of the appointing authority, any
peace officer shall stop and detain any person found violating R.C. §  4506.15
, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, without obtaining a
warrant. When there is reasonable ground to believe that a violation of R.C. §
4506.15 , or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, has been
committed and a test or tests of the person’s whole blood, blood plasma or
blood serum, breath or urine is necessary, the peace officer shall take the
person to an appropriate place for testing. If a person refuses to submit to a
test after being warned as provided in R.C. §  4506.17 (C), or submits to a
test that discloses the presence of a controlled substance or an alcohol
concentration of 0.04% or more by whole blood or breath, an alcohol
concentration of 0.048% or more by blood serum or blood plasma, or an alcohol
concentration of 0.056% or more by urine, the peace officer shall require that
the person immediately surrender the person’s commercial driver’s license to
the peace officer.
   (b)   As used in this section, “jurisdictional limits” means the limits
within which a peace officer may arrest and detain a person without a warrant
under R.C. § 2935.03, except that the Superintendent and the troopers of the
State Highway Patrol may stop and detain, without warrant, any person who, in
the presence of the Superintendent or any trooper, is engaged in a violation of
any of the provisions of R.C. Chapter 4506.
(R.C. § 4506.23)
§ 442.09 PERMITTING OR DRIVING WHILE FATIGUED OR ILL PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle, as defined in R.C. §
4506.01, or a commercial car or commercial tractor, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, while the person’s ability or alertness is so impaired by fatigue,
illness or other causes that it is unsafe for the person to drive the vehicle.
No driver shall use any drug which would adversely affect the driver’s ability
or alertness.
   (b)   No owner, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, of a commercial motor vehicle,
commercial car or commercial tractor, or a person employing or otherwise
directing the driver of the vehicle, shall require or knowingly permit a driver
in any such condition described in division (a) of this section to drive the
vehicle upon any street or highway.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.79, or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764 or
4511.77, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.79)
§ 442.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 444: OFFENSES RELATING TO THEFT AND FRAUD
Section
444.01 Police may remove ignition key
§ 444.01 POLICE MAY REMOVE IGNITION KEY.
   A law enforcement officer may remove the ignition key left in the ignition
switch of an unlocked and unattended motor vehicle parked on a street or
highway. The officer removing the key shall place notification upon the vehicle
detailing his or her name and badge number, the place where the key may be
reclaimed, and the procedure for reclaiming the key. The key shall be returned
to the owner of the motor vehicle upon presentation of proof of ownership.
(R.C. § 4549.05) (Prior Code, § 444.02)
TITLE EIGHT - Parking
      
Chap. 452. Parking Generally.
      
Chap. 454. Parking Violations Bureau.
CHAPTER 452: PARKING GENERALLY
Section
452.01 Prohibition against parking on streets or highways
452.02 Police may remove illegally parked vehicle
452.03 Prohibited standing or parking places
452.04 Manner of parallel and angle parking; privileges for persons with
disabilities
452.05 Willfully leaving vehicles on private or public property
452.06 Parking prohibitions on private property; private tow-away zones
452.07 Unattended vehicles; duty to lock ignition, remove key, set brake and
the like
452.08 Opening doors on side available to traffic
452.09 Selling, washing or repairing vehicle upon roadway
452.10 Truck loading zones
452.11 Bus stops and taxicab stands
452.12 Parking in alleys and narrow streets; exceptions
452.13 Emergency snow parking bans
452.14 Overnight parking
452.15 Registered owner prima facie liable for unlawful parking
452.16 Waiver
452.99 Penalty
§ 452.01 PROHIBITION AGAINST PARKING ON STREETS OR HIGHWAYS.
   (a)   (1)   Upon any highway, no person shall stop, park or leave standing
any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled
part of the highway if it is practicable to stop, park or so leave the vehicle
off the paved or main traveled part of the highway. In every event a clear and
unobstructed portion of the highway opposite the standing vehicle shall be left
for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear view of the stopped vehicle
shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each direction upon the
highway.
      (2)   This section does not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is
disabled while on the paved or improved or main traveled portion of a highway
in such manner and to the extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in that position.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.66)
§ 452.02 POLICE MAY REMOVE ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE.
   (a)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in
violation of R.C. § 4511.66 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
the officer may move the vehicle, or require the driver or other person in
charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved or improved
or main traveled part of the highway.
   (b)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any
highway, bridge or causeway, or in any tunnel, where the vehicle constitutes an
obstruction to traffic, the officer may provide for the removal of the vehicle
to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
(R.C. § 4511.67)
§ 452.03 PROHIBITED STANDING OR PARKING PLACES.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or to comply with the provisions of this Traffic
Code, or while obeying the directions of a police officer or a traffic control
device, in any of the following places:
   (a)   On a sidewalk, except a bicycle;
   (b)   In front of a public or private driveway;
   (c)   Within an intersection;
   (d)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;
   (e)   On a crosswalk;
   (f)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
   (g)   Within 30 feet of, and upon the approach to, any flashing beacon, stop
sign, or traffic-control device;
   (h)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by a traffic-control device;
   (i)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
   (j)   Within 20 feet of a driveway entrance to any fire station and, on the
side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75 feet of
the entrance when it is properly posted with signs;
   (k)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such
standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
   (l)   Alongside any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street;
   (m)   Upon any bridge or elevated structure upon a highway, or within a
highway tunnel;
   (n)   At any place where signs prohibit stopping, standing or parking, or
where the curbing is painted yellow, or at any place in excess of the maximum
time limited by signs;
   (o)   Within one foot of another parked vehicle;
   (p)   On the roadway portion of a freeway, expressway, or thruway which is
covered by any accumulation of snow or ice;
   (q)   On the roadway portion of the following main thoroughfares in the
city: Lake Road, Electric Boulevard, Walker Road, Miller Road, Moore Road, Avon
Belden Road, Jaycox Road, Lear Road, Webber Road and Krebs Road;
   (r)   On the paved portion of the side of the street on which fire hydrants
have been installed;
   (s)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any tree lawn for which
the owner of the tree lawn has obtained a pollinator planting permit.
(Ord. 109-63, passed 10-28-1963; Ord. 177-2018, passed 12-10-2018; Ord. 9-2020,
passed 2-10-2020; Ord. 23-40, passed 3-27-2023)
§ 452.04 MANNER OF PARALLEL AND ANGLE PARKING; PRIVILEGES FOR PERSONS WITH
DISABILITIES.
   (a)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is an
adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the
vehicle parallel with and not more than 12 inches from the right-hand curb,
unless it is impossible to approach so close to the curb; in such case the stop
shall be made as close to the curb as possible and only for the time necessary
to discharge and receive passengers or to load or unload merchandise. Local
authorities by ordinance may permit angle parking on any roadway under their
jurisdiction, except that angle parking shall not be permitted on a state route
within the municipality unless an unoccupied roadway width of not less than 25
feet is available for free-moving traffic.
   (b)   Local authorities by ordinance may permit parking of vehicles with the
left-hand wheels adjacent to and within 12 inches of the left-hand curb of a
one-way roadway.
   (c)   (1)   A.   Except as provided in division (c)(1)B. of this section, no
vehicle shall be stopped or parked on a road or highway with the vehicle facing
in a direction other than the direction of travel on that side of the road or
highway.
   B.   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into an angled
parking space so that when the motorcycle is parked it is facing in a direction
other than the direction of travel on the side of the road or highway.
      (2)   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into a parking
space that is located on the side of, and parallel to, a road or highway. The
motorcycle may face any direction when so parked. Not more than two motorcycles
at a time shall be parked in a parking space as described in this division (c)
(2) of this section irrespective of whether or not the space is metered.
   (d)   Notwithstanding any statute or any rule, regulation, resolution or
ordinance, air compressors, tractors, trucks and other equipment, while being
used in the construction, reconstruction, installation, repair or removal of
facilities near, on, over, or under a street or highway, may stop, stand or
park where necessary in order to perform such work, provided a flagperson is on
duty or warning signs or lights are displayed as may be prescribed by the
Director of Transportation.
   (e)   Accessible parking locations and privileges for persons with
disabilities that limit or impair the ability to walk shall be provided and
designated by all political subdivisions and by the state and all agencies and
instrumentalities thereof at all offices and facilities where parking is
provided, whether owned, rented or leased, and at all publicly owned parking
garages. The locations shall be designated through the posting of an elevated
sign, whether permanently affixed or movable, imprinted with the international
symbol of access and shall be reasonably close to exits, entrances, elevators
and ramps. All elevated signs posted in accordance with this division and R.C.
§ 3781.111(C) shall be mounted on a fixed or movable post, and the distance
from the ground to the bottom edge of the sign shall measure not less than five
feet. If a new sign or a replacement sign designating an accessible parking
location is posted on or after October 14, 1999, there also shall be affixed
upon the surface of that sign or affixed next to the designating sign a notice
that states the fine applicable for the offense of parking a motor vehicle in
the designated accessible parking location if the motor vehicle is not legally
entitled to be parked in that location.
   (f)   (1)   A.   No person shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle at
accessible parking locations provided under division (e) of this section, or at
accessible clearly marked parking locations provided in or on privately owned
parking lots, parking garages or other parking areas and designated in
accordance with that division, unless one of the following applies:
            1.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of
a person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a valid removable windshield placard or accessible license plates;
or
            2.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of
a person with a disability and is displaying a parking card or accessible
license plates.
         B.   Any motor vehicle that is parked in an accessible marked parking
location in violation of division (f)(1)A.1. or (f)(1)A.2. of this section may
be towed or otherwise removed from the parking location by the law enforcement
agency of the municipality. A motor vehicle that is so towed or removed shall
not be released to its owner until the owner presents proof of ownership of the
motor vehicle and pays all towing and storage fees normally imposed by the
municipality for towing and storing motor vehicles. If the motor vehicle is a
leased vehicle, it shall not be released to the lessee until the lessee
presents proof that that person is the lessee of the motor vehicle and pays all
towing and storage fees normally imposed by the municipality for towing and
storing motor vehicles.
         C.   If a person is charged with a violation of division (f)(1)A.1. or
(f)(1)A.2. of this section, it is an affirmative defense to the charge that the
person suffered an injury not more than 72 hours prior to the time the person
was issued the ticket or citation and that, because of the injury, the person
meets at least one of the criteria contained in R.C. § 4503.44(A)(1).
      (2)   No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle in an area
that is commonly known as an access aisle, which area is marked by diagonal
stripes and is located immediately adjacent to an accessible parking location
provided under division (e) of this section or at an accessible clearly marked
parking location provided in or on a privately owned parking lot, parking
garage, or other parking area and designated in accordance with that division.
   (g)   When a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a
person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a removable windshield placard or accessible license plates, or when
a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a person with a
disability and is displaying a parking card or accessible license plates, the
motor vehicle is permitted to park for a period of two hours in excess of the
legal parking period permitted by local authorities, except where local
ordinances or police rules provide otherwise or where the vehicle is parked in
such a manner as to be clearly a traffic hazard.
   (h)   No owner of an office, facility or parking garage where accessible
parking locations are required to be designated in accordance with division (e)
of this section shall fail to properly mark the accessible parking locations in
accordance with that division or fail to maintain the markings of the
accessible locations, including the erection and maintenance of the fixed or
movable signs.
   (i)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a person or
organization to apply for a removable windshield placard or accessible license
plates if the parking card or accessible license plates issued to the person or
organization under prior law have not expired or been surrendered or revoked.
   (j)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Accessible license plates” and “removable windshield placard.” Any
license plates, standard removable windshield placard, permanent removable
windshield placard, or temporary removable windshield placard issued under R.C.
§ 4503.41 or 4503.44, and also mean any substantially similar license plates or
removable windshield placard issued by a state, district, country, or
sovereignty.
      (2)   “Person with a disability.” Any person who has lost the use of one
or both legs or one or both arms, who is blind, deaf or unable to move without
the aid of crutches or a wheelchair, or whose mobility is restricted by a
permanent cardiovascular, pulmonary or other disabling condition.
      (3)   “Person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to
walk.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4503.44.
(R.C. § 4511.69(A) - (I), (K))
   (k)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (a) or (c) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (f)(1)A.1. or (f)(1)A.2. of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in
division (k)(2)A. and (k)(2)B. of this section. Except as otherwise provided in
division (k)(2)A. of this section, an offender who violates division (f)(1)A.1.
or (f)(1)A.2. of this section shall be fined not less than $250 nor more than
$500. An offender who violates division (f)(1)A.1. or (f)(1)A.2. of this
section shall be fined not more than $100 if the offender, prior to sentencing,
proves either of the following to the satisfaction of the court:
            1.   At the time of the violation of division (f)(1)A.1. of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a removable windshield placard that then was
valid or accessible license plates that then were valid but the offender or the
person neglected to display the placard or license plates as described in
division (f)(1)A.1. of this section.
            2.   At the time of the violation of division (f)(1)A.2. of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a parking card that then was valid or accessible
license plates that then were valid but the offender or the person neglected to
display the card or license plates as described in division (f)(1)A.2. of this
section.
         B.   In no case shall an offender who violates division (f)(1)A.1. or
(f)(1)A.2. be sentenced to any term of imprisonment.
         C.   An arrest or conviction for a violation of division (f)(1)A.1. or
(f)(1)A.2. of this section does not constitute a criminal record and need not
be reported by the person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries
contained in any application for employment, license or other right or
privilege, or made in connection with the person’s appearance as a witness.
         D.   The Clerk of the Court shall pay every fine collected under
divisions (k)(2) and (k)(3) of this section to the municipality. Except as
provided in division (k)(2) of this section, the municipality shall use the
fine moneys it receives under divisions (k)(2) and (k)(3) of this section to
pay the expenses it incurs in complying with the signage and notice
requirements contained in division (e) of this section. The municipality may
use up to 50% of each fine it receives under divisions (k)(2) and (k)(3) of
this section to pay the costs of educational, advocacy, support and assistive
technology programs for persons with disabilities, and for public improvements
within the municipality that benefit or assist persons with disabilities, if
governmental agencies or nonprofit organizations offer the programs.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (f)(2) of this section shall be fined not
less than $250 nor more than $500. In no case shall an offender who violates
division (f)(2) of this section be sentenced to any term of imprisonment. An
arrest or conviction for a violation of division (f)(2) of this section does
not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries contained in any application
for employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection
with the person’s appearance as a witness.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (h) of this section shall be punished as
follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (k)(4) of this section,
the offender shall be issued a warning.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (h) of this section or of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division, the offender shall
not be issued a warning but shall be fined not more than $25 for each parking
location that is not properly marked or whose markings are not properly
maintained.
(Ord. 15-2015, passed 2-9-2015)
§ 452.05 WILLFULLY LEAVING VEHICLES ON PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (a)   The Police Chief, upon notification to the Police Chief of such action
and of the location of the place of storage, may order into storage any motor
vehicle, including an abandoned junk motor vehicle as defined in R.C. §
4513.63, that:
      (1)   Has come into the possession of the Police chief as a result of the
performance of the Police Chief’s duties; or
      (2)   Has been left on a public street or other property open to the
public for purposes of vehicular travel, or upon or within the right-of-way of
any road or highway, for 48 hours or longer without notification to the Police
Chief of the reasons for leaving the motor vehicle in such place. However, when
such a motor vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic it may be ordered
into storage immediately unless either of the following applies:
         A.   The vehicle was involved in an accident and is subject to R.C. §
4513.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
         B.   The vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle. If the vehicle is a
commercial motor vehicle, the Police Chief shall allow the owner or operator of
the vehicle the opportunity to arrange for the removal of the motor vehicle
within a period of time specified by the Police Chief. If the Police Chief
determines that the vehicle cannot be removed within the specified period of
time, the Police Chief shall order the removal of the vehicle.
      (3)   Subject to division (c) of this section, the Police Chief shall
designate the place of storage of any motor vehicle so ordered removed.
   (b)   If the Police Chief issues an order under division (a) of this section
and arranges for the removal of a motor vehicle by a towing service, the towing
service shall deliver the motor vehicle to the location designated by the
Police Chief not more than two hours after the time it is removed.
   (c)   (1)   The Police Chief shall cause a search to be made of the records
of an applicable entity listed in R.C. § 4513.601(F)(1) to ascertain the
identity of the owner and any lienholder of a motor vehicle ordered into
storage by the Police Chief within five business days of the removal of the
vehicle. Upon obtaining such identity, the Police Chief shall send or cause to
be sent to the owner and any lienholder at the owner’s and any lienholder’s
last known address by certified or express mail with return receipt requested,
by certified mail with electronic tracking, or by a commercial carrier service
utilizing any form of delivery requiring a signed receipt. The notice shall
inform the owner and any lienholder that the motor vehicle will be declared a
nuisance and disposed of if not claimed within ten days of the date of the
sending of the notice.
      (2)   A.   The owner or lienholder of the motor vehicle is responsible
for payment of any expenses or charges incurred in its removal and storage and
may reclaim the motor vehicle upon payment of those expenses or charges, and
presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a certificate of
title or memorandum certificate of title to the motor vehicle, a certificate of
registration for the motor vehicle, or a lease agreement. Upon presentation of
proof of ownership evidenced as provided above, the owner of the motor vehicle
also may retrieve any personal items from the vehicle without retrieving the
vehicle and without paying any fee. However, a towing service or storage
facility may charge an after-hours retrieval fee established by the Public
Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25 if the owner
retrieves the personal items after hours, unless the towing service or storage
facility fails to provide the notice required under R.C. § 4513.69(B)(3), if
applicable. However, the owner shall not do either of the following:
            1.   Retrieve any personal item that has been determined by the
Police Chief to be necessary to a criminal investigation;
            2.   Retrieve any personal item from a vehicle if it would endanger
the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees to sign a waiver of liability.
         B.   For purposes of division (c)(2) of this section, “personal items”
do not include any items that are attached to the vehicle.
      (3)   If the owner or lienholder of the motor vehicle reclaims it after a
search of the applicable records has been conducted and after notice has been
sent to the owner and any lienholder as described in this section, and the
search was conducted by the place of storage, and the notice was sent to the
motor vehicle owner by the place of storage, the owner or lienholder shall pay
to the place of storage a processing fee of $25, in addition to any expenses or
charges incurred in the removal and storage of the vehicle.
   (d)   If the owner or lienholder makes no claim to the motor vehicle within
ten days of the date of sending the notice, and if the vehicle is to be
disposed of at public auction as provided in R.C. § 4513.62 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the Police Chief, without charge
to any party, shall file with the clerk of courts of the county in which the
place of storage is located an affidavit showing compliance with the
requirements of this section. Upon presentation of the affidavit, the clerk,
without charge, shall issue a salvage certificate of title, free and clear of
all liens and encumbrances, to the Police Chief. If the vehicle is to be
disposed of to a motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility as provided in
R.C. § 4513.62 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the Police
Chief shall execute in triplicate an affidavit, as prescribed by the Registrar
of Motor Vehicles, describing the motor vehicle and the manner in which it was
disposed of, and that all requirements of this section have been complied with.
The Police Chief shall retain the original of the affidavit for the Police
Chief’s records, and shall furnish two copies to the motor vehicle salvage
dealer or other facility. Upon presentation of a copy of the affidavit by the
motor vehicle salvage dealer, the clerk of courts, within 30 days of the
presentation, shall issue a salvage certificate of title, free and clear of all
liens and encumbrances.
   (e)   Whenever a motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility receives an
affidavit for the disposal of a motor vehicle as provided in this section, the
dealer or facility shall not be required to obtain an Ohio certificate of title
to the motor vehicle in the dealer’s or facility’s own name if the vehicle is
dismantled or destroyed and both copies of the affidavit are delivered to the
clerk of courts.
   (f)   No towing service or storage facility shall fail to comply with this
section.
(R.C. § 4513.61)
   (g)   Abandonment of junk motor vehicle prohibited.
      (1)   A.   No person shall willfully leave an abandoned junk motor
vehicle, as defined in R.C. § 4513.63, on private property for more than 72
hours without the permission of the person having the right to the possession
of the property, or on a public street or other property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking, or upon or within the right-of-way of
any road or highway for 48 hours or longer without notification to the Police
Chief of the reason for leaving the motor vehicle in that place.
         B.   For purposes of this division (g)(1), the fact that a motor
vehicle has been so left without permission or notification is prima facie
evidence of abandonment.
         C.   Nothing contained in this section and R.C. §§ 4513.60, 4513.61
and 4513.63 shall invalidate or prevent the enactment of further provisions of
municipal ordinances regulating or prohibiting the abandonment of motor
vehicles on streets, highways, public property or private property within the
municipality.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (g) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
and shall also be assessed any costs incurred by the municipality in disposing
of the abandoned junk motor vehicle, less any money accruing to the
municipality from the disposal.
(R.C. § 4513.64)
§ 452.06 PARKING PROHIBITIONS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; PRIVATE TOW-AWAY ZONES.
   (a)   (1)   The chief of a law enforcement agency of the municipal
corporation, upon complaint of any person adversely affected, may order into
storage any motor vehicle, other than an abandoned junk motor vehicle as
defined in R.C. § 4513.63, that has been left on private residential or private
agricultural property for at least four hours without the permission of the
person having the right to the possession of the property. The chief, upon
complaint of a repair garage or place of storage, may order into storage any
motor vehicle, other than an abandoned junk motor vehicle, that has been left
at the garage or place of storage for a longer period than that agreed upon.
When ordering a motor vehicle into storage pursuant to this division, the chief
may arrange for the removal of the motor vehicle by a towing service and shall
designate a storage facility.
      (2)   A towing service towing a motor vehicle under division (a)(1) of
this section shall remove the motor vehicle in accordance with that division.
The towing service shall deliver the motor vehicle to the location designated
by the chief not more than two hours after the time it is removed from the
private property, unless the towing service is unable to deliver the motor
vehicle within two hours due to an uncontrollable force, natural disaster, or
other event that is not within the power of the towing service.
      (3)   Subject to division (b) of this section, the owner of a motor
vehicle that has been removed pursuant to this division may recover the vehicle
only in accordance with division (d) of this section.
      (4)   As used in this section, “private residential property” means
private property on which is located one or more structures that are used as a
home, residence, or sleeping place by one or more persons, if no more than
three separate households are maintained in the structure or structures. The
phrase does not include any private property on which is located one or more
structures that are used as a home, residence, or sleeping place by two or more
persons, if more than three separate households are maintained in the structure
or structures.
   (b)   (1)   If the owner or operator of a motor vehicle that has been
ordered into storage pursuant to division (a)(1) of this section arrives after
the motor vehicle has been prepared for removal, but prior to its actual
removal from the property, the towing service shall give the owner or operator
oral or written notification at the time of such arrival that the vehicle owner
or operator may pay a fee of not more than one-half of the fee for the removal
of the motor vehicle established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules
adopted under R.C. § 4921.25, in order to obtain release of the motor vehicle.
However, if the vehicle is within a municipal corporation and the municipal
corporation has established a vehicle removal fee, the towing service shall
give the owner or operator oral or written notification that the owner or
operator may pay not more than one-half of that fee to obtain release of the
motor vehicle. That fee may be paid by use of a major credit card unless the
towing service uses a mobile credit card processor and mobile service is not
available at the time of the transaction.
      (2)   Upon payment of the applicable fee, the towing service shall give
the vehicle owner or operator a receipt showing both the full amount normally
assessed and the actual amount received and shall release the motor vehicle to
the owner or operator. Upon its release, the owner or operator immediately
shall move it so that it is not on the private residential or private
agricultural property without the permission of the person having the right to
possession of the property, or is not at the garage or place of storage without
the permission of the owner, whichever is applicable.
   (c)   (1)   The chief of a law enforcement agency in the municipal
corporation shall maintain a record of motor vehicles that the chief orders
into storage pursuant to division (a)(1) of this section. The record shall
include an entry for each such motor vehicle that identifies the motor
vehicle’s license number, make, model, and color, the location from which it
was removed, the date and time of its removal, the telephone number of the
person from whom it may be recovered, and the address of the place to which it
has been taken and from which it may be recovered. The chief shall provide any
information in the record that pertains to a particular motor vehicle to any
person who, either in person or pursuant to a telephone call, identifies self
as the owner or operator of the motor vehicle and requests information
pertaining to its location.
      (2)   Any person who registers a complaint that is the basis of the
chief’s order for the removal and storage of a motor vehicle under division (a)
(1) of this section shall provide the identity of the law enforcement agency
with which the complaint was registered to any person who identifies self as
the owner or operator of the motor vehicle and requests information pertaining
to its location.
   (d)   (1)   The owner or lienholder of a motor vehicle that is ordered into
storage pursuant to division (a)(1) of this section may reclaim it upon both of
the following:
         A.   Payment of all applicable fees established by the Public
Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25 or, if the vehicle
was towed within a municipal corporation that has established fees for vehicle
removal and storage, payment of all applicable fees established by the
municipal corporation.
         B.   Presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a
certificate of title to the motor vehicle, a certificate of registration for
the motor vehicle, or a lease agreement.
      (2)   When the owner of a vehicle towed under this section retrieves the
vehicle, the towing service or storage facility in possession of the vehicle
shall give the owner written notice that if the owner disputes that the motor
vehicle was lawfully towed, the owner may be able to file a civil action under
R.C. § 4513.611.
      (3)   Upon presentation of proof of ownership as required under division
(d)(1)B. of this section, the owner of a motor vehicle that is ordered into
storage under division (a)(1) of this section may retrieve any personal items
from the motor vehicle without retrieving the vehicle and without paying any
fee. However, a towing service or storage facility may charge an after- hours
retrieval fee established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted
under R.C. § 4921.25 if the owner retrieves the personal items after hours,
unless the towing service or storage facility fails to provide the notice
required under R.C. § 4513.69(B)(3), if applicable. The owner of a motor
vehicle shall not do either of the following:
         A.   Retrieve any personal item that has been determined by the chief
to be necessary to a criminal investigation;
         B.   Retrieve any personal item from a vehicle if it would endanger
the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees to sign a waiver of liability.
      (4)   For purposes of division (d)(3) of this section, “personal items”
do not include any items that are attached to the motor vehicle.
      (5)   If a motor vehicle that is ordered into storage pursuant to
division (a)(1) of this section remains unclaimed by the owner for 30 days, the
procedures established by R.C. §§ 4513.61 and 4513.612 apply.
   (e)   (1)   No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any motor
vehicle from any private residential or private agricultural property other
than in accordance with division (a)(1) of this section or R.C. §§ 4513.61 to
4513.65.
      (2)   No towing service or storage facility shall fail to comply with the
requirements of this section.
   (f)   This section does not apply to any private residential or private
agricultural property that is established as a private tow-away zone in
accordance with division (h) of this section or R.C. § 4513.601.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (e) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.60)
   (h)   Private tow-away zones.
      (1)   The owner of a private property may establish a private tow-away
zone, but may do so only if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
         A.   The owner of the private property posts on the property a sign,
that is at least 18 inches by 24 inches in size, that is visible from all
entrances to the property, and that includes all of the following information:
            1.   A statement that the property is a tow-away zone;
            2.   A description of persons authorized to park on the property.
If the property is a residential property, the owner of the private property
may include on the sign a statement that only tenants and guests may park in
the private tow-away zone, subject to the terms of the property owner. If the
property is a commercial property, the owner of the private property may
include on the sign a statement that only customers may park in the private
tow-away zone. In all cases, if it is not apparent which persons may park in
the private tow-away zone, the owner of the private property shall include on
the sign the address of the property on which the private tow-away zone is
located or the name of the business that is located on the property designated
as a private tow-away zone.
            3.   If the private tow-away zone is not enforceable at all times,
the times during which the parking restrictions are enforced;
            4.   The telephone number and the address of the place from which a
towed vehicle may be recovered at any time during the day or night;
            5.   A statement that the failure to recover a towed vehicle may
result in the loss of title to the vehicle as provided in R.C. § 4505.101(B).
            6.   In order to comply with the requirements of division (h)(1)A.
of this section, the owner of a private property may modify an existing sign by
affixing to the existing sign stickers or an addendum in lieu of replacing the
sign.
         B.   A towing service ensures that a vehicle towed under this division
(h) is taken to a location from which it may be recovered that complies with
all of the following:
            1.   It is located within 25 linear miles of the location of the
private tow-away zone, unless it is not practicable to take the vehicle to a
place of storage within 25 linear miles.
            2.   It is well-lighted.
            3.   It is on or within a reasonable distance of a regularly
scheduled route of one or more modes of public transportation, if any public
transportation is available in the municipal corporation or township in which
the private tow-away zone is located.
      (2)   A.   If a vehicle is parked on private property that is established
as a private tow-away zone in accordance with division (h)(1) of this section,
without the consent of the owner of the private property or in violation of any
posted parking condition or regulation, the owner of the private property may
cause the removal of the vehicle by a towing service. The towing service shall
remove the vehicle in accordance with this division (h). The vehicle owner and
the operator of the vehicle are considered to have consented to the removal and
storage of the vehicle, to the payment of the applicable fees established by
the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25, and to
the right of a towing service to obtain title to the vehicle if it remains
unclaimed as provided in R.C. § 4505.101. The owner or lienholder of a vehicle
that has been removed under this division (h), subject to division (h)(3) of
this section, may recover the vehicle in accordance with division (h)(7) of
this section.
         B.   If a municipal corporation requires tow trucks and tow truck
operators to be licensed, no owner of a private property located within the
municipal corporation shall cause the removal and storage of any vehicle
pursuant to division (h)(2) of this section by an unlicensed tow truck or
unlicensed tow truck operator.
         C.   No towing service shall remove a vehicle from a private tow-away
zone except pursuant to a written contract for the removal of vehicles entered
into with the owner of the private property on which the private tow-away zone
is located.
      (3)   If the owner or operator of a vehicle that is being removed under
authority of division (h)(2) of this section arrives after the vehicle has been
prepared for removal, but prior to its actual removal from the property, the
towing service shall give the vehicle owner or operator oral or written
notification at the time of such arrival that the vehicle owner or operator may
pay a fee of not more than one-half of the fee for the removal of the vehicle
established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. §
4921.25 in order to obtain release of the vehicle. That fee may be paid by use
of a major credit card unless the towing service uses a mobile credit card
processor and mobile service is not available at the time of the transaction.
Upon payment of that fee, the towing service shall give the vehicle owner or
operator a receipt showing both the full amount normally assessed and the
actual amount received and shall release the vehicle to the owner or operator.
Upon its release, the owner or operator immediately shall move the vehicle so
that the vehicle is not parked on the private property established as a private
tow-away zone without the consent of the owner of the private property or in
violation of any posted parking condition or regulation.
      (4)   A.   Prior to towing a vehicle under division (h)(2) of this
section, a towing service shall make all reasonable efforts to take as many
photographs as necessary to evidence that the vehicle is clearly parked on
private property in violation of a private tow-away zone established under
division (h)(1) of this section. The towing service shall record the time and
date of the photographs taken under this division (h). The towing service shall
retain the photographs and the record of the time and date, in electronic or
printed form, for at least 30 days after the date on which the vehicle is
recovered by the owner or lienholder or at least two years after the date on
which the vehicle was towed, whichever is earlier.
         B   A towing service shall deliver a vehicle towed under division (h)
(2) of this section to the location from which it may be recovered not more
than two hours after the time it was removed from the private tow-away zone,
unless the towing service is unable to deliver the motor vehicle within two
hours due to an uncontrollable force, natural disaster, or other event that is
not within the power of the towing service.
      (5)   A.   If an owner of a private property that is established as a
private tow-away zone in accordance with division (H)(1) of this section causes
the removal of a vehicle from that property by a towing service under division
(H)(2) of this section, the towing service, within two hours of removing the
vehicle, shall provide notice to the law enforcement agency of the municipal
corporation concerning all of the following:
            1.   The vehicle’s license number, make, model, and color;
            2.   The location from which the vehicle was removed;
            3.   The date and time the vehicle was removed;
            4.   The telephone number of the person from whom the vehicle may
be recovered;
            5.   The address of the place from which the vehicle may be
recovered.
         B.   The chief of a law enforcement agency of the municipal
corporation shall maintain a record of any vehicle removed from private
property in the chief’s jurisdiction that is established as a private tow-away
zone of which the chief has received notice under this division (h). The record
shall include all information submitted by the towing service. The chief shall
provide any information in the record that pertains to a particular vehicle to
a person who, either in person or pursuant to a telephone call, identifies self
as the owner, operator, or lienholder of the vehicle and requests information
pertaining to the vehicle.
      (6)   A.   When a vehicle is removed from private property in accordance
with this section, within three business days of the removal, the towing
service or storage facility from which the vehicle may be recovered shall cause
a search to be made of either of the following to ascertain the identity of the
owner and any lienholder of the vehicle:
            1.   The records of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles;
            2.   The records of any vendor or vendors, approved by the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles, that are capable of providing real-time access to
owner and lienholder information.
         B.   The towing service or storage facility may search the National
Motor Vehicle Title Information System in order to determine the state in which
the vehicle is titled. The entity that provides the record of the owner and any
lienholder under this division shall ensure that such information is provided
in a timely manner.
         C.   Subject to division (h)(6)F. of this section, the towing service
or storage facility shall send notice to the vehicle owner and any known
lienholder as follows:
            1.   Within five business days after the applicable entity provides
the identity of the owner and any lienholder of the motor vehicle, if the
vehicle remains unclaimed, to the owner’s and lienholder’s last known address
by certified or express mail with return receipt requested, by certified mail
with electronic tracking, or by a commercial carrier service utilizing any form
of delivery requiring a signed receipt;
            2.   If the vehicle remains unclaimed 30 days after the first
notice is sent, in the manner required under division (h)(6)C.1. of this
section.
         D.   Sixty days after any notice sent pursuant to division (h)(6)C. of
this section is received, as evidenced by a receipt signed by any person, or
the towing service or storage facility has been notified that delivery was not
possible, the towing service or storage facility, if authorized under R.C. §
4505.101(B), may initiate the process for obtaining a certificate of title to
the motor vehicle as provided in that section.
         E.   A towing service or storage facility that does not receive a
signed receipt of notice, or a notification that delivery was not possible,
shall not obtain, and shall not attempt to obtain, a certificate of title to
the motor vehicle under R.C. § 4505.101(B).
         F.   With respect to a vehicle concerning which a towing service or
storage facility is not eligible to obtain title under R.C. § 4505.101, the
towing service or storage facility need only comply with the initial notice
required under division (h)(6)C.1. of this section.
      (7)   A.   The owner or lienholder of a vehicle that is removed under
division (h)(2) of this section may reclaim it upon both of the following:
            1.   Presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by
a certificate of title to the vehicle, a certificate of registration for the
motor vehicle, or a lease agreement;
            2.   Payment of the following fees:
               a.   All applicable fees established by the Public Utilities
Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25, except that the lienholder of
a vehicle may retrieve the vehicle without paying any storage fee for the
period of time that the vehicle was in the possession of the towing service or
storage facility prior to the date the lienholder received the notice sent
under division (h)(6)A.1. of this section;
               b.   If notice has been sent to the owner and lienholder as
described in division (h)(6) of this section, a processing fee of $25.
         B.   A towing service or storage facility in possession of a vehicle
that is removed under authority of division (h)(2) of this section shall show
the vehicle owner, operator, or lienholder who contests the removal of the
vehicle all photographs taken under division (h)(4) of this section. Upon
request, the towing service or storage facility shall provide a copy of all
photographs in the medium in which the photographs are stored, whether paper,
electronic, or otherwise.
         C.   When the owner of a vehicle towed under this section retrieves
the vehicle, the towing service or storage facility in possession of the
vehicle shall give the owner written notice that if the owner disputes that the
motor vehicle was lawfully towed, the owner may be able to file a civil action
under R.C. § 4513.611.
         D.   Upon presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced
by a certificate of title to the vehicle, a certificate of registration for the
motor vehicle, or a lease agreement, the owner of a vehicle that is removed
under authority of division (h)(2) of this section may retrieve any personal
items from the vehicle without retrieving the vehicle and without paying any
fee. The owner of the vehicle shall not retrieve any personal items from a
vehicle if it would endanger the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees
to sign a waiver of liability. For purposes of division (h)(7)D. of this
section, “personal items” do not include any items that are attached to the
vehicle.
      (8)   No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any vehicle from
private property that is established as a private tow-away zone under this
division (h) or store such a vehicle other than in accordance with this
division (h), or otherwise fail to comply with any applicable requirement of
this division (h).
      (9)   This section does not affect or limit the operation of divisions
(a) through (g) of this section, R.C. § 4513.60 or R.C. §§ 4513.61 to 4613.65
as they relate to property other than private property that is established as a
private tow-away zone under division (h)(1) of this section.
      (10)   Whoever violates division (h)(8) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
      (11)   As used in this section, “owner of a private property” or “owner
of the private property” includes, with respect to a private property, any of
the following:
         A.   Any person who holds title to the property;
         B.   Any person who is a lessee or sublessee with respect to a lease
or sublease agreement for the property;
         C.   A person who is authorized to manage the property;
         D.   A duly authorized agent of any person listed in divisions (h)
(11)A. to (h)(11)C. of this section.
(R.C. § 4513.601)
   (i)   If an owner of private property posts on the property in a conspicuous
manner a prohibition against parking on the property or conditions and
regulations under which parking is permitted, no person shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   Park a vehicle on the property without the owner’s consent;
      (2)   Park a vehicle on the property in violation of any condition or
regulation posted by the owner.
   (j)   Whoever violates division (i) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.681)
(Prior Code, § 452.055)
§ 452.07 UNATTENDED VEHICLES; DUTY TO LOCK IGNITION, REMOVE KEY, SET BRAKE AND
THE LIKE.
   (a)   (1)   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit
it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition,
removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting the parking brake, and,
when the motor vehicle is standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to
the curb or side of the highway.
      (2)   The requirements of this section relating to the stopping of the
engine, locking of the ignition, and removing the key from the ignition of a
motor vehicle do not apply to any of the following:
         A.   A motor vehicle that is parked on residential property;
         B.   A motor vehicle that is locked, regardless of where it is parked;
         C.   An emergency vehicle ;
         D.   A public safety vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.661) (Prior Code, § 452.06)
§ 452.08 OPENING DOORS ON SIDE AVAILABLE TO TRAFFIC.
   (a)   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.70) (Prior Code, § 452.07)
§ 452.09 SELLING, WASHING OR REPAIRING VEHICLE UPON ROADWAY.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the
principal purpose of:
   (a)   Displaying the vehicle for sale; or
   (b)   Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle except repairs necessitated
by an emergency.
(Prior Code, § 452.08)
§ 452.10 TRUCK LOADING ZONES.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of
time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and
loading of materials, in any place marked as a truck loading zone during hours
when the provisions applicable to those zones are in effect. In no case shall
the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.
(Prior Code, § 452.09)
§ 452.11 BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   (a)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a
bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or
stand has been officially designated and appropriately posted, except that the
driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of,
and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers when the
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter the zone, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes, if
the stopping is not prohibited therein by posted signs.
   (b)   No operator of a bus shall stop, stand or park the vehicle upon any
street or other public way at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading
passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop so designated and posted
as such, except in case of an emergency.
   (c)   No operator of a bus shall fail to enter a bus stop on a street or
other public way in such a manner that the bus when stopped to load or unload
passengers or baggage is in a position with the right front wheel of the
vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately
parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular
traffic.
   (d)   No operator of a taxicab shall stand or park the vehicle upon any
street or other public way at any place other than in a taxicab stand so
designated and posted as such. This provision shall not prevent the operator of
a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
parking provisions at any place for the purpose of, and while actually engaged
in, the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
(Prior Code, § 452.10)
§ 452.12 PARKING IN ALLEYS AND NARROW STREETS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other
than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available
less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular
traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or
unloading of passengers or when directed to by a police officer or traffic-
control signal.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided by law, no person shall stop, stand or
park a vehicle within an alley except while actually loading and unloading, and
then only for a period not to exceed 30 minutes.
(Prior Code, § 452.11)
§ 452.13 EMERGENCY SNOW PARKING BANS.
   (a)   Whenever, during any period of 24 hours or less, snow falls in the
city to a depth of two inches or more, an emergency is declared to exist in
that such a heavy snow storm constitutes a serious public hazard impairing
transportation, the movement of food and fuel supplies, medical care, fire,
health and police protection and other vital facilities of the city. Such
emergency shall continue until an announcement by the Safety Director that snow
plowing operations have been completed, which announcement shall be made in the
same manner as outlined in division (b) of this section.
   (b)   Whenever such an emergency exists, the Director shall request the
cooperation of the local press and radio and television stations to announce
the emergency and the time that the emergency parking regulations will become
effective, which time shall be not sooner than one hour after the first
announcement. The announcement by two local radio stations or by two local
television stations shall constitute notice to the general public of the
existence of the emergency. However, owners and operators of motor vehicles
shall have full responsibility to determine existing weather conditions and to
comply with the emergency parking regulations.
   (c)   During the period of the emergency, the Director may prohibit the
parking of any vehicle upon any city street. During the emergency, no person
shall park, cause to be parked, permit to be parked, permit to remain parked or
abandoned or leave unattended any vehicle of any kind or description upon such
specified street. However, a vehicle may be parked for a period of not longer
than three minutes for actual loading or unloading of property, provided that
no other ordinance restricting parking as to place or time is violated thereby.
   (d)   Signs shall be posted where parking is banned during a snow emergency.
   (e)   Any motor vehicle parked in violation of this section may be removed
in accordance with this Traffic Code, in addition to the penalty provided in §§
408.01 and
408.02.
(Prior Code, § 452.12) (Ord. 109-81, passed 11-23-1981)
§ 452.14 OVERNIGHT PARKING.
   No person shall park a vehicle on any street or highway between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day of the week.
(Prior Code, § 452.13) (Ord. 1233, passed 11-24-1958)
§ 452.15 REGISTERED OWNER PRIMA FACIE LIABLE FOR UNLAWFUL PARKING.
   In any hearing on a charge of illegally parking a motor vehicle, testimony
that a vehicle bearing a certain license plate was found unlawfully parked as
prohibited by the provisions of this traffic code, and further testimony that
the record of the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles shows that the license plate
was issued to the defendant, shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle
which was unlawfully parked, was so parked by the defendant. A certified
registration copy, showing that fact, from the Registrar shall be proof of
ownership.
(Prior Code, § 452.14)
§ 452.16 WAIVER.
   Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person served with a written
notice of a parking violation, either personally or by posting or attaching the
same to a motor vehicle, may be discharged of such offense upon payment of $10
at the office of the Parking Violations Clerk, either by personal delivery or
by mail, delivered or postmarked within 48 hours after the issuance of the
written notice of violation, or upon payment of $20 at the office of the
Parking Violations Clerk within 72 hours after the issuance of said written
notice of violation. After the passage of 72 hours, a parking violation charge
shall be disposed of through an appearance before the Municipal Court at a
regularly scheduled hearing and/or continuances thereof.
(Prior Code, § 452.15) (Ord. 142-95, passed 9-11-1995; Ord. 15-2015, passed 2-
9-2015)
§ 452.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 454: PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU
Section
454.01 Definitions
454.02 Decriminalization of parking violations; impoundment and immobilization
of vehicles
454.03 Parking ticket; service and liability
454.04 Establishment of Bureau; jurisdiction; costs; collection and
disbursement of fines and the like; contract for services
454.05 Answering charges
454.06 Failure to answer charges
454.07 Hearings; judgments; appeals
454.08 Nonliability of vehicle owner
454.09 Parking ticket adopted
454.10 Parking infraction fines
§ 454.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Accessible parking space” means a motor vehicle parking location that
is reserved for the exclusive standing or parking of a vehicle that is operated
by or on behalf of a person with a disability that limits or impairs the
ability to walk and displays a placard or license plates issued under R.C. §
4503.44.
   (b)   “Bureau” means the City of Avon Lake Parking Violations Bureau.
   (c)   “Court” or “Municipal Court” means the City of Avon Lake Municipal
Court.
   (d)   “Local authority” means every county, municipal corporation, township
or other local board or body having authority to adopt police regulations
pursuant to the Constitution and laws of this State.
   (e)   “Parking infraction” means a violation of Chapter 452 of this code of
ordinances.
   (f)   “Person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk”
has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4503.44.
   (g)   “Vehicle” means a device, including a motorized bicycle, in, upon or
by which any person or property may be transported or drawn upon a street or
highway, except motorized wheelchairs and devices, other than bicycles, moved
by human power. (See also §
402.01 of this code of ordinances and R.C. § 4511.01(A).)
(Ord. 122-95, passed 7-24-1995)
Statutory reference:
   Parking violations bureau definitions, see R.C. § 4521.01
§ 454.02 DECRIMINALIZATION OF PARKING VIOLATIONS; IMPOUNDMENT AND
IMMOBILIZATION OF VEHICLES.
   (a)   A parking infraction shall not be considered a criminal offense for
any purpose.
   (b)   A vehicle involved in three or more parking infractions, in which
judgments or default judgments have been filed with the Clerk of the Municipal
Court pursuant to §
454.07(i), is subject to impoundment or immobilization by law enforcement
officers of the city, without regard to whether the vehicle, at the time of
impoundment or immobilization, is illegally parked.
   (c)   The owner of any vehicle impounded is liable for impoundment fees and
storage charges as provided by §
454.06.
   (d)   A vehicle impounded or immobilized under division (b) or (e) of this
section shall be released to the owner upon the owner presenting a valid
certificate of title to the vehicle to the Violations Clerk of the Parking
Violations Bureau and paying either the fines, penalties, fees and costs due on
the parking infractions issued or outstanding, or the judgments or default
judgments which lead to the impoundment or immobilization, or posting a bond
equal to the amount of the fines, penalties, fees and costs. In no case shall
the owner of a vehicle impounded or immobilized be required to post a bond in
excess of $500 to obtain release of the vehicle.
   (e)   Notwithstanding divisions (b) and (d) of this section, a vehicle
parked, stopped or standing on a public street or highway in commission of a
parking infraction is subject to impoundment if determined to be in violation
of §
452.01.
(Ord. 122-95, passed 7-24-1995)
Statutory reference:
   Local authority to create noncriminal parking violations, see R.C. § 4521.02
§ 454.03 PARKING TICKET; SERVICE AND LIABILITY.
   (a)   The parking ticket adopted in §
454.09 shall be used by law enforcement officers in all cases in which a person
is charged with committing a parking infraction within the city. The parking
ticket shall be the summons and complaint.
   (b)   A law enforcement officer who issues a parking ticket for a parking
infraction shall complete the ticket by identifying the infraction charged,
recording the license plate number and the type and make or model of the
vehicle, and indicating the date, time and place of the infraction. The officer
shall sign the ticket and affirm the facts it contains and file a copy with the
Violations Clerk. If the operator of the vehicle is present, the officer shall
record on the ticket the name of the operator and shall then personally serve
the parking ticket upon the operator. If the operator of the vehicle is not
present, the officer shall insert the “owner” in the space provided on the
parking ticket for identification of the offender and constructively serve the
parking ticket upon the owner of the vehicle by affixing the ticket to the
vehicle in a conspicuous place. Constructive service of a parking ticket upon
an owner of a vehicle by affixation as provided in this section, or by the
procedure described in division (d) of this section, has the same force and
effect, and potentially subjects both the owner and the operator of the vehicle
whose act or omission resulted in the parking infraction, if different, to the
same fine and the same penalties, fees and costs for failure to timely answer
or to appear, if a hearing is requested, as if the parking ticket were
personally served on both the owner and operator of the vehicle at the time of
the violation.
   (c)   The original of a parking ticket issued pursuant to this section or
any true copy of it shall be considered a record kept in the ordinary course of
business of the city and of the law enforcement agency whose officer issued it,
and shall be prima facie evidence of the facts it contains.
   (d)   An operator of a vehicle who is not the owner of the vehicle, but who
operates it with the express or implied permission of the owner, is the agent
of the owner for purposes of the receipt of parking tickets served in
accordance with this section, and personal service of a parking ticket upon the
operator in accordance with this section constitutes constructive service upon
the owner. The operator of a rented or leased vehicle whose act or omission
resulted in an alleged parking infraction is not considered an agent of the
owner if the owner is engaged in the business of renting and leasing vehicles
pursuant to a written rental or lease agreement and if the owner follows the
procedures set forth in §
454.08.
   (e)   Except as provided in §
454.08, when a parking ticket is issued for a parking infraction and is served
pursuant to this section, the operator of the vehicle whose act or omission
resulted in the parking infraction for which the ticket was issued and the
owner of the vehicle involved in the parking infraction, if different, are
jointly liable for the parking infraction and any fine, penalty or fees and
costs arising out of the parking infraction. Any owner of a vehicle who pays
any fine, penalty, fee and cost imposed for a parking infraction may recover
the amount paid from the operator of the vehicle whose act or omission resulted
in the infraction.
   (f)   No person upon whom a parking ticket charging a parking infraction is
personally or constructively served shall be arrested as a result of the
commission of the parking infraction.
(Ord. 122-95, passed 7-24-1995)
§ 454.04 ESTABLISHMENT OF BUREAU; JURISDICTION; COSTS; COLLECTION AND
DISBURSEMENT OF FINES AND THE LIKE; CONTRACT FOR SERVICES.
   (a)   The City of Avon Lake Parking Violations Bureau, hereinafter called
the Parking Violations Bureau or the Bureau, is hereby established pursuant to
R.C. §  4521.04 . The Parking Violations Bureau shall be a division within the
office of the Finance Department. The Parking Violations Bureau has
jurisdiction over each parking infraction that occurs within the territory of
the city.
   (b)   The operating costs of the Parking Violations Bureau shall be paid by
the city. The Mayor shall appoint a Violations Clerk, hearing examiners and
necessary clerical employees. No person shall be employed as a hearing examiner
unless the person is an attorney admitted to the practice of law in this state
or was formerly employed as a law enforcement officer.
   (c)   The fine, penalties, fees and costs established for a parking
infraction, as established in §
452.15 of this code of ordinances, shall be collected, retained and disbursed
by the Violations Clerk if the parking infraction which occasioned the fine,
penalties, fees and costs occurred within the jurisdiction of the Bureau. The
Violations Clerk shall issue blank tickets for parking infractions to the
Police Chief for the city who shall prescribe conditions for issuance and
accountability. The fine, penalties, fees and costs collected by the Violations
Clerk for a parking infraction shall be disbursed by such Clerk to the city.
   (d)   The Mayor has authority, with Council approval, to contract with any
nongovernmental entity to provide services in the processing, collecting and
enforcing of parking tickets issued by law enforcement officers, and civil and
default civil judgments entered pursuant to this chapter. No contract shall
affect the responsibilities of hearing examiners or the ultimate responsibility
of the Violations Clerk to collect, retain and disburse fines, penalties, fees
and costs for parking infractions and money paid in satisfaction of judgments
and default judgments entered pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 122-95, passed 7-24-1995)
§ 454.05 ANSWERING CHARGES.
    (a)   A person who is personally or constructively served with a parking
ticket charging a parking infraction may answer the charge by appearing
personally before the Parking Violations Bureau, or by mail, within five days
from the date of the infraction. The answer shall be in one of the following
forms:
      (1)   An admission that the person committed the infraction, by payment
of any fine arising out of the parking infraction;
      (2)   An admission that the person committed the infraction, with an
explanation of the circumstances surrounding the infraction; or
       (3)   A denial that the person committed the infraction and a request
for a hearing. If the person desires the presence, at the hearing, of the law
enforcement officer who issued the parking ticket, the person must request the
officer’s presence in his or her answer.
   (b)   A person who admits that he or she committed a parking infraction
shall, and a person who admits that he or she committed a parking infraction
with explanation may, when he or she makes his or her answer, pay the fine
arising out of the infraction admitted to the Violations Clerk.
   (c)   A person who admits that he or she committed a parking infraction with
explanation shall submit evidence to the Bureau that explains the circumstances
surrounding the parking infraction. The evidence may be submitted in person or,
to avoid the necessity of personal appearance, may be sent as affidavits and
other documentary evidence, by mail. The Bureau, when it receives an answer
admitting that a person committed a parking infraction with explanation, shall
promptly determine whether the explanation mitigates the fact that the person
committed the parking infraction and shall notify the person, in writing, of
its determination. If the Bureau determines that the explanation mitigates the
fact that the person committed the parking infraction, the Bureau shall
eliminate or reduce the amount of the fine arising out of the parking
infraction. If the fine is eliminated or reduced and the person has previously
paid the fine, the amount paid in excess of the revised fine shall be returned
to the person. If the fine is eliminated or reduced and the person has not
previously paid the fine, the person shall pay only the amount of the revised
fine. If a person admits that he or she committed a parking infraction with
explanation and the person fails to pay the amount of the fine due within five
days after receiving notice of the Bureau’s determination, unless the amount
due has previously been paid, the Bureau’s determination and the amount of the
fine due will be considered a judgment and shall be treated as if it were a
judgment rendered subsequent to a hearing held pursuant to §
454.07.
   (d)   A person who denies that he or she committed a parking infraction
shall be granted a hearing concerning the infraction. The Bureau shall set a
date for the hearing and notify the person, in writing, of the date, time and
place of the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing examiner of
the Parking Violations Bureau in accordance with §
454.07.
   (e)   If a person who is personally or constructively served with a parking
ticket charging the commission of a parking infraction fails to timely answer
the charge, as provided in division (a) of this section, the Parking Violations
Bureau shall issue the proper notification of infraction pursuant to §
454.06 and proceed according to that section. Failure to timely answer a charge
may result in the imposition of an additional penalty as prescribed by
ordinance.
   (f)   The issuance of a parking ticket, the filing of or failure to file an
answer by a person personally or constructively served with the ticket, the
substance of an answer, the payment of any fine, penalty, fee and cost, and any
other relevant information, shall be entered in the records of the Bureau.
(Ord. 122-95, passed 7-24-1995)
§ 454.06 FAILURE TO ANSWER CHARGES.
   (a)   When a person is personally or constructively served with a parking
ticket charging the commission of a parking infraction and fails to answer the
charge within the time specified in §
454.05, the Parking Violations Bureau shall send a notification of infraction
as follows.
      (1)   If the person who fails to answer was the operator of the vehicle
involved in the parking infraction at the time of the commission of the parking
infraction and was personally served with the parking ticket, a notification of
infraction shall be sent to that person and, additionally, if such person is
not the owner of the vehicle, as determined from the records of the Bureau of
Motor Vehicles, a notification of infraction shall also be sent to the owner at
his or her most recent address appearing in such records.
      (2)   If the person who fails to answer was the owner of the vehicle and
was constructively served with the parking ticket, a notification of infraction
shall be sent to the owner at his or her most recent address appearing in the
records of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles.
   (b)   A notification of infraction shall be sent by first-class mail within
12 months after the expiration of the time specified in §
454.05 for the making of an answer and shall contain all of the following:
      (1)   An identification of the parking infraction with which the person
was charged and the time and date of the infraction, which identification may
be a copy of the parking ticket;
      (2)   The amount of the fine, penalties, fees and costs due;
      (3)   A warning that the person must answer the parking infraction
charged in the ticket within 30 days or a default civil judgment in the amount
of the fine, penalties, fees and costs due may be entered against the person;
      (4)   A description of the allowable answers that may be made and
notification that the person will be afforded a hearing before the Bureau if he
or she denies in his or her answer that he or she committed the parking
infraction;
      (5)   An identification of the manner in which, and the entity to which,
an answer may be made;
      (6)   A warning that if the person fails to appear at a requested
hearing, a default civil judgment in the amount of the fine, penalties, fees
and costs due may be entered against the person; and
      (7)   A warning that the registration of the vehicle involved in the
parking infraction, if the vehicle is registered in this state, may not be
renewed or transferred if a civil judgment is entered against the person until
the judgment is paid or until it is otherwise finally disposed of in a manner
specified in this chapter.
   (c)   A person who receives a notification of infraction pursuant to this
section may answer in any of the ways provided in §
454.05(a) for answers to a parking infraction charged in a parking ticket. An
answer under this section shall be made within 30 days after the date on which
the notification of infraction was mailed and shall be in one of the forms
specified in §
454.05(a) for answers to a parking infraction charged in a parking ticket,
except that if the answer includes payment of the fine arising out of the
parking infraction, any penalty, fee or cost arising out of such infraction
shall also be paid. The answer shall be governed by §
454.05(b), (c) and (d) for answers relative to parking infractions charged in a
parking ticket, except that any determination of the amount to be paid under an
answer admitting the commission of the parking infraction with explanation
shall also consider any penalty, fee or cost arising out of such infraction.
   (d)   If a person who is issued a notification of infraction fails to timely
answer, as provided in division (c) of this section, the failure to answer
shall be considered an admission that the person committed the parking
infraction, and a default civil judgment of the amount of the fine, penalties
and costs due may be entered against the person. Failure to timely answer the
parking infraction identified in the notification of the infraction may result
in the imposition of an additional penalty as prescribed by ordinance.
   (e)   The sending of a notification of infraction, the filing of or failure
to file an answer by the person to whom it is sent, the substance of an answer,
the payment of any fine, penalty, fee and cost, and any other relevant
information, shall be entered in the records of the Bureau.
(Ord. 122-95, passed 7-24-1995)
§ 454.07 HEARINGS; JUDGMENTS; APPEALS.
   (a)   If a person who is personally or constructively served with a parking
ticket charging the commission of a parking infraction, or who receives a
notification of infraction, denies, in his or her answer to the charge, that he
or she committed the infraction, the Parking Violations Bureau shall conduct a
hearing to determine if the person committed the infraction. Each hearing shall
be conducted by a hearing examiner of the Parking Violations Bureau in such a
manner as the hearing examiner considers appropriate. Rules regarding the
admissibility of evidence shall not be strictly applied in the hearing, but all
testimony shall be under oath.
   (b)   At the hearing, the city has the burden of proving, by a preponderance
of the evidence, that the person committed the parking infraction. If the
person, in his or her answer, denied that he or she committed the infraction
and requested the presence at the hearing of the law enforcement officer who
issued the parking ticket, the officer shall be required to attend the hearing,
unless the hearing examiner determines that the officer’s presence is not
required. If the officer’s presence at the hearing has been requested and the
officer is unable to attend the hearing on the day and at the time scheduled,
the hearing examiner may grant a reasonable continuance. The person for whom
the hearing is being conducted may present any relevant evidence and testimony
at the hearing. The person does not have to attend the hearing if he or she
submits documentary evidence to the hearing examiner prior to the day of the
hearing.
   (c)   The city shall submit the original parking ticket that was personally
or constructively served on the person or a true copy that identifies the owner
of the vehicle. The ticket and the information in proper form is prima facie
evidence that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person who committed
the parking infraction. The city may present additional evidence and testimony
at the hearing. The city does not have to be represented at the hearing by an
attorney.
   (d)   If a person for whom a hearing is to be conducted appears at the
scheduled hearing, the hearing examiner shall determine whether the city has
established, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the person committed the
parking infraction. If the hearing examiner determines that the person
committed the infraction, an order indicating the determination as a judgment
against the person and requiring the person to pay the appropriate fine and
additional penalties, fines and costs shall be entered in the records of the
Parking Violations Bureau.
   (e)   If a person for whom a hearing is to be conducted fails to appear at
the scheduled hearing and fails to submit evidence in accordance with division
(b) of this section, the hearing examiner shall, if he or she determines from
any evidence and testimony presented, by a preponderance of the evidence, that
the person committed the parking infraction, enter a default judgment against
the person and require the person to pay the appropriate fine and any
additional penalties, fees and costs. A default judgment entered under this
division (e) shall be entered in the records of the Parking Violations Bureau.
   (f)   If a person who is sent a notification of infraction does not timely
answer, the hearing examiner of the Parking Violations Bureau shall, if he or
she determines from any evidence and testimony presented to him or her, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the person committed the parking
infraction, enter a default judgment against the person and require the person
to pay the appropriate fine and any additional penalties, fees and costs. A
default judgment entered under this division shall be entered in the records of
the Parking Violations Bureau.
   (g)   If the hearing examiner does not determine, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that a person in any of the classes described in divisions (d), (e)
and (f) of this section committed the parking infraction, the hearing examiner
shall enter judgment against the city, shall dismiss the charge against the
person and enter the judgment and dismissal in the records of the Parking
Violations Bureau.
   (h)   A default judgment entered under this section may be vacated by the
hearing examiner who entered it if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The person against whom the default judgment was entered files a
motion with the Parking Violations Bureau within one year of the date of entry
of the judgment;
      (2)   The motion sets forth a sufficient defense to the parking
infraction out of which the judgment arose; and
      (3)   The motion sets forth excusable neglect as to the person’s failure
to attend the hearing or to answer the notification of infraction.
   (i)   Payment of any judgment or default judgment entered against a person
pursuant to this section shall be made to the Violations Clerk of the Parking
Violations Bureau in which the judgment was entered within ten days of the date
of entry. All money paid in satisfaction of a judgment or default judgment
shall be disbursed by the Violations Clerk to the city and the Clerk shall
enter the fact of payment and its disbursement in the records of the Bureau. If
payment is not made within this period, the judgment or default judgment shall
be filed with the Clerk of the Avon Lake Municipal Court and, when so filed,
shall have the same force and effect as a money judgment in a civil action
rendered in that Court. As required by R.C. § 4521.08(C), judgments and default
judgments filed with the Avon Lake Municipal Court pursuant to this division
(i) shall be maintained in a separate index and judgment roll from other
judgments rendered in that Court. Computer printouts, microfilm, microdot,
microfiche or other similar data recording techniques may be utilized to record
such judgments. When a judgment or default judgment is filed with the Court,
execution may be levied, and such other measures may be taken for its
collection as are authorized for the collection of an unpaid money judgment in
a civil action rendered in that Court. The Court may assess costs against the
judgment debtor for each parking infraction, to be paid upon satisfaction of
the judgment.
   (j)   Any person against whom a judgment or default judgment is entered
pursuant to this section, and the city, if a judgment is entered against the
city pursuant to this section, may appeal the judgment to the Avon Lake
Municipal Court by filing notices of appeal with the Parking Violations Bureau
and the Municipal Court within 15 days of the date of entry of the judgment and
by the payment of such reasonable costs as the Court required. Upon the filing
of an appeal, the Court shall schedule a hearing date and notify the parties of
the date, time and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be held by the Court
in accordance with the rules of the Court. Service of notice of appeal under
this division (j) by a person does not stay enforcement and collection of the
judgment or default judgment from which appeal is taken by the person, unless
the person who files the appeal posts bond with the Parking Violations Bureau
in the amount of the judgment, plus court costs, at or before service of the
notice of appeal. The judgment on appeal to the Municipal Court is final, and
no other appeal of the judgment of the Parking Violations Bureau and no appeal
of the judgment of the Municipal Court may be taken.
   (k)   A default judgment entered pursuant to this section may be filed with
the Municipal Court under division (i) of this section at any time within three
years after the date of issuance of the parking ticket charging the parking
infraction out of which the judgment arose. This division (k) applies to any
ticket issued for an offense that would be a parking infraction on or after the
effective date of this section if the ticket was issued within three years
prior to the effective date of this section.
(Ord. 122-95, passed 7-24-1995)
§ 454.08 NONLIABILITY OF VEHICLE OWNER.
   (a)   An owner of a vehicle is not jointly liable with an operator of a
vehicle, whose act or omission resulted in a parking infraction, for any fine,
penalty, fee or cost arising out of the parking infraction, if any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The owner answers the charge of the parking infraction under §
454.05 or
454.06, the answer denies that he or she committed the infraction and requests
a hearing concerning the infraction, the owner additionally asserts and
provides reasonable evidence at the time to prove that the vehicle, at the time
of the commission of the parking infraction, was being used by the operator
without the owner’s express or implied consent, and the Parking Violations
Bureau determines that the vehicle was being used without the owner’s express
or implied consent at the time. If the Bureau does not so determine, it shall
conduct the hearing concerning the infraction according to §
454.07.
      (2)   The owner answers the charge of the parking infraction under §
454.05 or
454.06, the answer denies that he or she committed the parking infraction, the
owner additionally submits evidence at that time that proves that, at the time
of the alleged commission of the infraction, the owner was either engaged in a
licensed taxicab business or otherwise engaged in the business of renting or
leasing vehicles under written rental or lease agreements, and the owner
additionally submits evidence that proves that, at the time of the alleged
commission of the parking infraction, the vehicle in question was in the care,
custody or control of a person other than the owner, either pursuant to an
employment relationship, if the owner was engaged in a licensed taxicab
business, or otherwise pursuant to a written rental or lease agreement. If the
owner does not so prove, the Parking Violations Bureau shall conduct a hearing
relative to the infraction according to §
454.07.
      (3)   The owner, at a hearing concerning the parking infraction conducted
in accordance with §
454.07, proves that the vehicle, at the time of the parking infraction, was
being used by the operator without the owner’s express or implied consent or
proves the facts described in division (a)(2) of this section.
   (b)   An owner of a vehicle who is either engaged in a licensed taxicab
business or otherwise engaged in the business of renting or leasing vehicles
under written rental or lease agreements, but who does not satisfy the
additional requirements of division (a)(2) of this section, is not liable for
any penalty arising out of a parking infraction involving the vehicle, if, at
the time of the commission of the parking infraction, the vehicle was in the
care, custody or control of a person other than the owner, either pursuant to
an employment relationship, if the owner was engaged in a licensed taxicab
business, or otherwise pursuant to a written rental or lease agreement, and if
the owner answers the charge of the parking infraction by denying that he or
she committed the parking infraction or by paying the fine arising out of the
parking infraction within 30 days after actual receipt of the parking ticket
charging the infraction or, if the owner did not receive the parking ticket,
within 30 days after receipt of the notification of infraction. Proof that the
vehicle was in the care, custody or control of a person other than the owner
pursuant to a written rental or lease agreement at the time of the alleged
parking infraction shall be established by sending a true copy of the rental or
lease agreement or an affidavit to that effect to the Parking Violations Bureau
within 30 days after the date of receipt by the owner of the parking ticket,
within 30 days after receipt of the notification of infraction. The submission
of a true copy of a written rental or lease agreement or affidavit shall be
prima facie evidence that a vehicle was in the care, custody or control of a
person other than the owner. In addition, any information required by division
(a)(2) of this section may be provided on magnetic tape or other computer-
readable media in a format acceptable to the City of Avon Lake.
(Ord. 122-95, passed 7-24-1995)
§ 454.09 PARKING TICKET ADOPTED.
   The parking ticket to be used by law enforcement officers in all cases in
which a person is charged with a parking infraction within the city shall be
set by ordinance from time to time by the legislative body so as to be in
conformity with the laws of the state.
(Ord. 122-95, passed 7-24-1995)
§ 454.10 PARKING INFRACTION FINES.
   Fines for parking infractions shall be as follows:
   (a)   Ten dollars, if paid at the Parking Violations Bureau within 48 hours
of the infraction.
   (b)   Twenty dollars, if paid at the Parking Violations Bureau within 72
hours of the infraction.
   (c)   Two-hundred fifty dollars for parking in designated disabled parking
locations in violation of the code of ordinances §
452.04(f).
(Ord. 122-95, passed 7-24-1995; Ord. 15-2015, passed 2-9-2015)
TITLE TEN - Bicycles, Motorcycles and Snowmobiles
      
Chap. 474.  Bicycles, Electric Bicycles, and Motorcycles Generally.
      
Chap. 476. Snowmobiles, Off-Highway Motorcycles and All-Purpose Vehicles.
      
Chap. 478. Motorized Bicycles.
CHAPTER 474: BICYCLES, ELECTRIC BICYCLES, AND MOTORCYCLES GENERALLY
Section
474.01 Code application to bicycles and electric bicycles
474.02 Riding upon seats; carrying packages; motorcycle handle bars; helmets
and glasses
474.03 Attaching bicycles, motorcycles to other vehicles
474.04 Riding on right side of roadway; riding abreast
474.05 Lights, signal devices, brakes on bicycles and electric bicycles
474.06 Riding on sidewalks
474.07 Safe operation; right-of-way
474.08 Parking of bicycles and electric bicycles
474.09 Impounding
474.10 Bicycle and electric bicycle license required
474.11 Bicycle and electric bicycle license application
474.12 Issuance of bicycle and electric bicycle license
474.13 Attachment of bicycle and electric bicycle license plate
474.14 Transfer of ownership bicycle and electric bicycle
 
474.99 Penalty
§ 474.01 CODE APPLICATION TO BICYCLES AND ELECTRIC BICYCLES.
   (a)   The provisions of this title that are applicable to bicycles and
electric bicycles apply whenever a bicycle or electric bicycle is operated upon
any roadways or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or
electric bicycles.
   (b)   Except as provided in division (d) of this section, a bicycle operator
or electric bicycle operator who violates any provisions of this title
described in division (a) of this section that is applicable to bicycles or
electric bicycles may be issued a ticket, citation, or summons by a law
enforcement officer for the violation in the same manner as the operator of a
motor vehicle would be cited for the same violation. A person who commits any
such violation while operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall not have any
points assessed against the person’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, or probationary license under R.C. §
4510.036.
   (c)   Except as provided in division (d) of this section, in the case of a
violation of any provision of this title described in division (a) of this
section by a bicycle operator, electric bicycle operator, or motor vehicle
operator when the trier of fact finds that the violation by the motor vehicle
operator endangered the lives of bicycle riders or electric bicycle riders at
the time of the violation, the court, notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio
Revised Code to the contrary, may require the bicycle operator, electric
bicycle operator, or motor vehicle operator to take and successfully complete a
bicycling skills course approved by the court in addition to or in lieu of any
penalty otherwise prescribed by this Traffic Code or the Ohio Revised Code for
that violation.
   (d)   Divisions (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to violations of
R.C. § 4511.19, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (e)   Every person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall obey the
instructions of official traffic-control devices and signals applicable to
vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
(Ord. 25-129, passed 6-23-2025)
Statutory reference:
   Bicycles and electric bicycles - issuance of ticket - points not assessed,
see R.C. § 4511.52
§ 474.02 RIDING UPON SEATS; CARRYING PACKAGES; MOTORCYCLE HANDLE BARS; HELMETS
AND GLASSES.
   (a)   For purposes of this section, “snowmobile” has the same meaning as
given that term in R.C. § 4519.01.
   (b)   (1)   No person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall ride
other than upon or astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto or
carry any other person upon the bicycle or electric bicycle other than upon a
firmly attached and regular seat thereon, and no person shall ride upon a
bicycle or electric bicycle other than upon such a firmly attached and regular
seat.
      (2)   No person operating a motorcycle shall ride other than upon or
astride the permanent and regular seat or saddle attached thereto, or carry any
other person upon the motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular
seat or saddle thereon, and no person shall ride upon a motorcycle other than
upon such a firmly attached and regular seat or saddle.
      (3)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a
saddle other than while sitting astride the saddle, facing forward, with one
leg on each side of the motorcycle.
      (4)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a seat
other than while sitting upon the seat.
      (5)   No person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall carry any
package, bundle or article that prevents the driver from keeping at least one
hand upon the handlebars.
      (6)   No bicycle, electric bicycle, or motorcycle shall be used to carry
more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
No motorcycle shall be operated on a highway when the handlebars rise higher
than the shoulders of the operator when the operator is seated in the
operator’s seat or saddle.
   (c)   (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(3) of this section, no person
shall operate or be a passenger on a snowmobile or motorcycle without using
safety glasses or other protective eye device. Except as provided in division
(c)(3) of this section, no person who is under the age of 18 years, or who
holds a motorcycle operator’s endorsement or license bearing a “novice”
designation that is currently in effect as provided in R.C. § 4507.13, shall
operate a motorcycle on a highway, or be a passenger on a motorcycle, unless
wearing a protective helmet on the person’s head, and no other person shall be
a passenger on a motorcycle operated by such a person unless similarly wearing
a protective helmet. The helmet, safety glasses, or other protective eye device
shall conform with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety. The
provisions of this division or a violation thereof shall not be used in the
trial of any civil action.
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in division (c)(3) of this section, no
person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary instruction permit and
temporary instruction permit identification card issued by the Registrar of
Motor Vehicles pursuant to R.C. § 4507.05 unless the person, at the time of
such operation, is wearing on the person’s head a protective helmet that
conforms with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety.
         B.   No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary
instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification card issued
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles pursuant to R.C. § 4507.05 in any of the
following circumstances:
            1.   At any time when lighted lights are required by R.C. § 4513.03
(A)(1);
            2.   While carrying a passenger;
            3.   On any limited access highway or heavily congested roadway.
      (3)   Divisions (c)(1) and (c)(2)A. of this section do not apply to a
person who operates or is a passenger in an autocycle or cab-enclosed
motorcycle when the occupant compartment top is in place enclosing the
occupants.
   (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the carrying
of a child in a seat or trailer that is designed for carrying children and is
firmly attached to the bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b) or (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates division (b) or (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (b) or (c)(1) or
(c)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.53)
§ 474.03 ATTACHING BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES TO OTHER VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   No person riding upon any bicycle, electric bicycle, coaster,
roller skates, sled, skateboard, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or self
to any vehicle upon a roadway.
      (2)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person riding upon any
bicycle, electric bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, skateboard, or toy
vehicle to attach the same or self to any vehicle while it is moving upon a
roadway.
      (3)   This section does not apply to towing a disabled vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.54)
§ 474.04 RIDING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; RIDING ABREAST.
   (a)   Every person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle upon a roadway
shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable obeying all
traffic rules applicable to vehicles and exercising due care when passing a
standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (b)   Persons riding bicycles, electric bicycles, or motorcycles upon a
roadway shall ride not more than two abreast in a single lane, except on paths
or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, electric
bicycles, or motorcycles.
   (c)   This section does not require a person operating a bicycle or electric
bicycle to ride at the edge of the roadway when it is unreasonable or unsafe to
do so. Conditions that may require riding away from the edge of the roadway
include when necessary to avoid fixed or moving objects, parked or moving
vehicles, surface hazards, or if it otherwise is unsafe or impracticable to do
so, including if the lane is too narrow for the bicycle or electric bicycle and
an overtaking vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (e)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.55)
§ 474.05 LIGHTS, SIGNAL DEVICES, BRAKES ON BICYCLES AND ELECTRIC BICYCLES.
   (a)   Every bicycle or electric bicycle when in use at the times specified
in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be
equipped with the following:
      (1)   A lamp mounted on the front of either the bicycle or electric
bicycle or the operator that shall emit a white light visible from a distance
of at least 500 feet to the front and 300 feet to the sides. A generator-
powered lamp that emits light only when the bicycle or electric bicycle is
moving may be used to meet this requirement.
      (2)   A red reflector on the rear that shall be visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
      (3)   A lamp emitting either flashing or steady red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear shall be used in addition to the red
reflector. If the red lamp performs as a reflector in that it is visible as
specified in division (a)(2) of this section, the red lamp may serve as the
reflector and a separate reflector is not required.
   (b)   Additional lamps and reflectors may be used in addition to those
required under division (a) of this section, except that red lamps and red
reflectors shall not be used on the front of the bicycle or electric bicycle
and white lamps and white reflectors shall not be used on the rear of the
bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (c)   A bicycle or electric bicycle may be equipped with a device capable of
giving an audible signal, except that a bicycle or electric bicycle shall not
be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle or electric bicycle
any siren or whistle.
   (d)   Every bicycle and electric bicycle shall be equipped with an adequate
brake when used on a street or roadway.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Ord. 25-129, passed 6-23-2025)
Statutory reference:
   Bicycle signal devices, see R.C. § 4511.56
§ 474.06 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
   (a)   Whenever any person is riding a bicycle or electric bicycle upon a
sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall
give an audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
   (b)   No person shall ride an electric bicycle on any sidewalk with the
motor engaged.
(Ord. 132-62, passed 10-22-1962; Ord. 25-129, passed 6-23-2025)
§ 474.07 SAFE OPERATION; RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Every person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall, at all times,
operate it with due regard to his or her own safety and the safety of other
persons lawfully upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public places
and shall, in each and every instance, yield the right-of-way to pedestrians.
(Ord. 132-62, passed 10-22-1962; Ord. 25-129, passed 6-23-2025)
§ 474.08 PARKING OF BICYCLES AND ELECTRIC BICYCLES.
   No person shall park a bicycle or electric bicycle upon the traveled portion
of a street or roadway. Any bicycle or electric bicycle parked in an alley or
on a sidewalk or other public place must be in such a position as not to
interfere with the safety or movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(Prior Code, § 474.09) (Ord. 132-62, passed 10-22-1962; Ord. 25-129, passed 6-
23-2025)
§ 474.09 IMPOUNDING.
   Whenever any bicycle, electric bicycle or motorbike is operated by any minor
under the age of 18 years, in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter, such bicycle, electric bicycle or motorbike may be seized by any
member of the Police Department and impounded in the Municipal Building. The
bicycle, electric bicycle or motorbike so impounded shall be surrendered to the
parent or guardian of the minor without charge, after a full explanation to
such parent or guardian of the reason for impounding of the bicycle, electric
bicycle or motorbike. The remedy of impoundment shall be in addition to
penalties provided in §§
408.01 and
408.02 for violations of any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 474.10) (Ord. 132-62, passed 10-22-1962; Ord. 25-129, passed 6-
23-2025)
§ 474.10 BICYCLE AND ELECTRIC BICYCLE LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person who resides within the city shall ride or propel a bicycle or
electric bicycle upon any sidewalk, street or public path set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles or electric bicycle, unless such bicycle or electric
bicycle has been licensed and a license decal is attached thereto as provided
herein.
(Prior Code, § 474.11) (Ord. 132-62, passed 10-22-1962; Ord. 25-129, passed 6-
23-2025)
§ 474.11 BICYCLE AND ELECTRIC BICYCLE LICENSE APPLICATION.
   Application for a bicycle or electric bicycle license and license decal
shall be made upon a form prescribed by the city and directed to the Safety
Director or his or her designee. The license shall remain in force without
necessity of renewal until such time as the licensed bicycle or electric
bicycle is sold, given away or in any other way changes ownership.
(Prior Code, § 474.12) (Ord. 108-2016, passed 8-22-2016; Ord. 25-129, passed 6-
23-2025)
§ 474.12 ISSUANCE OF BICYCLE AND ELECTRIC BICYCLE LICENSE.
   (a)   The Safety Director’s designee, upon receipt of the proper application
therefor, is authorized to issue a bicycle or electric bicycle license which
shall be effective for the period specified in §
474.11.
   (b)   The Safety Director’s designee shall not issue a license for any
bicycle or electric bicycle when he or she knows or has reasonable grounds to
believe that the applicant is not the owner or entitled to the possession of
such bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (c)   The Safety Director’s designee shall keep a record of the number of
each license, the date issued, the name and address of the person to whom
issued, the number on the frame of the bicycle or electric bicycle for which
issued and a record of all bicycle or electric bicycle licenses.
(Prior Code, § 474.13) (Ord. 90-84, passed 6-11-1984; Ord. 25-129, passed 6-23-
2025)
§ 474.13 ATTACHMENT OF BICYCLE AND ELECTRIC BICYCLE LICENSE PLATE.
   (a)   The Safety Director’s designee shall issue a license decal bearing the
license number assigned to the bicycle or electric bicycle and the name of the
city.
   (b)   The licensee shall cause such license decal to be firmly attached to
the frame of the bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (c)   No person shall remove a license decal from a bicycle or electric
bicycle during the period for which it is issued except upon a transfer of
ownership or in the event the bicycle or electric bicycle is dismantled and no
longer operated upon any street in the city.
(Prior Code, § 474.14) (Ord. 90-84, passed 6-11-1984; Ord. 25-129, passed 6-23-
2025)
§ 474.14 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP BICYCLE AND ELECTRIC BICYCLE.
   Upon the sale or other transfer of a licensed bicycle or electric bicycle,
the licensee shall remove the license decal.
(Prior Code, § 474.15) (Ord. 90-84, passed 6-11-1984; Ord. 25-129, passed 6-23-
2025)
§ 474.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 476: SNOWMOBILES, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLES AND ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLES
Section
476.01 Definitions
476.02 Equipment
476.03 Code application; prohibited operation
476.04 Permitted operation
476.05 Licensing requirements of operator
476.06 Accident reports
476.07 Local control within police power
476.08 Registration of vehicles
476.09 Operation of off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle without
certificate of title; failure to surrender
 
476.99 Penalty
§ 476.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   “All-purpose vehicle.” Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily
for cross-country travel on land and water, or on more than one type of
terrain, and steered by wheels or caterpillar treads, or any combination
thereof, including vehicles that operate on a cushion of air, vehicles commonly
known as all-terrain vehicles, all season vehicles, mini-bikes and trail bikes.
The term does not include a utility vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4501.01 or any
vehicle principally used in playing golf, any motor vehicle or aircraft
required to be registered under R.C. Chapter 4503 or R.C. Chapter 4561, and any
vehicle excepted from definition as a motor vehicle by R.C. § 4501.01(B).
   (b)   “Dealer.” Any person or firm engaged in the business of manufacturing
or selling snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles or all-purpose vehicles at
wholesale or retail, or who rents, leases or otherwise furnishes snowmobiles,
off-highway motorcycles or all-purpose vehicles for hire.
   (c)   “Electronic” and “electronic record.” Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 4501.01.
   (d)   “Electronic dealer.” A dealer whom the Registrar of Motor Vehicles
designates under R.C. § 4519.511.
   (e)   “Interstate highway.” Any part of the interstate system of highways as
defined in division (e), 90 Stat. 431 (1976), 23 U.S.C. 103, as amended.
   (f)   “Limited-access highway” or “freeway.” Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 5511.02.
   (g)   “Mini-truck.” A vehicle that has four wheels, is propelled by an
electric motor with a rated power of 7,500 watts or less or an internal
combustion engine with a piston displacement capacity of 660 cubic centimeters
or less, has a total dry weight of 900 to 2,200 pounds, contains an enclosed
cabin and a seat for the vehicle operator, resembles a pickup truck or van with
a cargo area or bed located at the rear of the vehicle, and was not originally
manufactured to meet federal motor vehicle safety standards.
   (h)   “Off-highway motorcycle.” Every motorcycle, as defined in R.C. §
4511.01, that is designed to be operated primarily on lands other than a street
or highway.
   (i)   “Operator.” Any person who operates or is in actual physical control
of a snowmobile, off- highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle.
   (j)   “Owner.” Any person or firm, other than a lienholder or dealer, having
title to a snowmobile, off- highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, or other
right to the possession thereof.
   (k)   “Proof of financial responsibility.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4509.01.
   (l)   “Snowmobile.” Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for use on
snow or ice, and steered by skis, runners or caterpillar treads.
   (m)   “State highway” and “state route.” Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
4511.01.
   (n)   “Street” or “highway.” Have the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 4519.01)
§ 476.02 EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   In addition to any rules or regulations promulgated by the Ohio
Director of Public Safety pursuant to R.C. § 4519.20 and R.C. Chapter 119,
equipment of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles and all- purpose vehicles
shall include but not necessarily be limited to requirements for the following
items of equipment:
      (1)   At least one headlight having a minimum candlepower of sufficient
intensity to reveal persons and objects at a distance of at least 100 feet
ahead under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (2)   At least one red tail light having a minimum candlepower of
sufficient intensity to be plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the
rear under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (3)   Every snowmobile, while traveling on packed snow, shall be capable
of carrying a driver who weighs 175 pounds or more, and, while carrying the
driver, be capable of stopping in no more than 40 feet from an initial steady
speed of 20 miles per hour, or locking its traction belt; and
      (4)   A muffler system capable of precluding the emission of excessive
smoke or exhaust fumes, and of limiting the engine noise of vehicles. On
snowmobiles manufactured after January 1, 1973, the requirement shall include
sound dampening equipment such that noise does not exceed 82 decibels on the
“A” scale at 50 feet as measured according to SAE J192 (September 1970).
   (b)   No person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle in violation of this section, except that equipment specified
in division (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section shall not be required on
snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles or all-purpose vehicles operated during
the daylight hours.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b) of this section shall be fined not more than $50. If the offender
within the preceding year previously has committed a violation of division (b)
of this section or of R.C. § 4519.20(B), whoever violates division (b) of this
section shall be fined not less than $15 nor more than $100, imprisoned not
more than three days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.20)
§ 476.03 CODE APPLICATION; PROHIBITED OPERATION.
   Except as otherwise provided by R.C. § 4519.40, as amended from time to
time.
   (a)   The applicable provisions of this Traffic Code apply to the operation
of snowmobiles, off- highway motorcycles and all-purpose vehicles, except that
no person shall operate a snowmobile, off- highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle as follows:
      (1)   On any state highway, including a limited access highway or freeway
or the right-of-way thereof, except for emergency travel during such time and
in such manner as the Ohio Director of Public Safety designates or except as
authorized by R.C. § 4519.41(F);
      (2)   On any private property, or in any nursery or planting area,
without the permission of the owner or other person having the right to
possession of the property;
      (3)   On any land or waters controlled by the state, except at those
locations where a sign has been posted permitting such operation;
      (4)   On the tracks or right-of-way of any operating railroad;
      (5)   While transporting any firearm, bow or other implement for hunting
that is not unloaded and securely encased in violation of R.C. § 4519.40 as the
same may be amended;
      (6)   For the purpose of chasing, pursuing, capturing or killing any
animal or wild fowl;
      (7)   During the time from sunset to sunrise, unless displaying lighted
lights as required by R.C. § 4519.20 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance; or
      (8)   On any street or other public way in the city, except as otherwise
provided in §
476.04.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50 nor
more than $500, or imprisoned not less than three nor more than 30 days, or
both.
(Ord. 54-2020, passed 4-27-2020)
§ 476.04 PERMITTED OPERATION.
   Snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles and all-purpose vehicles may be
operated as follows:
   (a)   To make a crossing of a highway, other than a highway as designated in
R.C. § 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
whenever the crossing can be made in safety and will not interfere with the
movement of vehicular traffic approaching from any direction on the highway,
and provided that the operator yields the right-of-way to any approaching
traffic that presents an immediate hazard;
   (b)   On highways in the county or township road systems whenever the local
authority having jurisdiction over the highways so permits;
   (c)   Off and alongside street or highway for limited distances from the
point of unloading from a conveyance to the point at which the snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle is intended and authorized to be
operated;
   (d)   On the berm or shoulder of a highway, other than a highway as
designated in R.C. § 4519.40(A)(1), or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, when the terrain permits the operation to be undertaken safely and
without the necessity of entering any traffic lane;
   (e)   On the berm or shoulder or a county or township road, while traveling
from one area of operation of the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle to another such area.
   (f)   For snowmobiles without metal studded tracks and all-purpose vehicles,
on state highways located on an island in Lake Erie, including limited access
highways and freeways, between the first day of November and the thirtieth day
of April, provided that all of the following conditions apply:
      (1)   The operator has a valid driver’s license as required under R.C. §
4519.44.
      (2)   The snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle is in compliance with rules
governing safety equipment adopted under R.C. § 4519.20.
      (3)   The owner of the snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle maintains proof
of financial responsibility for both on-road and off-road use of the snowmobile
or all-purpose vehicle.
      (4)   The operator obeys all traffic rules and regulations.
(R.C. § 4519.41)
§ 476.05 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS OF OPERATOR.
   (a)   No person who does not hold a valid, current motor vehicle driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, motorcycle operator’s endorsement or probationary
license, issued under R.C. Chapter 4506 or R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid,
current driver’s license issued by another jurisdiction, shall operate a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle on any street or
highway in this municipality, on any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or on
any public land or waters.
   (b)   No person who is less than 16 years of age shall operate a snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle on any land or waters other than
private property or waters owned by or leased to the person’s parent or
guardian, unless accompanied by another person who is 18 years of age or older,
and who holds a license as provided in division (a) of this section, except
that the Ohio Department of Natural Resources may permit the operation on
state-controlled land under its jurisdiction when the person is less than 16
years of age and is accompanied by a parent or guardian who is a licensed
driver 18 years of age or older.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50 nor
more than $500, or imprisoned not less than three nor more than 30 days, or
both.
(R.C. § 4519.44)
§ 476.06 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (a)   The operator of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle involved in any accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any
person or damage to the property of any person in excess of $100 shall report
the accident within 48 hours to the Police Chief, and within 30 days shall
forward a written report of the accident to the Ohio Registrar of Motor
Vehicles on a form prescribed by the Registrar. If the operator is physically
incapable of making the reports and there is another participant in the
accident not so incapacitated, the participant shall make the reports. In the
event there is no other participant, and the operator is other than the owner,
the owner, within the prescribed periods of time, shall make the reports.
   (b)   Any law enforcement officer or other person authorized by R.C. §§
4519.42 and 4519.43 who investigates or receives information of an accident
involving a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all- purpose vehicle shall
forward to the Registrar a written report of the accident within 48 hours.
(R.C. § 4519.46)
§ 476.07 LOCAL CONTROL WITHIN POLICE POWER.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the municipality from
regulating the operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycle and all-purpose
vehicles on streets and highways and other public property under municipal
jurisdiction, and within the reasonable exercise of the police power, except
that no registration or licensing of any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle required to be registered or titled under R.C. Chapter 4519
shall be required.
(R.C. § 4519.48)
§ 476.08 REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b), (c) and (d) of this section,
no person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle within this municipality unless the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle
or all-purpose vehicle is registered and numbered in accordance with R.C. §§
4519.40 and 4519.04.
      (2)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.215 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, no registration is required for a mini-truck that is
operated within this state. A mini-truck may be operated only in accordance
with R.C. § 4511.215 and R.C. § 4519.401, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (b)   (1)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or off-highway
motorcycle that is operated exclusively upon lands owned by the owner of the
snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle, or on lands to which the owner of the
snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle has a contractual right.
      (2)   No registration is required for an all-purpose vehicle that is used
primarily for agricultural purposes when the owner qualifies for the current
agricultural use valuation tax credit, unless it is to be used on any public
land, trail, or right-of-way.
      (3)   Any all-purpose vehicle exempted from registration under division
(b)(2) of this section and operated for agricultural purposes may use public
roads and rights-of-way when traveling from one farm field to another, when
such use does not violate R.C. § 4519.41.
      (4)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle
that is operated on a state highway as authorized by R.C. § 4519.41(F).
   (c)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle
or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident of another
state whenever that state has in effect a registration law similar to R.C.
Chapter 4519 and the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle
is properly registered under that state’s law. Any snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident of
a state not having a registration law similar to R.C. Chapter 4519 shall comply
with R.C. § 4519.09.
   (d)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle
or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this municipality by the United
States, another state or a political subdivision thereof, but the snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle shall display the name of the
owner thereon.
   (e)   The owner or operator of any all-purpose vehicle operated or used upon
the waters in this municipality shall comply with R.C. Chapters 1547 and 1548
relative to the operation of watercraft.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section shall be fined not less
than $50 nor more than $100.
(R.C. § 4519.02)
Statutory reference:
   Destruction or disposal of vehicle; transfer of ownership; change of
address; loss of certificate, see R.C. § 4519.05
   Registration of emergency vehicles, see R.C. § 4519.08
   Registration procedure, see R.C. § 4519.03
   Temporary license placards and fees, see R.C. § 4519.10
   Temporary operating permit for certain nonresidents, see R.C. § 4519.09
§ 476.09 OPERATION OF OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE OR ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE WITHOUT
CERTIFICATE OF TITLE; FAILURE TO SURRENDER.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle without having a certificate of title for the off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle if such a certificate is required by R.C. Chapter 4519 to
be issued for the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, or, if a
physical certificate of title has not been issued for it, operate an off-
highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle knowing that the ownership
information related to the motorcycle or vehicle has not been entered into the
automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common Pleas.
      (2)   Operate in this municipality an off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle if a certificate of title to the off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle has been issued and then has been canceled.
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title upon cancellation of it
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed
in R.C. Chapter 4519.
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapter 4519, in case of the destruction or
dismantling of, or change in, the off- highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle described in the certificate of title.
      (5)   Violate any provision of R.C. §§ 4519.51 to 4519.70 for which no
penalty is otherwise provided or any lawful rules adopted pursuant to those
sections.
      (6)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle knowing that the certificate of title to or ownership of the motorcycle
or vehicle as otherwise reflected in the automated title processing system has
been canceled.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $200, or
imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.66)
§ 476.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 478: MOTORIZED BICYCLES
Section
478.01 Parental responsibility
478.02 Code application to motorized bicycles
478.03 Equipment and licenses generally
478.04 Restrictions on operations
478.05 Attaching to vehicles
478.06 Manner of operating a motorized bicycle; riding abreast
478.07 Riding on sidewalks and public streets
478.08 Riding in public parks
478.09 Audible signaling devices
478.10 Exhaust systems
478.11 Lights
478.12 Impounding
§ 478.01 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   (a)   The parent or guardian or any minor under the age of 18 years shall
not authorize or permit such minor to violate any of the provisions of this
chapter under circumstances where the parent or guardian knew or should have
known of such violation.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
   (c)   In addition to or in lieu of the penalty imposed under division (b) of
this section, the court may prohibit such violator from riding a motorized
bicycle for a period not to exceed six months or authorize a motorized bicycle
to be impounded for a period not to exceed 30 days.
(Ord. 7-85, passed 1-28-1985)
§ 478.02 CODE APPLICATION TO MOTORIZED BICYCLES.
   The provisions of this Traffic Code which are applicable to motorized
bicycles apply whenever a motorized bicycle is operated upon any street or
highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of motorized bicycles.
(Ord. 7-85, passed 1-28-1985)
§ 478.03 EQUIPMENT AND LICENSES GENERALLY.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon a street, highway or
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking, unless all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The person is 14 years of age or older and holds either a valid
operator’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid motorized bicycle
operator’s license issued after the person has passed the test provided in this
section;
      (2)   The motorized bicycle is equipped in accordance with the rules
adopted under division (b) of this section and is in proper working order; and
      (3)   The person has registered the motorized bicycle as required by the
applicable Ohio law.
   (b)   The Ohio Director of Highway Safety, subject to R.C. §§ 119.01 to
119.13, shall adopt and promulgate rules concerning the equipment of motorized
bicycles and the testing and qualifications of persons who do not hold a valid
operator’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4507. The test shall include at
least a test of vision and knowledge of rules of the road.
   (c)   Every motorized bicycle operator’s license expires on the birthday of
the applicant in the fourth year after the date it is issued, but in no event
shall any motorized bicycle operator’s license be issued for a period of longer
than four years.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
   (e)   In addition to or in lieu of the penalty imposed under division (d) of
this section, the court may prohibit such violator from riding a motorized
bicycle for a period not to exceed six months or authorize a motorized bicycle
to be impounded for a period not to exceed 30 days.
(Ord. 7-85, passed 1-28-1985)
§ 478.04 RESTRICTIONS ON OPERATIONS.
   (a)   A person operating a motorized bicycle shall not ride other than upon
the permanent and regular seat attached thereto and meeting the specifications
promulgated by the Ohio Director of Highway Safety.
   (b)   No motorized bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time
than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
   (c)   A person shall ride upon a motorized bicycle only while sitting
astride the seat facing forward with one leg on each side of the motorized
bicycle.
   (d)   No person operating a motorized bicycle shall carry any package,
bundle or article that prevents the driver from maintaining his or her grip
with two hands upon the handle bars.
   (e)   No motorized bicycle shall be operated with any part of the handle bar
more than 15 inches above that portion of the seat occupied by the operator
when the seat is fully depressed.
   (f)   No person under 18 years of age shall operate a motorized bicycle
without using safety glasses or other protective eye devices. No person who is
under the age of 18 years shall operate a motorized bicycle unless wearing a
protective helmet. The helmet, safety glasses or other protective eye device
shall conform with regulations prescribed and promulgated by the Director of
Highway Safety. The provisions of this division (f) or a violation thereof
shall not be used in trial in any civil action.
   (g)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
   (h)   In addition to or in lieu of the penalty imposed under division (g) of
this section, the court may prohibit such violator from riding a motorized
bicycle for a period not to exceed six months or authorize a motorized bicycle
to be impounded for a period not to exceed 30 days.
(Ord. 7-85, passed 1-28-1985)
§ 478.05 ATTACHING TO VEHICLES.
   (a)   No person riding upon any motorized bicycle shall attach the same or
himself or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
   (b)   No operator of a motorized bicycle shall knowingly permit any person
riding upon a motorcycle, motorized bicycle, bicycle, coaster, roller skates,
sled, toy vehicle or his or her feet on the ice and snow to attach the same to
either the rider or to the motorized bicycle while it is moving upon a roadway.
   (c)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
   (d)   In addition to or in lieu of the penalty imposed under division (c) of
this section, the court may prohibit such violator from riding a motorized
bicycle for a period not to exceed six months or authorize a motorized bicycle
to be impounded for a period not to exceed 30 days.
(Ord. 7-85, passed 1-28-1985)
§ 478.06 MANNER OF OPERATING A MOTORIZED BICYCLE; RIDING ABREAST.
   (a)   Every person operating a motorized bicycle upon a street or highway
within the city shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as
practical, obeying all traffic rules applicable to vehicles and exercising due
care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (b)   Persons riding a motorized bicycle upon a roadway shall ride not more
than two abreast in a single lane.
   (c)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. A second violation by the same operator or person within a
period of one year shall constitute a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (d)   In addition to or in lieu of the penalty imposed under division (c) of
this section, the court may prohibit such violator from riding a motorized
bicycle for a period not to exceed six months or authorize a motorized bicycle
to be impounded for a period not to exceed 30 days.
(Ord. 7-85, passed 1-28-1985)
§ 478.07 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC STREETS.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon any sidewalk within
the municipality.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon any public street
within the municipality which is not improved with a macadam, asphalt or
concrete surface.
   (c)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. A second violation by the same operator or person within a
period of one year shall constitute a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (d)   In addition to or in lieu of the penalty imposed under division (c) of
this section, the court may prohibit such violator from riding a motorized
bicycle for a period not to exceed six months or authorize a motorized bicycle
to be impounded for a period not to exceed 30 days.
(Ord. 7-85, passed 1-28-1985)
§ 478.08 RIDING IN PUBLIC PARKS.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon or within a public
park or public school real property in the city, unless a designated path or
roadway exists therein as determined and posted by the appropriate public
authority or public body entitled under law to exercise control in any such
area.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A
second violation by the same operator or person within a period of one year
shall constitute a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (c)   In addition to or in lieu of the penalty imposed under division (b) of
this section, the court may prohibit such violator from riding a motorized
bicycle for a period not to exceed six months or authorize a motorized bicycle
to be impounded for a period not to exceed 30 days.
(Ord. 7-85, passed 1-28-1985)
§ 478.09 AUDIBLE SIGNALING DEVICES.
    (a)   No person shall operate a motorized bicycle unless it is equipped
with at least one audible signaling device capable of giving a signal audible
for a distance of at least 100 feet, activated by pushing a self-returning
device located on the left handle bar. Such signaling device shall not consist
of a siren or whistle.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A
second violation by the same operator or person within a period of one year
shall constitute a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (c)   In addition to or in lieu of the penalty imposed under division (b) of
this section, the court may prohibit such violator from riding a motorized
bicycle to be impounded for a period not to exceed 30 days.
(Ord. 7-85, passed 1-28-1985)
§ 478.10 EXHAUST SYSTEMS.
   (a)   Motorized bicycles shall be equipped with an exhaust system, where
applicable, incorporating a muffler or other mechanical device for the purpose
of reducing engine noise. Cutouts and by-passes in the exhaust are prohibited.
The system shall be securely attached and located so as not to interfere with
the operation of the motorized bicycle. Shielding shall be provided to prevent
inadvertent bodily contact with the exhaust system during normal operation.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A
second violation by the same operator or person within a period of one year
shall constitute a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (c)   In addition to or in lieu of the penalty imposed under division (b) of
this section, the court may prohibit such violator from riding a motorized
bicycle for a period not to exceed six months or authorize a motorized bicycle
to be impounded for a period not to exceed 30 days.
(Ord. 7-85, passed 1-28-1985)
§ 478.11 LIGHTS.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon the streets, alleys
or other public ways during the period from one hour after sunset to one hour
before sunrise, or wherever, by reason of fog, visibility is rendered
difficult, unless such motorized bicycle is equipped with a headlight casting a
beam of white light in front of the motorized bicycle clearly visible for at
least 50 feet and with a red tail light or reflector readily visible for at
least 50 feet.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A
second violation by the same operator or person within a period of one year
shall constitute a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (c)   In addition to or in lieu of the penalty imposed under division (b) of
this section, the court may prohibit such violator from riding a motorized
bicycle for a period not to exceed six months or authorize a motorized bicycle
to be impounded for a period not to exceed 30 days.
(Ord. 7-85, passed 1-28-1985)
§ 478.12 IMPOUNDING.
   Whenever any motorized bicycle is operated by a minor under the age of 18
years, in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, such motorized
bicycle may be seized by any member of the Police Department and impounded at
the Municipal Building. The motorized bicycle so impounded shall be surrendered
to the parent or guardian of the minor after payment of a towing charge, if
applicable. The remedy of impoundment shall be in addition to the penalties
provided for a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 7-85, passed 1-28-1985)
PART SIX - GENERAL OFFENSES CODE
      
Chap. 606. General Provisions; Administration and Enforcement.
      
Chap. 610. Advertising, Billposting and Handbills.
      
Chap. 612. Alcoholic Beverages.
      
Chap. 618. Animals.
      
Chap. 624. Drugs.
      
Chap. 630. Gambling.
      
Chap. 636. Offenses Relating to Persons.
      
Chap. 642. Offenses Relating to Property.
      
Chap. 648. Peace Disturbances.
      
Chap. 660. Safety, Sanitation and Health.
      
Chap. 662. Nuisance Properties.
      
Chap. 666. Sex Related Offenses.
      
Chap. 667. Smoking in Municipal Buildings.
      
Chap. 668. Vegetation and Litter.
      
Chap. 670. Watercraft.
      
Chap. 672. Weapons and Explosives.
      
Chap. 698. Penalties and Sentencing.
CHAPTER 606: GENERAL PROVISIONS; ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
606.01 Definitions
606.02 Culpable mental states
606.03 Classification of offenses
606.04 Offenses defined
606.05 Rules of construction
606.06 Criminal law jurisdiction
606.07 Limitation on criminal prosecutions; voluntary intoxication
606.08 Requirements for criminal liability
606.09 Organizational criminal liability
606.10 Personal accountability for organizational conduct
606.11 Falsification
606.12 False report of child abuse or neglect
606.13 Compounding a crime
606.14 Failure to report a crime or death
606.15 Failure to aid a law enforcement officer
606.16 Obstructing official business
606.17 Obstructing justice
606.18 Resisting arrest
606.19 Compliance with lawful order of police officer; fleeing
606.20 Having an unlawful interest in a public contract
606.21 Soliciting or receiving improper compensation
606.22 Dereliction of duty
606.23 Interfering with civil rights
606.24 Attempts
606.25 Complicity
606.26 Detention of shoplifters and those committing motion picture piracy;
protection of institutional property
606.27 Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police Department
606.28 Impersonating an officer
606.29 Display of law enforcement agency emblem
606.30 Using sham legal process
606.31 Failure to disclose personal information
606.32 Misuse of 9-1-1 system
606.33 Self defense; limitations on duty to retreat prior to using force
§ 606.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE, CONTRIBUTION, LEGISLATIVE CAMPAIGN FUND, POLITICAL
ACTION COMMITTEE, POLITICAL CONTRIBUTING ENTITY and POLITICAL PARTY. Have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 3517.01.
   CONTRABAND. Any property that is illegal for a person to acquire or possess
under a statute, ordinance or rule, or that a trier of fact lawfully determines
to be illegal to possess by reason of the property’s involvement in an offense.
CONTRABAND includes but is not limited to all of the following:
      (1)   Any controlled substance, as defined in R.C. § 3719.01, or any
device or paraphernalia related thereto;
      (2)   Any unlawful gambling device or paraphernalia;
      (3)   Any dangerous ordnance or obscene material.
   DEADLY FORCE. Any force that carries a substantial risk that it will
proximately result in the death of any person.
   DETENTION. Arrest; confinement in any vehicle subsequent to an arrest;
confinement in any public or private facility for custody of persons charged
with or convicted of crime in this state or another state or under the laws of
the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent child or unruly child
in this state or another state or under the laws of the United States;
hospitalization, institutionalization or confinement in any public or private
facility that is ordered pursuant to or under the authority of R.C. § 2945.37,
2945.371, 2945.38, 2945.39, 2945.40, 2945.401 or 2945.402; confinement in any
vehicle for transportation to or from any facility of any of those natures;
detention for extradition or deportation; except as provided in this division,
supervision by any employee of any facility of any of those natures that is
incidental to hospitalization, institutionalization or confinement in the
facility but that occurs outside the facility; supervision by an employee of
the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction of a person on any type of
release from a state correctional institution; or confinement in any vehicle,
airplane or place while being returned from outside of this state into this
state by a private person or entity pursuant to a contract entered into under
R.C. § 311.29(E) or 5149.03(B). For a person confined in a county jail who
participates in a county jail industry program pursuant to R.C. § 5147.30,
DETENTION includes time spent at an assigned work site and going to and from
the work site.
   DETENTION FACILITY. Any public or private place used for the confinement of
a person charged with or convicted of any crime in this state or another state
or under the laws of the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent
child or an unruly child in this state or another state or under the laws of
the United States.
   FORCE. Any violence, compulsion or constraint physically exerted by any
means upon or against a person or thing.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any of the following:
      (1)   A Sheriff, Deputy Sheriff, constable, police officer of a township
or joint police district, Marshal, Deputy Marshal, municipal police officer,
member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under
R.C. § 3735.31(D) or State Highway Patrol trooper.
      (2)   An officer, agent or employee of the state or any of its agencies,
instrumentalities or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute, a duty to
conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and the
authority to arrest violators is conferred, within the limits of such statutory
duty and authority.
      (3)   The Mayor, in a capacity as chief conservator of the peace within
the municipality.
      (4)   A member of an auxiliary police force organized by the county,
township or municipal law enforcement authorities, within the scope of the
member’s appointment or commission.
      (5)   A person lawfully called pursuant to R.C. § 311.07 to aid a sheriff
in keeping the peace, for the purposes and during the time when the person is
called.
      (6)   A person appointed by a Mayor pursuant to R.C.§ 737.10 as a special
patrolling officer during a riot or emergency, for the purposes and during the
time when the person is appointed.
      (7)   A member of the organized militia of this state or the Armed Forces
of the United States, lawfully called to duty to aid civil authorities in
keeping the peace or protect against domestic violence.
      (8)   A prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, secret
service officer or municipal prosecutor.
      (9)   A veterans’ home police officer appointed under R.C. § 5907.02.
      (10)   A member of a police force employed by a regional transit
authority under R.C. § 306.35(Y).
      (11)   A special police officer employed by a port authority under R.C. §
4582.04 or 4582.28.
      (12)   The House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms if the House of
Representatives Sergeant at Arms has arrest authority pursuant to R.C. §
101.311(E)(1) and an Assistant House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms.
      (13)   The Senate Sergeant at Arms and an Assistant Senate Sergeant at
Arms.
      (14)   A special police officer employed by a municipal corporation at a
municipal airport, or other municipal air navigation facility, that has
scheduled operations, as defined in 14 C.F.R. 119.3, as amended, and that is
required to be under a security program and is governed by aviation security
rules of the Transportation Security Administration of the United States
Department of Transportation as provided in 49 C.F.R. Parts 1542 and 1544, as
amended.
   NOT GUILTY BY REASON OF INSANITY. A person is NOT GUILTY BY REASON OF
INSANITY relative to a charge of an offense only if the person proves, in the
manner specified in R.C. § 2901.05, that at the time of the commission of the
offense, he or she did not know, as a result of a severe mental disease or
defect, the wrongfulness of his or her acts.
   OFFENSE OF VIOLENCE.
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.11,
2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.15, 2903.18, 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22, 2905.01,
2905.02, 2905.11, 2905.32, 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.05, 2909.02, 2909.03,
2909.24, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2917.01, 2917.02, 2917.03, 2917.31,
2917.321, 2919.25, 2921.03, 2921.04, 2921.34 or 2923.161, of division (A)(1) of
R.C. § 2903.34, of division (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) of R.C. § 2911.12, or of
division (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3) or (B)(4) of R.C. § 2919.22, or felonious
sexual penetration in violation of former R.C. § 2907.12;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States, substantially equivalent to
any section, division or offense listed in division (1) of this definition;
      (3)   An offense, other than a traffic offense, under an existing or
former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or of the United
States, committed purposely or knowingly, and involving physical harm to
persons or a risk of serious physical harm to persons;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under division (1), (2) or (3) of this definition;
      (5)   A violation of division (C) of R.C. § 959.131.
   OFFICIAL PROCEEDING. Any proceeding before a legislative, judicial,
administrative or other governmental agency or official authorized to take
evidence under oath, and includes any proceeding before a referee, hearing
examiner, commissioner, notary or other person taking testimony or a deposition
in connection with an official proceeding.
   PARTY OFFICIAL. Any person who holds an elective or appointive post in a
political party in the United States or this state, by virtue of which he or
she directs, conducts or participates in directing or conducting party affairs
at any level of responsibility.
   PERSON.
      (1)   A.   Subject to division (2) of this definition, as used in any
section contained in this general offenses code that sets forth a criminal
offense, PERSON includes all of the following:
            1.   An individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership and association.
            2.   An unborn human who is viable.
         B.   As used in any section contained in this general offenses code
that does not set forth a criminal offense, PERSON includes an individual,
corporation, business trust, estate, partnership and association.
         C.   As used in division (1)A.2. of this definition, “unborn human”
means an individual organism of the species homo sapiens from fertilization
until live birth. “Viable” means the stage of development of a human fetus at
which there is a realistic probability of maintaining and nourishing of a life
outside the womb with or without temporary artificial life-sustaining support.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (1)A. of this definition, in no case shall
the portion of the definition of the term PERSON that is set forth in division
(1)A.2. of this definition be applied or construed in any section contained in
this general offenses code that sets forth a criminal offense in any of the
following manners:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (2)A. of this
definition, in a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as
prohibiting any pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion
with the consent of the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman
implied by law in a medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise
authorized by law to consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant
woman. An abortion that violates the conditions described in the immediately
preceding sentence may be punished as a violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02,
2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13,
2903.14, 2903.21 or 2903.22, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, as applicable. An abortion that does not violate the conditions
described in the second immediately preceding sentence but that does violate
R.C. § 2919.12, 2919.13(B), 2919.15, 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, may be punished as a violation of
that section, as applicable. Consent is sufficient under this division if it is
of the type otherwise adequate to permit medical treatment to the pregnant
woman, even if it does not comply with R.C. § 2919.12.
         B.   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
            1.   Her delivery of a stillborn baby.
            2.   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a
viable, unborn human that she is carrying.
            3.   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who
dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human.
            4.   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human.
            5.   Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in
any other manner, an injury, illness, or other psychological illness or
condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human
that she is carrying.
   PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any injury, illness or other physiological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
   PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY. Any tangible or intangible damage to property
that, in any degree, results in loss to its value or interferes with its use or
enjoyment. PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY does not include wear and tear occasioned
by normal use.
   PRIVILEGE. An immunity, license or right conferred by law, or bestowed by
express or implied grant, or arising out of status, position, office or
relationship, or growing out of necessity.
   PROPERTY.
      (1)   Any property, real or personal, tangible or intangible, and any
interest or license in that property. PROPERTY includes but is not limited to
cable television service, other telecommunications service, telecommunications
devices, information service, computers, data, computer software, financial
instruments associated with computers, other documents associated with
computers, or copies of the documents, whether in machine or human- readable
form, trade secrets, trademarks, copyrights, patents, and property protected by
a trademark, copyright or patent. “Financial instruments associated with
computers” include but are not limited to checks, drafts, warrants, money
orders, notes of indebtedness, certificates of deposit, letters of credit,
bills of credit or debit cards, financial transaction authorization mechanisms,
marketable securities or any computer system representations of any of them.
      (2)   As used in this definition, “trade secret” has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 1333.61, and “telecommunications service” and “information service”
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (3)   As used in this definition and in the definition of “contraband” in
this section, “cable television service”, “computer”, “computer network”,
“computer software”, “computer system”, “data” and “telecommunications device”
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   PROVIDER AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
   PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Any elected or appointed officer, employee or agent of the
state or any political subdivision thereof, whether in a temporary or permanent
capacity, and includes but is not limited to legislators, judges and law
enforcement officers. The term does not include an employee, officer, or
governor-appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit
corporation formed under R.C. § 187.01.
   PUBLIC SERVANT.
      (1)   Any of the following:
         A.   Any public official.
         B.   Any person performing ad hoc a governmental function, including
but not limited to a juror, member of a temporary commission, master,
arbitrator, advisor or consultant.
         C.   A person who is a candidate for public office, whether or not he
or she is elected or appointed to the office for which he or she is a
candidate. A person is a candidate for purposes of this division if he or she
has been nominated according to law for election or appointment to public
office, or if he or she has filed a petition or petitions as required by law to
have his or her name placed on the ballot in a primary, general or special
election, or if he or she campaigns as a write-in candidate in any primary,
general or special election.
      (2)   The term does not include an employee, officer, or governor-
appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit corporation formed
under R.C. § 187.01.
   RISK. A significant possibility, as contrasted with a remote possibility,
that a certain result may occur or that certain circumstances may exist.
   SCHOOL, SCHOOL BUILDING and SCHOOL PREMISES. Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 2925.01.
   SCHOOL ACTIVITY. Any activity held under the auspices of a board of
education of a city, local, exempted village, joint vocational or cooperative
education school district; a governing authority of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314; a governing board of an educational
service center; or the governing body of a nonpublic school for which the State
Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under R.C. § 3301.07.
   SCHOOL BUS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   SCHOOL SAFETY ZONE. Consists of a school, school building, school premises,
school activity and school bus.
   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any mental illness or condition of such gravity as would normally
require hospitalization or prolonged psychiatric treatment;
      (2)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death;
      (3)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent incapacity, whether
partial or total, or that involves some temporary, substantial incapacity;
      (4)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent disfigurement, or
that involves some temporary, serious disfigurement;
      (5)   Any physical harm that involves acute pain of such duration as to
result in substantial suffering, or that involves any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain.
   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY. Any physical harm to property that does
either of the following:
      (1)   Results in substantial loss to the value of the property, or
requires a substantial amount of time, effort or money to repair or replace;
      (2)   Temporarily prevents the use or enjoyment of the property, or
substantially interferes with its use or enjoyment for an extended period of
time.
   SUBSTANTIAL RISK. A strong possibility, as contrasted with a remote or
significant possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain
circumstances may exist.
   VALUABLE THING or VALUABLE BENEFIT. Includes but is not limited to a
contribution. This inclusion does not indicate or imply that a contribution was
not included in those terms before September 17, 1986.
(R.C. §§ 2901.01, 2921.01)
§ 606.02 CULPABLE MENTAL STATES.
   (a)   A person acts purposely when it is the person’s specific intention to
cause a certain result, or, when the gist of the offense is a prohibition
against conduct of a certain nature, regardless of what the offender intends to
accomplish thereby, it is the offender’s specific intention to engage in
conduct of that nature.
   (b)   A person acts knowingly, regardless of purpose, when the person is
aware that the person’s conduct will probably cause a certain result or will
probably be of a certain nature. A person has knowledge of circumstances when
the person is aware that such circumstances probably exist. When knowledge of
the existence of a particular fact is an element of an offense, such knowledge
is established if a person subjectively believes that there is a high
probability of its existence and fails to make inquiry or acts with a conscious
purpose to avoid learning the fact.
   (c)   A person acts recklessly when, with heedless indifference to the
consequences, the person disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that
the person’s conduct is likely to cause a certain result or is likely to be of
a certain nature. A person is reckless with respect to circumstances when, with
heedless indifference to the consequences, the person disregards a substantial
and unjustifiable risk that such circumstances are likely to exist.
   (d)   A person acts negligently when, because of a substantial lapse from
due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that the person’s
conduct may cause a certain result or may be of a certain nature. A person is
negligent with respect to circumstances when, because of a substantial lapse
from due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that such
circumstances may exist.
   (e)   When the section defining an offense provides that negligence suffices
to establish an element thereof, then recklessness, knowledge or purpose is
also sufficient culpability for that element. When recklessness suffices to
establish an element of an offense, then knowledge or purpose is also
sufficient culpability for that element. When knowledge suffices to establish
an element of an offense, then purpose is also sufficient culpability for that
element.
(R.C. § 2901.22)
§ 606.03 CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENSES.
   As used in this general offenses code:
   (a)   Offenses include misdemeanors of the first, second, third and fourth
degree, minor misdemeanors and offenses not specifically classified.
   (b)   Regardless of the penalty that may be imposed, any offense
specifically classified as a misdemeanor is a misdemeanor.
   (c)   Any offense not specifically classified is a misdemeanor if
imprisonment for not more than one year may be imposed as a penalty.
   (d)   Any offense not specifically classified is a minor misdemeanor if the
only penalty that may be imposed is one of the following:
      (1)   For an offense committed prior to January 1, 2004, a fine not
exceeding $100;
      (2)   For an offense committed on or after January 1, 2004, a fine not
exceeding $150, community service under R.C. § 2929.27(D), or a financial
sanction other than a fine under R.C. § 2929.28.
(R.C. § 2901.02)
§ 606.04 OFFENSES DEFINED.
   (a)   No conduct constitutes a criminal offense against the municipality
unless it is defined as an offense in this general offenses code.
   (b)   An offense is defined when one or more sections of this general
offenses code state a positive prohibition or enjoin a specific duty, and
provide a penalty for violation of the prohibition or failure to meet that
duty.
   (c)   This section does not affect the power of a court to punish for
contempt or to employ any sanction authorized by law to enforce an order, civil
judgment or decree.
(R.C. § 2901.03)
§ 606.05 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c) or (d) of this section,
sections of this general offenses code defining offenses or penalties shall be
strictly construed against the municipality and liberally construed in favor of
the accused.
   (b)   Rules of criminal procedure and sections of this general offenses code
providing for criminal procedure shall be construed so as to effect the fair,
impartial, speedy and sure administration of justice.
   (c)   Any provision of a section of this general offenses code that refers
to a previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of a section of
this general offenses code, the Ohio Revised Code or a division of a section of
this general offenses code or the Ohio Revised Code shall be construed to also
refer to a previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a substantially
equivalent offense under an existing or former law of this municipality, state,
another state or the United States or under an existing or former municipal
ordinance.
   (d)   Any provision of this code that refers to a section, or to a division
of a section, of this code that defines or specifies a criminal offense shall
be construed to also refer to an existing or former law of this state, another
state or the United States, to an existing or former municipal ordinance, or to
an existing or former division of any such existing or former law or ordinance
that defines or specifies, or that defined or specified, a substantially
equivalent offense.
(R.C. § 2901.04)
§ 606.06 CRIMINAL LAW JURISDICTION.
   (a)   A person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this
municipality if any of the following occur:
      (1)   The person commits an offense under the laws of this municipality,
any element of which takes place in this municipality;
      (2)   While in this municipality, the person attempts to commit, or is
guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in another jurisdiction,
which offense is an offense under both the laws of this municipality and the
other jurisdiction, or, while in this municipality, the person conspires to
commit an offense in another jurisdiction, which offense is an offense under
both the laws of this municipality and the other jurisdiction, and a
substantial overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy is undertaken in this
municipality by the person or another person involved in the conspiracy,
subsequent to the person’s entrance into the conspiracy. In any case in which a
person attempts to commit, is guilty of complicity in the commission of, or
conspires to commit an offense in another jurisdiction as described in this
division, the person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this
municipality for the attempt, complicity or conspiracy, and for any resulting
offense that is committed or completed in the other jurisdiction;
      (3)   While out of this municipality, the person conspires or attempts to
commit, or is guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in this
municipality;
      (4)   While out of this municipality, the person omits to perform a legal
duty imposed by the laws of this municipality, which omission affects a
legitimate interest of the municipality in protecting, governing or regulating
any person, property, thing, transaction or activity in this municipality;
      (5)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
retains property and subsequently brings any of the unlawfully taken or
retained property into this municipality;
      (6)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
entices another person and subsequently brings the other person into this
municipality;
      (7)   The person, by means of a computer, computer system, computer
network, telecommunication, telecommunications device, telecommunications
service or information service, causes or knowingly permits any writing, data,
image or other telecommunication to be disseminated or transmitted into this
municipality in violation of the law of this state or municipality.
   (b)   In homicide, the element referred to in division (a)(1) of this
section includes the act that causes death, the physical contact that causes
death, the death itself, or any other element that is set forth in the offense
in question. If any part of the body of a homicide victim is found in this
municipality, the death is presumed to have occurred within this municipality.
   (c)   (1)   This municipality includes the land and water within its
boundaries and the air space above that land and water, with respect to which
this municipality has either exclusive or concurrent legislative jurisdiction.
Where the boundary between this municipality and another jurisdiction is
disputed, the disputed territory is conclusively presumed to be within this
municipality for purposes of this section.
      (2)   The Courts of Common Pleas of Adams, Athens, Belmont, Brown,
Clermont, Columbiana, Gallia, Hamilton, Jefferson, Lawrence, Meigs, Monroe,
Scioto and Washington counties have jurisdiction beyond the north or northwest
shore of the Ohio River extending to the opposite shore line, between the
extended boundary lines of any adjacent counties or adjacent state. Each of
those Courts of Common Pleas has concurrent jurisdiction on the Ohio River with
any adjacent Court of Common Pleas that borders on that river and with any
court of Kentucky or of West Virginia that borders on the Ohio River and that
has jurisdiction on the Ohio River under the law of Kentucky or the law of West
Virginia, whichever is applicable, or under federal law.
   (d)   When an offense is committed under the laws of this municipality, and
it appears beyond a reasonable doubt that the offense or any element of the
offense took place either in this municipality or in another jurisdiction or
jurisdictions, but it cannot reasonably be determined in which it took place,
the offense or element is conclusively presumed to have taken place in this
municipality for purposes of this section.
   (e)   When a person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in
this municipality for an offense committed or completed outside this
municipality, the person is subject to all specifications for that offense that
would be applicable if the offense had been committed within this municipality.
   (f)   Any act, conduct or element that is a basis of a person being subject
under this section to criminal prosecution and punishment in this municipality
need not be committed personally by the person as long as it is committed by
another person who is in complicity or conspiracy with the person.
   (g)   This section shall be liberally construed, consistent with
constitutional limitations, to allow this municipality the broadest possible
jurisdiction over offenses and persons committing offenses in, or affecting,
this municipality.
   (h)   For purposes of division (a)(2) of this section, an overt act is
substantial when it is of a character that manifests a purpose on the part of
the actor that the object of the conspiracy should be completed.
   (i)   As used in this section, “computer”, “computer system”, “computer
network”, “information service”, “telecommunication”, “telecommunications
device”, “telecommunications service”, “data” and “writing” have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
(R.C. § 2901.11) (Prior Code, § 606.055)
§ 606.07 LIMITATION ON CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS; VOLUNTARY INTOXICATION.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), (a)(5),
or (a)(6) of this section or as otherwise provided in this section, a
prosecution shall be barred unless it is commenced within the following periods
after an offense is committed:
         A.   For a felony, six years;
         B.   For a misdemeanor other than a minor misdemeanor, two years;
         C.   For a minor misdemeanor, six months.
      (2)   There is no period of limitation for the prosecution of a violation
of R.C. § 2903.01 or 2903.02 or for the prosecution of a conspiracy to commit,
attempt to commit, or complicity in committing a violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or
R.C. § 2903.02.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (b) to (j) of this
section, a prosecution of any of the following offenses shall be barred unless
it is commenced within 20 years after the offense is committed:
         A.   A violation of R.C. § 2903.03, 2903.04, 2905.01, 2905.32,
2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.21, 2909.02, 2909.22, 2909.23, 2909.24, 2909.26,
2909.27, 2909.28, 2909.29, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12 or 2917.02, a
violation of R.C. § 2903.11 or 2903.12 if the victim is a peace officer, a
violation of R.C. § 2903.13 that is a felony, or a violation of former R.C. §
2907.12.
         B.   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing a violation set forth in division (a)(3)A. of this section.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (d) to (l) of this
section, a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 or a
conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in committing a
violation of either section shall be barred unless it is commenced within 25
years after the offense is committed.
      (5)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (a)(5)B. and (e) to
(i) of this section, a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2907.13 shall be
barred unless it is commenced within five years after the offense is committed.
         B.   Prosecution that would otherwise be barred under division (a)
(5)A. of this section may be commenced within five years after the date of the
discovery of the offense by either an aggrieved person or the aggrieved
person’s legal representative who is not a party to the offense.
         C.   As used in division (a)(5)B. of this section, “aggrieved person”
includes any of the following individuals with regard to a violation of R.C. §
2907.13:
            1.   A patient who was the victim of the violation;
            2.   The spouse or surviving spouse of a patient who was the victim
of the violation;
            3.   Any child born as a result of the violation.
      (6)   A prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2151.421(A)(1) or (A)(4),
which is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, or a misdemeanor of the first
degree under circumstances specified in R.C. § 2151.99, is barred unless it is
commenced within four years after the violation is committed.
   (b)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2) of this section,
if the period of limitation provided in division (a)(1) or (a)(3) of this
section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for an offense of which an
element is fraud or breach of fiduciary duty within one year after discovery of
the offense either by an aggrieved person or by the aggrieved person’s legal
representative who is not a party to the offense.
      (2)   If the period of limitation provided in division (a)(1) or (a)(3)
of this section has expired, prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2913.49
shall be commenced within five years after discovery of the offense either by
an aggrieved person or the aggrieved person’s legal representative who is not a
party to the offense.
   (c)   (1)   If the period of limitation provided in division (a)(1) or (a)
(3) of this section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for the
following offenses during the following specified periods of time:
         A.   For an offense involving misconduct in office by a public servant
at any time while the accused remains a public servant, or within two years
thereafter;
         B.   For an offense by a person who is not a public servant but whose
offense is directly related to the misconduct in office of a public servant, at
any time while that public servant remains a public servant, or within two
years thereafter.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   “Offense is directly related to the misconduct in office of a
public servant.” The phrase includes but is not limited to a violation of R.C.
§ 101.71, 101.91, 121.61 or 2921.13, 102.03(F) or (H), 2921.02(A), 2921.43(A)
or (B), or 3517.13(F) or (G), that is directly related to an offense involving
misconduct in office of a public servant, or a violation of any municipal
ordinance substantially equivalent to those Ohio Revised Code sections listed
in this division (c)(2)A.
         B.   “Public servant” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.01.
   (d)   (1)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal
investigation of the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 is
determined to match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person and if
the time of the determination is later than 25 years after the offense is
committed, prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may be
commenced within five years after the determination is complete.
      (2)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal investigation
of the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 is determined to
match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person and if the time of
the determination is within 25 years after the offense is committed,
prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may be commenced
within the longer of 25 years after the offense is committed or five years
after the determination is complete.
      (3)   As used in this division, “DNA record” has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 109.573.
   (e)   An offense is committed when every element of the offense occurs. In
the case of an offense of which an element is a continuing course of conduct,
the period of limitation does not begin to run until the course of conduct or
the accused’s accountability for it terminates, whichever occurs first.
   (f)   A prosecution is commenced on the date an indictment is returned or an
information filed, or on the date a lawful arrest without a warrant is made, or
on the date a warrant, summons, citation or other process is issued, whichever
occurs first. A prosecution is not commenced by the return of an indictment or
the filing of an information unless reasonable diligence is exercised to issue
and execute process on the same. A prosecution is not commenced upon issuance
of a warrant, summons, citation or other process unless reasonable diligence is
exercised to execute the same.
   (g)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the corpus
delicti remains undiscovered.
   (h)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the
accused purposely avoids prosecution. Proof that the accused departed this
municipality or conceals the accused’s identity or whereabouts is prima facie
evidence of the accused’s purpose to avoid prosecution.
   (i)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time a prosecution
against the accused based on the same conduct is pending in this state, even
though the indictment, information or process that commenced the prosecution is
quashed or the proceedings on the indictment, information or process are set
aside or reversed on appeal.
   (j)   The period of limitation for a violation of this Part 6 or Title XXIX
of the Ohio Revised Code that involves a physical or mental wound, injury,
disability or condition of a nature that reasonably indicates abuse or neglect
of a child under 18 years of age or of a child with a developmental disability
or physical impairment under 21 years of age shall not begin to run until
either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The victim of the offense reaches the age of majority.
      (2)   A public children services agency, or a municipal or county peace
officer that is not the parent or guardian of the child, in the county in which
the child resides or in which the abuse or neglect is occurring or has occurred
has been notified that abuse or neglect is known, suspected or believed to have
occurred.
   (k)   As used in this section, “peace officer” has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2935.01.
   (l)   (1)   The amendments to divisions (a) and (d) of this section that
took effect on July 16, 2015, apply to a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03
committed on and after July 16, 2015, and apply to a violation of either of
those sections committed prior to July 16, 2015, if prosecution for that
violation was not barred under this section as it existed on July 16, 2015.
      (2)   The amendment to division (a)(2) of this section that took effect
on April 4, 2023, applies to a conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or
complicity in committing a violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02 if the
conspiracy, attempt, or complicity is committed on or after April 4, 2023, and
applies to a conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing a violation of either of those sections if the conspiracy, attempt,
or complicity was committed prior to April 4, 2023, and prosecution for that
conspiracy, attempt, or complicity was not barred under this section as it
existed on the day prior to April 4, 2023.
(R.C. § 2901.13) (Prior Code, § 606.06)
§ 606.08 REQUIREMENTS FOR CRIMINAL LIABILITY.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, a person is not
guilty of an offense unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person’s liability is based on conduct that includes either a
voluntary act, or an omission to perform an act or duty that the person is
capable of performing;
      (2)   The person has the requisite degree of culpability for each element
as to which a culpable mental state is specified by the language defining the
offense.
   (b)   When the language defining an offense does not specify any degree of
culpability, and plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict criminal
liability for the conduct described in the section, then culpability is not
required for a person to be guilty of the offense. The fact that one division
of a section plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict liability for an
offense defined in that division does not by itself plainly indicate a purpose
to impose strict criminal liability for an offense defined in other divisions
of the section that do not specify a degree of culpability.
   (c)   (1)   When language defining an element of an offense that is related
to knowledge or intent or to which mens rea could fairly be applied neither
specifies culpability nor plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict
liability, the element of the offense is established only if a person acts
recklessly.
      (2)   Division (c)(1) of this section does not apply to offenses defined
in R.C. Title XLV.
      (3)   Division (c)(1) of this section does not relieve the prosecution of
the burden of proving the culpable mental state required by any definition
incorporated into the offense.
   (d)   Voluntary intoxication may not be taken into consideration in
determining the existence of a mental state that is an element of a criminal
offense. Voluntary intoxication does not relieve a person of a duty to act if
failure to act constitutes a criminal offense. Evidence that a person was
voluntarily intoxicated may be admissible to show whether or not the person was
physically capable of performing the act with which the person is charged.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Culpability.” Purpose, knowledge, recklessness or negligence, as
defined in R.C. § 2901.22.
      (2)   “Intoxication.” Includes but is not limited to intoxication
resulting from the ingestion of alcohol, a drug, or alcohol and a drug.
      (3)   “Involuntary acts.” Reflexes, convulsions, body movements during
unconsciousness or sleep, and body movements that are not otherwise a product
of the actor’s volition are “involuntary acts.”
      (4)   “Possession.” A voluntary act if the possessor knowingly procured
or received the thing possessed, or was aware of the possessor’s control of the
thing possessed for a sufficient time to have ended possession.
(R.C. § 2901.21) (Prior Code, § 606.07)
§ 606.09 ORGANIZATIONAL CRIMINAL LIABILITY.
   (a)   An organization may be convicted of an offense under any of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   The offense is a minor misdemeanor committed by an officer, agent
or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s office or employment, except that if the
section defining the offense designates the officers, agents or employees for
whose conduct the organization is accountable or the circumstances under which
it is accountable, those provisions shall apply.
      (2)   A purpose to impose organizational liability plainly appears in the
section defining the offense, and the offense is committed by an officer, agent
or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s office or employment, except that if the
section defining the offense designates the officers, agents or employees for
whose conduct the organization is accountable or the circumstances under which
it is accountable, those provisions shall apply.
      (3)   The offense consists of an omission to discharge a specific duty
imposed by law on the organization.
      (4)   If, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for the
commission of the offense, its commission was authorized, requested, commanded,
tolerated or performed by the board of directors, trustees, partners, or by a
high managerial officer, agent or employee acting in behalf of the organization
and within the scope of such a board’s or person’s office or employment.
   (b)   If strict liability is imposed for the commission of an offense, a
purpose to impose organizational liability shall be presumed, unless the
contrary plainly appears.
   (c)   In a prosecution of an organization for an offense other than one for
which strict liability is imposed, it is a defense that the high managerial
officer, agent or employee having supervisory responsibility over the subject
matter of the offense exercised due diligence to prevent its commission. This
defense is not available if it plainly appears inconsistent with the purpose of
the section defining the offense.
   (d)   As used in this section, “organization” means a corporation for profit
or not for profit, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture,
unincorporated nonprofit association, estate, trust or other commercial or
legal entity. “Organization” does not include an entity organized as or by a
governmental agency for the execution of a governmental program.
(R.C. § 2901.23) (Prior Code, § 606.08)
§ 606.10 PERSONAL ACCOUNTABILITY FOR ORGANIZATIONAL CONDUCT.
   (a)   An officer, agent or employee of an organization, as defined in R.C. §
2901.23, may be prosecuted for an offense committed by the organization, if he
or she acts with the kind of culpability required for the commission of the
offense, and any of the following apply:
      (1)   In the name of the organization or in its behalf, he or she engages
in conduct constituting the offense, or causes another to engage in that
conduct, or tolerates that conduct when it is of a type for which he or she has
direct responsibility;
      (2)   He or she has primary responsibility to discharge a duty imposed on
the organization by law, and the duty is not discharged.
   (b)   When a person is convicted of an offense by reason of this section, he
or she is subject to the same penalty as if he or she had acted in his or her
own behalf.
(R.C. § 2901.24) (Prior Code, § 606.09)
§ 606.11 FALSIFICATION.
   Except as otherwise provided by R.C. § 2921.13, as amended from time to
time.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly swear
or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made, when any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The statement is made in any official proceeding;
      (2)   The statement is made with purpose to incriminate another;
      (3)   The statement is made with purpose to mislead a public official in
performing his or her official function;
      (4)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the payment of
unemployment compensation; Ohio Works First; prevention, retention and
contingency benefits and services; disability financial assistance; retirement
benefits or health care coverage from a state retirement system; economic
development assistance as defined in R.C. § 9.66; or other benefits
administered by a governmental agency or paid out of a public treasury;
      (5)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the issuance by a
governmental agency of a license, permit, authorization, certificate,
registration, release, or provider agreement;
      (6)   The statement is sworn or affirmed before a notary public or
another person empowered to administer oaths;
      (7)   The statement is in writing on or in connection with a report or
return that is required or authorized by law;
      (8)   The statement is in writing and is made with purpose to induce
another to extend credit to or employ the offender, or to confer any degree,
diploma, certificate of attainment, award of excellence, or honor on the
offender, or to extend to or bestow upon the offender any other valuable
benefit or distinction when the person to whom the statement is directed relies
upon it to his or her detriment;
      (9)   The statement is made with purpose to commit or facilitate the
commission of a theft offense;
      (10)   The statement is knowingly made to a probate court in connection
with any action, proceeding, or other matter within its jurisdiction, either
orally or in a written document, including, but not limited to, an application,
petition, complaint, or other pleading, or an inventory, account or report;
      (11)   The statement is made on an account, form, record, stamp, label or
other writing that is required by law;
      (12)   The statement is made in a document or instrument of writing that
purports to be a judgment, lien, or claim of indebtedness and is filed or
recorded with the Secretary of State, a county recorder or the clerk of a court
of record;
      (13)   The statement is made in an application filed with a county
sheriff pursuant to R.C. § 2923.125 in order to obtain or renew a concealed
handgun license or is made in an affidavit submitted to a county sheriff to
obtain a concealed handgun license on a temporary emergency basis under R.C. §
2923.1213; or
      (14)   The statement is required under R.C. § 5743.71 in connection with
the person’s purchase of cigarettes or tobacco products in a delivery sale.
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under division (a)(6) of this section
that the oath or affirmation was administered or taken in an irregular manner.
   (c)   If contradictory statements relating to the same fact are made by the
offender within the period of the statute of limitations for falsification, it
is not necessary for the prosecution to prove which statement was false, but
only that one or the other was false.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), (a)
(5), (a)(6), (a)(7), (a)(8), (a)(10), (a)(11), (a)(12) or (a)(14) of this
section is guilty of falsification. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, falsification is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(9) of this section is guilty of
falsification in a theft offense. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, falsification in a theft offense is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the value of the property or services stolen is $1,000 or more,
falsification in a theft offense is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section in removal
proceedings under R.C. §§ 319.26, 321.37, 507.13 or 733.78 is guilty of
falsification regarding a removal proceeding, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (e)   (1)   No person who has knowingly failed to maintain proof of
financial responsibility in accordance with R.C. § 4509.101 shall produce any
document or present to a peace officer an electronic wireless communications
device that is displaying any text or images with the purpose to mislead a
peace officer upon the request of a peace officer for proof of financial
responsibility made in accordance with R.C. § 4509.101(D)(2).
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (e) is guilty of falsification, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Prior Code, § 606.10) (Ord. 54-2020, passed 4-27-2020)
Statutory reference:
   Civil liability for violations of this section, see R.C. § 2921.13(G)
§ 606.12 FALSE REPORT OF CHILD ABUSE OR NEGLECT.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make or cause another person to make a false
report under R.C. § 2151.421(B) alleging that any person has committed an act
or omission that resulted in a child being an abused child as defined in R.C. §
2151.031 or a neglected child as defined in R.C. § 2151.03.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or causing a false
report of child abuse or child neglect, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.14) (Prior Code, § 606.105)
§ 606.13 COMPOUNDING A CRIME.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly demand, accept or agree to accept anything
of value in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon a pending
criminal prosecution.
   (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section when both
of the following apply:
      (1)   The pending prosecution involved is for a violation of R.C. §
2913.02, 2913.11, 2913.21(B)(2) or 2913.47, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, of which the actor under this section was the victim.
      (2)   The thing of value demanded, accepted or agreed to be accepted, in
consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon the prosecution, did not
exceed an amount that the actor reasonably believed due him or her as
restitution for the loss caused him or her by the offense.
   (c)   When a prosecuting witness abandons or agrees to abandon a prosecution
under division (b) of this section, the abandonment or agreement in no way
binds the state to abandoning the prosecution.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of compounding a crime, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.21) (Prior Code, § 606.11)
§ 606.14 FAILURE TO REPORT A CRIME OR DEATH.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) of this section, no
person, knowing that a felony has been or is being committed, shall knowingly
fail to report the information to law enforcement authorities.
      (2)   No person, knowing that a violation of R.C. § 2913.04(B) has been
or is being committed or that the person has received information derived from
such a violation, shall knowingly fail to report the violation to law
enforcement authorities.
   (b)   Except for conditions that are within the scope of division (e) of
this section, no person giving aid to a sick or injured person shall
negligently fail to report to law enforcement authorities any gunshot or stab
wound treated or observed by the person, or any serious physical harm to
persons that the person knows or has reasonable cause to believe resulted from
an offense of violence.
   (c)   No person who discovers the body or acquires the first knowledge of
the death of a person shall fail to report the death immediately to a physician
or advanced practice registered nurse whom the person knows to be treating the
deceased for a condition from which death at such time would not be unexpected,
or to a law enforcement officer, an ambulance service, an emergency squad, or
the coroner in a political subdivision in which the body is discovered, the
death is believed to have occurred, or knowledge concerning the death is
obtained. For purposes of this division, “advanced practice registered nurse”
does not include a certified registered nurse anesthetist.
   (d)   No person shall fail to provide upon request of the person to whom a
report required by division (c) of this section was made, or to any law
enforcement officer who has reasonable cause to assert the authority to
investigate the circumstances surrounding the death, any facts within his or
her knowledge that may have a bearing on the investigation of the death.
   (e)   (1)   As used in this section, “burn injury” means any of the
following:
         A.   Second or third degree burns;
         B.   Any burns to the upper respiratory tract or laryngeal edema due
to the inhalation of super-heated air;
         C.   Any burn injury or wound that may result in death;
         D.   Any physical harm to persons caused by or as the result of the
use of fireworks, novelties and trick noisemakers, and wire sparklers, as each
is defined by R.C. § 3743.01.
      (2)   No physician, nurse, physician assistant, or limited practitioner
who, outside a hospital, sanitarium or other medical facility, attends or
treats a person who has sustained a burn injury inflicted by an explosion or
other incendiary device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a
violent, malicious or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury
immediately to the local arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the
jurisdiction in which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local
law enforcement authorities.
      (3)   No manager, superintendent or other person in charge of a hospital,
sanitarium or other medical facility in which a person is attended or treated
for any burn injury inflicted by an explosion or other incendiary device, or
that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a violent, malicious or
criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury immediately to the local
arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the jurisdiction in which the person
is attended or treated, or otherwise to local law enforcement authorities.
      (4)   No person who is required to report any burn injury under division
(e)(2) or (e)(3) of this section shall fail to file, within three working days
after attending or treating the victim, a written report of the burn injury
with the office of the State Fire Marshal. The report shall be made on a form
provided by the State Fire Marshal.
      (5)   Anyone participating in the making of reports under division (e) of
this section or anyone participating in a judicial proceeding resulting from
the reports is immune from any civil or criminal liability that otherwise might
be incurred or imposed as a result of such actions. Notwithstanding R.C. §
4731.22, the physician-patient relationship or advanced practice registered
nurse-patient relationship is not a ground for excluding evidence regarding a
person’s burn injury or the cause of the burn injury in any judicial proceeding
resulting from a report submitted under division (e) of this section.
   (f)   (1)   No person who knows that a licensed medical professional has
committed an offense under R.C. Chapter 2907, a violation of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to such offense, or a substantially
equivalent criminal offense in another jurisdiction, against a patient of the
licensed medical professional shall fail to report such knowledge to law
enforcement authorities within 30 days of obtaining the knowledge.
      (2)   Except for a self-report or participation in the offense or
violation being reported, any person who makes a report within the 30-day
period provided in division (f)(1) of this section or any person who
participates in a judicial proceeding that results from such report is immune
from civil or criminal liability that otherwise might be incurred or imposed as
a result of making that report or participating in that proceeding so long as
the person is acting in good faith without fraud or malice.
      (3)   The physician-patient relationship or physician assistant-patient
relationship is not a ground for excluding evidence regarding the person's
knowledge of a licensed medical professional's commission of an offense or
violation reported under division (f)(1) of this section, against that licensed
medical professional in any judicial proceeding resulting from a report made
under that division.
      (4)   As used in division (f) of this section, "licensed medical
professional" has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
   (g)   (1)   Any doctor of medicine or osteopathic medicine, hospital intern
or resident, nurse, psychologist, social worker, independent social worker,
social work assistant, licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed
professional counselor, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage
and family therapist who knows or has reasonable cause to believe that a
patient or client has been the victim of domestic violence, as defined in R.C.
§ 3113.31, shall note that knowledge or belief and the basis for it in the
patient’s or client’s records.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 4731.22, the physician-patient privilege or
advanced practice registered nurse-patient privilege shall not be a ground for
excluding any information regarding the report containing the knowledge or
belief noted under division (g)(1) of this section, and the information may be
admitted as evidence in accordance with the Rules of Evidence.
   (h)   Division (a) or (d) of this section does not require disclosure of
information, when any of the following applies:
      (1)   The information is privileged by reason of the relationship between
attorney and client; physician and patient; advanced practice registered nurse
and patient; licensed psychologist or licensed school psychologist and client;
licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed professional counselor,
independent social worker, social worker, independent marriage and family
therapist, or marriage and family therapist and client; member of the clergy,
rabbi, minister, or priest and any person communicating information
confidentially to the member of the clergy, rabbi, minister, or priest for a
religious counseling purpose of a professional character; husband and wife; or
a communications assistant and those who are a party to a telecommunications
relay service call.
      (2)   The information would tend to incriminate a member of the actor’s
immediate family.
      (3)   Disclosure of the information would amount to revealing a news
source, privileged under R.C. § 2739.04 or 2739.12.
      (4)   Disclosure of the information would amount to disclosure by a
member of the ordained clergy of an organized religious body of a confidential
communication made to that member of the clergy in that member’s capacity as a
member of the clergy by a person seeking the aid or counsel of that member of
the clergy.
      (5)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of the actor’s duties in connection with a bona fide
program of treatment or services for persons with drug dependencies or persons
in danger of drug dependence, which program is maintained or conducted by a
hospital, clinic, person, agency, or community addiction services provider
whose alcohol and drug addiction services are certified pursuant to R.C. §
5119.36.
      (6)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of the actor’s duties in connection with a bona fide
program for providing counseling services to victims of crimes that are
violations of R.C. § 2907.02 or R.C. § 2907.05 or to victims of felonious
sexual penetration in violation of former R.C. § 2907.12. As used in this
division, “counseling services” include services provided in an informal
setting by a person who, by education or experience, is competent to provide
those services.
   (i)   No disclosure of information pursuant to this section gives rise to
any liability or recrimination for a breach of privilege or confidence.
   (j)   Whoever violates division (a), (b), or (f)(1) of this section is
guilty of failure to report a crime. Violation of division (a)(1) or (f)(1) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Violation of division (a)
(2) or (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (k)   Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this section is guilty of
failure to report knowledge of a death, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (l)   (1)   Whoever negligently violates division (e) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever knowingly violates division (e) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (m)   As used in this section, “nurse” includes an advanced practice
registered nurse, registered nurse, and licensed practical nurse.
(R.C. § 2921.22) (Prior Code, § 606.12)
§ 606.15 FAILURE TO AID A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   (a)   No person shall negligently fail or refuse to aid a law enforcement
officer, when called upon for assistance in preventing or halting the
commission of an offense, or in apprehending or detaining an offender, when the
aid can be given without a substantial risk of physical harm to the person
giving it.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to aid a law
enforcement officer, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2921.23) (Prior Code, § 606.13)
§ 606.16 OBSTRUCTING OFFICIAL BUSINESS.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so and with purpose to prevent,
obstruct or delay the performance by a public official of any authorized act
within the public official’s official capacity, shall do any act that hampers
or impedes a public official in the performance of the public official’s lawful
duties.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing official
business. Except as otherwise provided in this division, obstructing official
business is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If a violation of this section
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, obstructing official business is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.31) (Prior Code, § 606.14)
§ 606.17 OBSTRUCTING JUSTICE.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension,
prosecution, conviction or punishment of another for crime, or to assist
another to benefit from the commission of a crime, and no person, with purpose
to hinder the discovery, apprehension, prosecution, adjudication as a
delinquent child, or disposition of a child for an act that if committed by an
adult would be a crime or to assist a child to benefit from the commission of
an act that if committed by an adult would be a crime, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Harbor or conceal the other person or child.
      (2)   Provide the other person or child with money, transportation, a
weapon, a disguise or other means of avoiding discovery or apprehension.
      (3)   Warn the other person or child of impending discovery or
apprehension.
      (4)   Destroy or conceal physical evidence of the crime or act, or induce
any person to withhold testimony or information or to elude legal process
summoning him or her to testify or supply evidence.
      (5)   Communicate false information to any person.
      (6)   Prevent or obstruct any person, by means of force, intimidation or
deception, from performing any act to aid in the discovery, apprehension or
prosecution of the other person or child.
   (b)   A person may be prosecuted for, and may be convicted of or adjudicated
a delinquent child for committing, a violation of division (a) of this section
regardless of whether the person or child aided ultimately is apprehended for,
is charged with, is convicted of, pleads guilty to or is adjudicated a
delinquent child for committing the crime or act the person or child aided
committed. The crime or act the person or child aided committed shall be used
under division (c) of this section in determining the penalty for violation of
division (a) of this section, regardless of whether the person or child aided
ultimately is apprehended for, is charged with, is convicted of, pleads guilty
to or is adjudicated a delinquent child for committing the crime or act the
person or child aided committed.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing justice.
      (1)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a misdemeanor or if
the act committed by the child aided would be a misdemeanor if committed by an
adult, obstructing justice is a misdemeanor of the same degree as the crime
committed by the person aided or a misdemeanor of the same degree that the act
committed by the child aided would be if committed by an adult.
      (2)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a felony or if the
act committed by the child aided would be a felony if committed by an adult, or
if the crime or act committed by the person or child aided is an act of
terrorism, obstructing justice is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (d)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Act of terrorism.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.21.
      (2)   “Adult” and “child.” Have the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.011.
      (3)   “Delinquent child.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.
(R.C. § 2921.32) (Prior Code, § 606.15)
§ 606.18 RESISTING ARREST.
   (a)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of himself, herself or another.
   (b)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person and, during the course of or as a
result of the resistance or interference, cause physical harm to a law
enforcement officer.
   (c)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person if either of the following
applies:
      (1)   The offender, during the course of or as a result of the resistance
or interference, recklessly causes physical harm to a law enforcement officer
by means of a deadly weapon; or
      (2)   The offender, during the course of the resistance or interference,
brandishes a deadly weapon.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of resisting arrest. A
violation of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. A violation of division (c) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (e)   As used in this section, “deadly weapon” has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2923.11.
(R.C. § 2921.33) (Prior Code, § 606.16)
Statutory reference:
   Unlawful taking of deadly weapon from law enforcement officer, felony, see
R.C. § 2911.01
§ 606.19 COMPLIANCE WITH LAWFUL ORDER OF POLICE OFFICER; FLEEING.
   (a)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any police officer invested with authority to direct, control or regulate
traffic.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as willfully to elude or
flee a police officer after receiving a visible or audible signal from a police
officer to bring the person’s motor vehicle to a stop.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to comply
with an order or signal of a police officer.
      (2)   A violation of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (c)(4) and (c)(5) of this section,
a violation of division (b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   A violation of division (b) of this section is a felony and shall
be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier of fact
finds by proof beyond a reasonable doubt that in committing the offense, the
offender was fleeing immediately after the commission of a felony.
      (5)   A.   A violation of division (b) of this section is a felony and
shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier
of fact finds any of the following by proof beyond a reasonable doubt:
            1.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender was a
proximate cause of serious physical harm to persons or property.
            2.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender caused a
substantial risk of serious physical harm to persons or property.
         B.   If a police officer pursues an offender who is violating division
(b) of this section and division (c)(5)A. of this section applies, the
sentencing court, in determining the seriousness of an offender’s conduct for
purposes of sentencing the offender for a violation of division (b) of this
section, shall consider, along with the factors set forth in R.C. §§ 2929.12
and 2929.13 that are required to be considered, all of the following:
            1.   The duration of the pursuit;
            2.   The distance of the pursuit;
            3.   The rate of speed at which the offender operated the motor
vehicle during the pursuit;
            4.   Whether the offender failed to stop for traffic lights or stop
signs during the pursuit;
            5.   The number of traffic lights or stop signs for which the
offender failed to stop during the pursuit;
            6.   Whether the offender operated the motor vehicle during the
pursuit without lighted lights during a time when lighted lights are required;
            7.   Whether the offender committed a moving violation during the
pursuit;
            8.   The number of moving violations the offender committed during
the pursuit;
            9.   Any other relevant factors indicating that the offender’s
conduct is more serious than conduct normally constituting the offense.
   (d)   In addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of division
(a) of this section, the court shall impose a class five suspension from the
range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). If the offender previously has been
found guilty of an offense under this section or under R.C. § 2921.331 or any
other substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, in addition to any other
sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class one suspension
as described in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(1). The court may grant limited driving
privileges to the offender on a suspension imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of this section as set forth in R.C. § 4510.021. No judge shall suspend any
portion of the suspension under a class one suspension of an offender’s
license, permit, or privilege required by this division.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Moving violation.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2743.70.
      (2)   “Police officer.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 2921.331(A) - (C), (E), (F)) (Prior Code, § 606.165)
§ 606.20 HAVING AN UNLAWFUL INTEREST IN A PUBLIC CONTRACT.
   (a)   No public official shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Authorize or employ the authority of the public official’s office
to secure authorization of any public contract in which the public official, a
member of the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s
business associates has an interest.
      (2)   Authorize or employ the authority or influence of the public
official’s office to secure the investment of public funds in any share, bond,
mortgage or other security with respect to which the public official, a member
of the public official’s family or any of the public official’s business
associates either has an interest, is an underwriter or receives any brokerage,
origination or servicing fees.
      (3)   During the public official’s term of office or within one year
thereafter, occupy any position of profit in the prosecution of a public
contract authorized by the public official or by a legislative body, commission
or board of which the public official was a member at the time of
authorization, unless the contract was let by competitive bidding to the lowest
and best bidder.
      (4)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
entered into by or for the use of the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality with which the public official is connected.
      (5)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
that is not let by competitive bidding when required by law, and that involves
more than $150.
   (b)   In the absence of bribery or a purpose to defraud, a public official,
member of a public official’s family or any of a public official’s business
associates shall not be considered as having an interest in a public contract
or the investment of public funds, if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The interest of that person is limited to owning or controlling
shares of the corporation, or being a creditor of the corporation or other
organization, that is the contractor on the public contract involved, or that
is the issuer of the security in which public funds are invested.
      (2)   The shares owned or controlled by that person do not exceed 5% of
the outstanding shares of the corporation, and the amount due that person as
creditor does not exceed 5% of the total indebtedness of the corporation or
other organization.
      (3)   That person, prior to the time the public contract is entered into,
files with the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality
involved, an affidavit giving that person’s exact status in connection with the
corporation or other organization.
   (c)   This section does not apply to a public contract in which a public
official, member of a public official’s family, or one of a public official’s
business associates has an interest, when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The subject of the public contract is necessary supplies or
services for the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved.
      (2)   The supplies or services are unobtainable elsewhere for the same or
lower cost, or are being furnished to the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality as part of a continuing course of dealing established
prior to the public official’s becoming associated with the political
subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality involved.
      (3)   The treatment accorded the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality is either preferential to or the same as that
accorded other customers or clients in similar transactions.
      (4)   The entire transaction is conducted at arm’s length, with full
knowledge by the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved, of the interest of the public official, member of the
public official’s family, or business associate, and the public official takes
no part in the deliberations or decision of the political subdivision or
governmental agency or instrumentality with respect to the public contract.
   (d)   Division (a)(4) of this section does not prohibit participation by a
public employee in any housing program funded by public moneys if the public
employee otherwise qualifies for the program and does not use the authority or
influence of the public employee’s office or employment to secure benefits from
the program and if the moneys are to be used on the primary residence of the
public employee. This participation does not constitute an unlawful interest in
a public contract in violation of this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of having an unlawful interest
in a public contract. Violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Violation of division
(a)(3), (a)(4) or (a)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (f)   It is not a violation of this section for a prosecuting attorney to
appoint assistants and employees in accordance with R.C. §§ 309.06 and
2921.421, or for a chief legal officer of a municipality or an official
designated as prosecutor in a municipality to appoint assistants and employees
in accordance with R.C. §§ 733.621 and 2921.421, or for a township law director
appointed under R.C. § 504.15 to appoint assistants and employees in accordance
with R.C. §§ 504.151 and 2921.421.
   (g)   Any public contract in which a public official, a member of the public
official’s family or any of the public official’s business associates has an
interest in violation of this section is void and unenforceable. Any contract
securing the investment of public funds in which a public official, a member of
the public official’s family or any of the public official’s business
associates has an interest, is an underwriter or receives any brokerage,
origination or servicing fees and that was entered into in violation of this
section is void and unenforceable.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Chief legal officer.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 733.621.
      (2)   “Public contract.” Any of the following:
         A.   The purchase or acquisition, or a contract for the purchase or
acquisition, of property or services by or for the use of the state or any of
its political subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either,
including the employment of an individual by the state, any of its political
subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either.
         B.   A contract for the design, construction, alteration, repair or
maintenance of any public property.
(R.C. § 2921.42) (Prior Code, § 606.17)
§ 606.21 SOLICITING OR RECEIVING IMPROPER COMPENSATION.
   (a)   No public servant shall knowingly solicit or accept and no person
shall knowingly promise or give to a public servant either of the following:
      (1)   Any compensation, other than as allowed by R.C. § 102.03(G), (H),
(I) or other provisions of law, to perform the public servant’s official
duties, to perform any other act or service in the public servant’s public
capacity, for the general performance of the duties of the public servant’s
public office or public employment, or as a supplement to the public servant’s
public compensation.
      (2)   Additional or greater fees or costs than are allowed by law to
perform the public servant’s official duties.
   (b)   No public servant for the public servant’s own personal or business
use and no person for the person’s own personal or business use or for the
personal or business use of a public servant or party official, shall solicit
or accept anything of value in consideration of either of the following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment or agency.
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion or other
material aspects of employment.
   (c)   No person for the benefit of a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity shall coerce any contribution in consideration of either of the
following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment or agency.
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion or other
material aspects of employment.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of soliciting improper
compensation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (e)   A public servant who is convicted of a violation of this section is
disqualified from holding any public office, employment or position of trust in
this state for a period of seven years from the date of conviction.
   (f)   Divisions (a), (b) and (c) of this section do not prohibit any person
from making voluntary contributions to a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity or prohibit a political party, campaign committee, legislative campaign
fund, political action committee or political contributing entity from
accepting voluntary contributions.
(R.C. § 2921.43) (Prior Code, § 606.18)
§ 606.22 DERELICTION OF DUTY.
   (a)   No law enforcement officer shall negligently do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to serve a lawful warrant without delay.
      (2)   Fail to prevent or halt the commission of an offense or to
apprehend an offender, when it is in the law enforcement officer’s power to do
so alone or with available assistance.
   (b)   No law enforcement, ministerial or judicial officer shall negligently
fail to perform a lawful duty in a criminal case or proceeding.
   (c)   No officer, having charge of a detention facility, shall negligently
do any of the following:
      (1)   Allow the detention facility to become littered or unsanitary.
      (2)   Fail to provide persons confined in the detention facility with
adequate food, clothing, bedding, shelter and medical attention.
      (3)   Fail to control an unruly prisoner, or to prevent intimidation of
or physical harm to a prisoner by another.
      (4)   Allow a prisoner to escape.
      (5)   Fail to observe any lawful and reasonable regulation for the
management of the detention facility.
   (d)   No public official shall recklessly create a deficiency, incur a
liability or expend a greater sum than is appropriated by the Council for the
use in any one year of the department, agency, or institution with which the
public official is connected.
   (e)   No public servant shall recklessly fail to perform a duty expressly
imposed by law with respect to the public servant’s office, or recklessly do
any act expressly forbidden by law with respect to the public servant’s office.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of dereliction of duty, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (g)   Except as otherwise provided by law, a public servant who is a county
treasurer; county auditor; township fiscal officer; city auditor; city
treasurer; village fiscal officer; village clerk-treasurer; village clerk; in
the case of a municipal corporation having a charter that designates an officer
who, by virtue of the charter, has duties and functions similar to those of the
city or village officers referred to in this section, the officer so designated
by the charter; school district treasurer; fiscal officer of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314; treasurer of a science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics school established under R.C. Chapter 3326; or
fiscal officer of a college-preparatory boarding school established under R.C.
Chapter 3328 and is convicted of or pleads guilty to dereliction of duty is
disqualified from holding any public office, employment, or position of trust
in this state for four years following the date of conviction or of entry of
the plea, and is not entitled to hold any public office until any repayment or
restitution required by the court is satisfied.
   (h)   As used in this section, “public servant” includes the following:
      (1)   An officer or employee of a contractor as defined in R.C. § 9.08;
      (2)   A fiscal officer employed by the operator of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314 or by the operator of a college-preparatory
boarding school established under R.C. Chapter 3328.
(R.C. § 2921.44) (Prior Code, § 606.19)
§ 606.23 INTERFERING WITH CIVIL RIGHTS; DISCRIMINATION AGAINST HANDICAPPED.
   (a)   No public servant, under color of the public servant’s office,
employment, or authority, shall knowingly deprive, or conspire or attempt to
deprive any person of a constitutional or statutory right.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interfering with civil
rights, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.45) (Prior Code, § 606.20)
Statutory reference:
   Restraining or confining pregnant children or pregnant women, see R.C. §
2152.75(B) and R.C. § 2901.10
§ 606.24 ATTEMPTS.
   (a)   No person, purposely or knowingly, and when purpose or knowledge is
sufficient culpability for the commission of an offense, shall engage in
conduct that, if successful, would constitute or result in the offense.
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that, in retrospect,
commission of the offense that was the object of the attempt was either
factually or legally impossible under the attendant circumstances, if that
offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the
actor believed them to be.
   (c)   No person who is convicted of committing a specific offense, of
complicity in the commission of an offense, or of conspiracy to commit an
offense, shall be convicted of an attempt to commit the same offense in
violation of this section.
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
actor abandoned his or her effort to commit the offense or otherwise prevented
its commission, under circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary
renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an attempt to commit
an offense. An attempt to commit aggravated murder, murder or an offense for
which the maximum penalty is imprisonment for life is a felony of the first
degree, to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to commit a
drug abuse offense for which the penalty is determined by the amount or number
of unit doses of the controlled substance involved in the drug abuse offense is
an offense of the same degree as the drug abuse offense attempted would be if
that drug abuse offense had been committed and had involved an amount or number
of unit doses of the controlled substance that is within the next lower range
of controlled substance amounts than was involved in the attempt. An attempt to
commit any other offense is an offense of the next lesser degree than the
offense attempted. In the case of an attempt to commit an offense other than a
violation of R.C. Chapter 3734 that is not specifically classified, an attempt
is a misdemeanor of the first degree if the offense attempted is a felony, and
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the offense attempted is a misdemeanor.
In the case of an attempt to commit a violation of any provision of R.C.
Chapter 3734, other than R.C. § 3734.18, that relates to hazardous wastes, an
attempt is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to
commit a minor misdemeanor, or to engage in conspiracy, is not an offense under
this section.
      (2)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to division (e)
(1) of this section for an attempt to commit aggravated murder or murder in
violation of division (a) of this section, if the offender used a motor vehicle
as the means to attempt to commit the offense, the court shall impose upon the
offender a class two suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or
nonresident operating privilege as specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(2).
      (3)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to attempted rape and
also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a specification of the type described
in R.C. §§ 2941.1418, 2941.1419, or 2941.1420, the offender shall be sentenced
to a prison term or term of life imprisonment pursuant to R.C. § 2971.03.
   (f)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Drug abuse offense” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
      (2)   “Motor vehicle” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
(R.C. § 2923.02) (Prior Code, § 606.21) (Ord. 149-84, passed 10-22-1984)
§ 606.25 COMPLICITY.
   (a)   No person, acting with the kind of culpability required for the
commission of an offense, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Solicit or procure another to commit the offense;
      (2)   Aid or abet another in committing the offense;
      (3)   Conspire with another to commit the offense in violation of R.C. §
2923.01;
      (4)   Cause an innocent or irresponsible person to commit the offense.
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that no person with
whom the accused was in complicity has been convicted as a principal offender.
   (c)   No person shall be convicted of complicity under this section unless
an offense is actually committed, but a person may be convicted of complicity
in an attempt to commit an offense in violation of R.C. § 2923.02 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (d)   If an alleged accomplice of the defendant testifies against the
defendant in a case in which the defendant is charged with complicity in the
commission of or an attempt to commit an offense, an attempt to commit an
offense, or an offense, the court shall charge the jury in accordance with R.C.
§ 2923.03(D).
   (e)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that,
prior to the commission of or attempt to commit the offense, the actor
terminated his or her complicity, under circumstances manifesting a complete
and voluntary renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of complicity in the
commission of an offense, and shall be prosecuted and punished as if he or she
were a principal offender. A charge of complicity may be stated in terms of
this section, or in terms of the principal offense.
(R.C. § 2923.03) (Prior Code, § 606.22)
§ 606.26 DETENTION OF SHOPLIFTERS AND THOSE COMMITTING MOTION PICTURE PIRACY;
PROTECTION OF INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Archival institution.” Any public or private building, structure,
or shelter in which are stored historical documents, devices, records,
manuscripts or items of public interest, which historical materials are stored
to preserve the materials or the information in the materials, to disseminate
the information contained in the materials, or to make the materials available
for public inspection or for inspection by certain persons who have a
particular interest in, use for, or knowledge concerning the materials.
      (2)   “Audiovisual recording function” and “facility.” Have the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2913.07.
      (3)   “Museum.” Any public or private nonprofit institution that is
permanently organized for primarily educational or aesthetic purposes, owns or
borrows objects or items of public interest, and cares for and exhibits to the
public the objects or items.
      (4)   “Pretrial diversion program.” Means a rehabilitative, educational
program designed to reduce recidivism and promote personal responsibility that
is at least four hours in length and that has been approved by any court in
this state.
   (b)   A merchant, or an employee or agent of a merchant, who has probable
cause to believe that things offered for sale by a mercantile establishment
have been unlawfully taken by a person, may, for the purposes set forth in
division (d) below, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable
length of time within the mercantile establishment or its immediate vicinity.
   (c)   Any officer, employee or agent of a library, museum or archival
institution may, for the purposes set forth in division (d) below or for the
purpose of conducting a reasonable investigation of a belief that the person
has acted in a manner described in divisions (c)(1) and (c)(2) below, detain a
person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time within, or in the
immediate vicinity of, the library, museum or archival institution, if the
officer, employee or agent has probable cause to believe that the person has:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly moved, defaced, damaged,
destroyed or otherwise improperly tampered with property owned by or in the
custody of the library, museum or archival institution; or
      (2)   With purpose to deprive the library, museum or archival institution
of property owned by it or in its custody, knowingly obtained or exerted
control over the property without the consent of the owner or person authorized
to give consent, beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the
owner or person authorized to give consent, by deception, or by threat.
   (d)   An officer, agent or employee of a library, museum or archival
institution pursuant to division (c) above or a merchant or an employee or
agent of a merchant pursuant to division (b) above may detain another person
for any of the following purposes:
      (1)   To recover the property that is the subject of the unlawful taking,
criminal mischief or theft;
      (2)   To cause an arrest to be made by a peace officer;
      (3)   To obtain a warrant of arrest;
      (4)   To offer the person, if the person is suspected of the unlawful
taking, criminal mischief, or theft and notwithstanding any other provision of
this Code or the Ohio Revised Code, an opportunity to complete a pretrial
diversion program and to inform the person of the other legal remedies
available to the library, museum, archival institution, or merchant.
   (e)   The owner or lessee of a facility in which a motion picture is being
shown, or the owner’s or lessee’s employee or agent, who has probable cause to
believe that a person is or has been operating an audiovisual recording
function of a device in violation of R.C. § 2917.07 may, for the purpose of
causing an arrest to be made by a peace officer or of obtaining an arrest
warrant, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of
time within the facility or its immediate vicinity.
   (f)   The officer, agent or employee of the library, museum or archival
institution, the merchant or an employee or agent of a merchant, or the owner,
lessee, employee or agent of the facility acting under divisions (b), (c) or
(e) above shall not search the person detained, search or seize any property
belonging to the person detained without the person’s consent, or use undue
restraint upon the person detained.
   (g)   Any peace officer may arrest without a warrant any person that the
officer has probable cause to believe has committed any act described in
division (c)(1) or (c)(2) above, that the officer has probable cause to believe
has committed an unlawful taking in a mercantile establishment, or that the
officer has reasonable cause to believe has committed an act prohibited by R.C.
§ 2913.07. An arrest under this division shall be made within a reasonable time
after the commission of the act or unlawful taking.
(R.C. § 2935.041) (Prior Code, § 606.23)
§ 606.27 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED OR FORFEITED PROPERTY HELD BY POLICE
DEPARTMENT.
   (a)   Safekeeping of property in custody.
      (1)   A.   Any property that has been lost, abandoned, stolen, seized
pursuant to a search warrant, or otherwise lawfully seized or forfeited and
that is in the custody of the Police Department shall be kept safely by the
Police Department, pending the time it no longer is needed as evidence or for
another lawful purpose, and shall be disposed of pursuant to this section or
R.C. §§ 2981.12 and 2981.13.
         B.   This section does not apply to the custody and disposal of any of
the following:
            1.   Vehicles subject to forfeiture under R.C. Title 45, except as
provided in division (b)(1)F. of this section;
            2.   Abandoned junk motor vehicles or other property of negligible
value;
            3.   Property held by a department of rehabilitation and correction
institution that is unclaimed, that does not have an identified owner, that the
owner agrees to dispose of or that is identified by the Department as having
little value;
            4.   Animals taken, and devices used in unlawfully taking animals,
under R.C. § 1531.20;
            5.   Controlled substances sold by a peace officer in the
performance of the officer’s official duties under R.C. § 3719.141;
            6.   Property recovered by a township law enforcement agency under
R.C. §§ 505.105 to 505.109;
            7.   Property held and disposed of under an ordinance of the
municipality or under R.C. §§ 737.29 to 737.33, except that if the municipality
has received notice of a citizens’ reward program as provided in division (b)
(5) of this section and disposes of property under an ordinance shall pay 25%
of any moneys acquired from any sale or auction to the citizens’ reward
program.
      (2)   A.   The Police Department shall adopt and comply with a written
internal control policy that does all of the following:
            1.   Provides for keeping detailed records as to the amount of
property acquired by the Police Department and the date property was acquired;
            2.   Provides for keeping detailed records of the disposition of
the property, which shall include but not be limited to both of the following:
               a.   The manner in which it was disposed, the date of
disposition, detailed financial records concerning any property sold and the
name of any person who received the property. The record shall not identify or
enable identification of the individual officer who seized any item of
property.
               b.   An itemized list of the specific expenditures made with
amounts that are gained from the sale of the property and that are retained by
the agency, including the specific amount expended on each expenditure, except
that the policy shall not provide for or permit the identification of any
specific expenditure that is made in an ongoing investigation.
            3.   Complies with R.C. § 2981.13 if the Police Department has a
law enforcement trust fund or similar fund created under that section.
         B.   The records kept under the internal control policy shall be open
to public inspection during the Police Department’s regular business hours. The
policy adopted under this section is a public record open for inspection under
R.C. § 149.43.
      (3)   A.   The Police Department, with custody of property to be disposed
of under this section or R.C. § 2981.12 or 2981.13, shall make a reasonable
effort to locate persons entitled to possession of the property, to notify them
of when and where it may be claimed, and to return the property to them at the
earliest possible time. In the absence of evidence identifying persons entitled
to possession, it is sufficient notice to advertise using at least one of the
following methods:
            1.   In the print or digital edition of a newspaper of general
circulation in the county;
            2.   On the official public notice web site established under R.C.
§ 125.182;
            3.   On the web site and social media account of the county.
         B.   The notices shall briefly describe the nature of the property in
custody and inviting persons to view and establish their right to it.
      (4)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   “Citizens’ reward program.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
9.92.
         B.   “Law enforcement agency.” Includes correctional institutions.
         C.   “Township law enforcement agency.” An organized police department
of a township, a township police district, a joint police district, or the
office of a township constable.
(R.C. § 2981.11)
   (b)   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property.
      (1)   Unclaimed or forfeited property in the custody of the Police
Department, other than property described in division (a)(1)B. of this section,
shall be disposed of by order of any court of record that has territorial
jurisdiction over the municipality, as follows:
         A.   Drugs shall be disposed of pursuant to R.C. § 3719.11 or placed
in the custody of the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States for
disposal or use for medical or scientific purposes under applicable federal
law.
         B.   Firearms and dangerous ordnance suitable for police work may be
given to a law enforcement agency for that purpose. Firearms suitable for
sporting use or as museum pieces or collectors’ items may be sold at public
auction pursuant to division (b)(2) of this section. The Police Department may
sell other firearms and dangerous ordnance to a federally licensed firearms
dealer in a manner that the court considers proper. The Police Department shall
destroy any firearms or dangerous ordnance not given to a law enforcement
agency or sold or shall send them to the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation for destruction by the Bureau.
         C.   Obscene materials shall be destroyed.
         D.   Beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol seized from a person who
does not hold a permit issued under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 or otherwise
forfeited to the state for an offense under R.C. § 4301.45 or 4301.53 shall be
sold by the Division of Liquor Control if the Division determines that it is
fit for sale or shall be placed in the custody of the Investigations Unit in
the Ohio Department of Public Safety and be used for training relating to law
enforcement activities. The Ohio Department of Public Safety, with the
assistance of the Division of Liquor Control, shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 to provide for the distribution to state or local law
enforcement agencies upon their request. If any tax imposed under R.C. Title 43
has not been paid in relation to the beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol, any
moneys acquired from the sale shall first be used to pay the tax. All other
money collected under this division (b)(1)D. shall be paid into the State
Treasury. Any beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol that the Division
determines to be unfit for sale shall be destroyed.
         E.   Money received by an inmate of a correctional institution from an
unauthorized source or in an unauthorized manner shall be returned to the
sender, if known, or deposited in the inmates’ industrial and entertainment
fund of the institution if the sender is not known.
         F.   1.   Any mobile instrumentality forfeited under R.C. Chapter 2981
may be given to the law enforcement agency that initially seized the mobile
instrumentality for use in performing its duties, if the agency wants the
mobile instrumentality. The agency shall take the mobile instrumentality
subject to any security interest or lien on the mobile instrumentality.
            2.   Vehicles and vehicle parts forfeited under R.C. §§ 4549.61 to
4549.63 may be given to a law enforcement agency for use in performing its
duties. Those parts may be incorporated into any other official vehicle. Parts
that do not bear vehicle identification numbers or derivatives of them may be
sold or disposed of as provided by rules of the Director of Public Safety.
Parts from which a vehicle identification number or derivative of it has been
removed, defaced, covered, altered or destroyed and that are not suitable for
police work or incorporation into an official vehicle shall be destroyed and
sold as junk or scrap.
         G.   Computers, computer networks, computer systems and computer
software suitable for police work may be given to a law enforcement agency for
that purpose or disposed of under division (b)(2) of this section.
         H.   Money seized in connection with a violation of R.C. § 2905.32,
2907.21, or 2907.22 shall be deposited in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund
created by R.C. § 5101.87.
      (2)   Unclaimed or forfeited property that is not described in division
(b)(1) of this section or division (a)(1)B. of this section, with court
approval, may be used by the law enforcement agency in possession of it. If it
is not used by the agency, it may be sold without appraisal at a public auction
to the highest bidder for cash or disposed of in another manner that the court
considers proper.
      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (b)(1) and (b)(5) of this section
and after compliance with division (b)(4) of this section when applicable, any
moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of pursuant to this section
shall be placed in the General Revenue Fund of the state, or the General Fund
of the municipality.
      (4)   If the property was in the possession of the Police Department in
relation to a delinquent child proceeding in a juvenile court, 10% of any
moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of under this section shall
be applied to one or more community addiction services providers, as defined in
R.C. § 5119.01. A juvenile court shall not specify a services provider, except
as provided in this division, unless the services provider is in the same
county as the court or in a contiguous county. If no services provider is
located in any of those counties, the juvenile court may specify a services
provider anywhere in Ohio. The remaining 90% of the proceeds or cash shall be
applied as provided in division (b)(3) of this section.
      (5)   A.   If the Board of County Commissioners recognizes a citizens’
reward program under R.C. § 9.92, the Board shall notify the Police Department
of the recognition by filing a copy of its resolution conferring that
recognition with the Police Department. When the Board recognizes a citizens’
reward program and the county includes a part, but not all, of the territory of
the municipality, the Board shall so notify the Police Department of the
recognition of the citizens’ reward program only if the county contains the
highest percentage of the municipality’s population.
         B.   Upon being so notified, the Police Department shall pay 25% of
any forfeited proceeds or cash derived from each sale of property disposed of
pursuant to this section to the citizens’ reward program for use exclusively to
pay rewards. No part of the funds may be used to pay expenses associated with
the program. If a citizens’ reward program that operates in more than one
county or in another state in addition to this state receives funds under this
section, the funds shall be used to pay rewards only for tips and information
to law enforcement agencies concerning offenses committed in the county from
which the funds were received.
      (6)   Any property forfeited under R.C. Chapter 2981 not be used to pay
any fine imposed upon a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to an
underlying criminal offense or a different offense arising out of the same
facts and circumstances.
      (7)   Any moneys acquired from the sale of personal effects, tools, or
other property seized because the personal effects, tools, or other property
were used in the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2905.32, 2907.21, or
2907.22 or derived from the proceeds of the commission of a violation of R.C. §
2905.32, 2907.21, or 2907.22 and disposed of pursuant to this division (b)
shall be placed in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund created by R.C. §
5101.87.
(R.C. § 2981.12)
   (c)   Disposition of contraband, proceeds, or instrumentalities. Except as
otherwise provided in R.C. § 2981.13, property ordered forfeited as contraband,
proceeds, or an instrumentality pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2981 shall be disposed
of, used or sold pursuant to division (b) of this section or R.C. § 2981.12. If
the property is to be sold under division (b) of this section or R.C. §
2981.12, the prosecutor shall cause notice of the proposed sale to be given in
accordance with law.
(R.C. § 2981.13(A))
(Prior Code, § 606.24)
Statutory reference:
   Forfeiture of property generally, see R.C. Chapter 2981
§ 606.28 IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Federal law enforcement officer.” An employee of the United States
who serves in a position the duties of which are primarily the investigation,
apprehension or detention of individuals suspected or convicted of offenses
under the criminal laws of the United States.
      (2)   “Impersonate.” To act the part of, assume the identity of, wear the
uniform or any part of the uniform of, or display the identification of a
particular person or of a member of a class of persons with purpose to make
another person believe that the actor is that particular person or is a member
of that class of persons.
      (3)   “Investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.11.
      (4)   “Peace officer.” A Sheriff, Deputy Sheriff, Marshal, Deputy
Marshal, member of the organized police department of a municipal corporation
or township constable, who is employed by a political subdivision of this
state; a member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority
under R.C. § 3735.31(D); a member of a police force employed by a regional
transit authority under R.C. § 306.35(Y); a state university law enforcement
officer appointed under R.C. § 3345.04; a veterans’ home police officer
appointed under R.C. § 5907.02; a special police officer employed by a port
authority under R.C. § 4582.04 or 4582.28; an officer, agent or employee of the
state or any of its agencies, instrumentalities or political subdivisions, upon
whom, by statute, a duty to conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain
laws is imposed and the authority to arrest violators is conferred, within
limits of that statutory duty and authority; or a State Highway Patrol trooper
whose primary duties are to preserve the peace, to protect life and property
and to enforce the laws, ordinances or rules of the state or any of its
political subdivisions.
      (5)   “Private police officer.” Any security guard, special police
officer, private detective or other person who is privately employed in a
police capacity.
   (b)   No person shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation or
federal law enforcement officer.
   (c)   No person, by impersonating a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation or
federal law enforcement officer, shall arrest or detain any person, search any
person or search the property of any person.
   (d)   No person, with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of an
offense, shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer, federal law
enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the municipality or the
state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation.
   (e)   No person shall commit a felony while impersonating a peace officer,
private police officer, federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or
employee of the municipality or of the state or investigator of the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation.
   (f)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b) of this
section that the impersonation of the peace officer, private police officer,
federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the
municipality or of the state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation was for a lawful purpose.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the purpose of a
violation of division (d) of this section is to commit or facilitate the
commission of a felony, a violation of division (d) is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. Whoever violates division (e) of this
section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.51) (Prior Code, § 606.25)
§ 606.29 DISPLAY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY EMBLEM.
   (a)   No person who is not entitled to do so shall knowingly display on a
motor vehicle the emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law
enforcement officers.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of the unlawful display of the
emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law enforcement
officers, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2913.441) (Prior Code, § 606.26)
§ 606.30 USING SHAM LEGAL PROCESS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Lawfully issued.” Adopted, issued or rendered in accordance with
the United States Constitution, the constitution of a state, and the applicable
statutes, rules, regulations and ordinances of the United States, a state and
the political subdivisions of a state.
      (2)   “Political subdivisions.” Municipal corporations, townships,
counties, school districts and all other bodies corporate and politic that are
organized under state law and are responsible for governmental activities only
in geographical areas smaller than that of a state.
      (3)   “Sham legal process.” An instrument that meets all of the following
conditions:
         A.   It is not lawfully issued.
         B.   It purports to do any of the following:
            1.   To be a summons, subpoena, judgment or order of a court, a law
enforcement officer, or a legislative, executive or administrative body.
            2.   To assert jurisdiction over or determine the legal or
equitable status, rights, duties, powers or privileges of any person or
property.
            3.   To require or authorize the search, seizure, indictment,
arrest, trial or sentencing of any person or property.
         C.   It is designed to make another person believe that it is lawfully
issued.
      (4)   “State.” A state of the United States, including without limitation
the state legislature, the highest court of the state that has statewide
jurisdiction, the offices of all elected state officers, and all departments,
boards, offices, commissions, agencies, institutions and other
instrumentalities of the state. “State” does not include the political
subdivisions of the state.
   (b)   No person shall, knowing the sham legal process to be a sham legal
process, do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly issue, display, deliver, distribute or otherwise use sham
legal process.
      (2)   Knowingly use sham legal process to arrest, detain, search or seize
any person or the property of another person.
      (3)   Knowingly commit or facilitate the commission of an offense using
sham legal process.
      (4)   Knowingly commit a felony by using sham legal process.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b)(1) or (b)
(2) of this section that the use of sham legal process was for a lawful
purpose.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using sham legal process. A
violation of division (b)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. A violation of division (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, except that if the purpose of a violation of
division (b)(3) of this section is to commit or facilitate the commission of a
felony, a violation of division (b)(3) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division (b)(4) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.52(A) - (D)) (Prior Code, § 606.27)
§ 606.31 FAILURE TO DISCLOSE PERSONAL INFORMATION.
   (a)   No person who is in a public place shall refuse to disclose the
person’s name, address or date of birth, when requested by a law enforcement
officer who reasonably suspects either of the following:
      (1)   The person is committing, has committed or is about to commit a
criminal offense.
      (2)   The person witnessed any of the following:
         A.   An offense of violence that would constitute a felony under the
laws of this state;
         B.   A felony offense that causes or results in, or creates a
substantial risk of, serious physical harm to another person or property;
         C.   Any attempt or conspiracy to commit, or complicity in committing,
any offenses identified in division (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this section;
         D.   Any conduct reasonably indicating that any offense identified in
division (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this section or any attempt, conspiracy or
complicity described in division (a)(2)C. of this section has been, is being or
is about to be committed.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of failure to
disclose one’s personal information, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (c)   Nothing in division (a) of this section requires a person to answer
any questions beyond that person’s name, address or date of birth. Nothing in
division (a) of this section authorizes a law enforcement officer to arrest a
person for not providing any information beyond the person’s name, address or
date of birth or for refusing to describe the offense observed.
   (d)   It is not a violation of division (a) of this section to refuse to
answer a question that would reveal a person’s age or date of birth if age is
an element of the crime that the person is suspected of committing.
(R.C. § 2921.29)
   (e)   No person entering an airport, train station, port or other similar
critical transportation infrastructure site shall refuse to show identification
when requested by a law enforcement officer when there is a threat to security
and the law enforcement officer is requiring identification of all persons
entering the site.
   (f)   A law enforcement officer may prevent any person who refuses to show
identification when asked under the circumstances described in division (e) of
this section from entering the critical transportation infrastructure site.
(R.C. § 2909.31)
(Prior Code, § 606.28)
§ 606.32 MISUSE OF 9-1-1 SYSTEM.
   (a)   As used in this section, “9-1-1 system” means a system through which
individuals can request emergency service using the telephone number 9-1-1.
(R.C. § 128.01(A))
   (b)   No person shall knowingly use the telephone number of a 9-1-1 system
established under R.C. Chapter 128 to report an emergency if the person knows
that no emergency exists.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly use a 9-1-1 system for a purpose other than
obtaining emergency service.
   (d)   No person shall disclose or use any information concerning telephone
numbers, addresses, or names obtained from the database that serves the public
safety answering point of a 9-1-1 system established under R.C. Chapter 128,
except for any of the following purposes or under any of the following
circumstances:
      (1)   For the purpose of the 9-1-1 system;
      (2)   For the purpose of responding to an emergency call to an emergency
service provider;
      (3)   In the circumstance of the inadvertent disclosure of such
information due solely to technology of the wireless telephone network portion
of the 9-1-1 system not allowing access to the database to be restricted to 9-
1-1 specific answering lines at a public safety answering point;
      (4)   In the circumstance of access to a database being given by a
telephone company that is a wireless service provider to a public utility or
municipal utility in handling customer calls in times of public emergency or
service outages. The charge, terms and conditions for the disclosure or use of
the information for the purpose of such access to a database shall be subject
to the jurisdiction of the Steering Committee;
      (5)   In the circumstance of access to a database given by a telephone
company that is a wireline service provider to a state and local government in
warning of a public emergency, as determined by the Steering Committee. The
charge, terms and conditions for the disclosure or use of that information for
the purpose of access to a database is subject to the jurisdiction of the
Steering Committee.
(R.C. § 128.32(E) - (G))
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 128.99(A), (B))
(Prior Code, § 606.29)
§ 606.33 SELF DEFENSE; LIMITATIONS ON DUTY TO RETREAT PRIOR TO USING FORCE.
   (a)   As used in this section, “residence” has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2901.05.
   (b)   For purposes of any section of this code that sets forth a criminal
offense, a person has no duty to retreat before using force in self-defense,
defense of another, or defense of that person’s residence if that person is in
a place in which the person lawfully has a right to be.
   (c)   A trier of fact shall not consider the possibility of retreat as a
factor in determining whether or not a person who used force in self-defense,
defense of another, or defense of that person’s residence reasonably believed
that the force was necessary to prevent injury, loss, or risk to life or
safety.
(R.C. § 2901.09) (Prior Code, § 606.30)
CHAPTER 610: ADVERTISING, BILLPOSTING AND HANDBILLS
Section
610.01 Advertising on private property
610.02 Advertising on public property
610.03 Real estate “open” signs at intersections
610.04 Impoundment of signs
§ 610.01 ADVERTISING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall stick or post any advertisement, poster, sign,
handbill or placard or any kind upon any building, vehicle, tree, post, fence,
billboard or other structure or thing that is the private property of another
without the permission of the occupant or owner of the same. No person shall
paint, mark, write, print, impress or in any manner attach any notice,
advertisement, name of any commodity or thing, trade mark, symbol or figure of
any kind upon anything that is the property of another without first obtaining
the permission of the owner of such thing on which he or she desires to place
such notice, advertisement, name, mark, symbol or figure.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 1233, passed 11-24-1958; Ord. 94-74, passed 6-10-1974)
§ 610.02 ADVERTISING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall stick, post or attach any advertisement, poster, sign,
handbill or placard of any kind upon any telegraph, telephone, railway or
electric light pole within the city or upon any public building, vehicle,
voting booth, flagging, curb, tree lawn, walk, step, stone or sidewalk. No
person shall write, print, impress or in any manner attach any notice or
advertisement of any kind upon any public building, voting booth, flagging,
curb, tree lawn, step, stone or sidewalk that is the property of the
municipality, within the street lines of the municipality or over which the
municipality or Council has the care, custody or control, except such as may be
required by the laws of the state or upon written permission of the Mayor for a
period not to exceed 60 days.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 94-74, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 63-76, passed 5-10-1976)
§ 610.03 REAL ESTATE “OPEN” SIGNS AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (a)   No sign, either permanent or temporary, shall be placed at the
intersection of two or more streets in the area contained between the paved
portion of the street and the sidewalk or right-of-way line, except that a sign
with the word “open” and a directional arrow may be displayed between the hours
of 1:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. city time. Only one such sign may be placed on each
side of any intersection for the purpose of directing traffic in one direction.
If two or more homes are being held open for inspection on the same street,
only one such sign may be displayed.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Prior Code, § 610.04) (Ord. 63-76, passed 5-10-1976)
§ 610.04 IMPOUNDMENT OF SIGNS.
   Any sign displayed in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or
Chapter 1236 of this code of ordinances shall be seized and held at the city
police station. Notice shall be sent by certified mail to the occupant of the
premises from which a sign is removed advising of such removal and that the
sign shall be returned to the owner upon payment of a storage charge as set
forth in
Chapter 208 of the Administration Code - the General Fee Schedule, and that a
sign not claimed within two weeks from the date of such notice shall be
destroyed.
(Prior Code, § 610.05) (Ord. 24-90, passed 2-12-1990)
CHAPTER 612: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
612.01 Definitions
612.02 Sales to underage persons; prohibitions and misrepresentations
612.03 Sales to intoxicated persons
612.04 Consumption in motor vehicle
612.05 Permit required
612.06 Posting age warning signs
612.07 Open container prohibited
612.08 Hours of sale or consumption
612.09 Conveying intoxicating liquor or cash onto grounds of detention
facilities or other specified governmental facilities
612.10 Sales of low-alcohol beverages to underage persons; prohibitions and
misrepresentations
612.11 Alcohol vaporizing devices prohibited
§ 612.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, whether rectified or diluted with water or not,
whatever its origin may be, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol. The term does
not include denatured alcohol and wood alcohol.
   AT RETAIL. For use or consumption by the purchaser and not for resale.
   BEER.
      (1)   Includes all beverages brewed or fermented wholly or in part from
malt products and containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.
      (2)   Beer, regardless of the percent of alcohol by volume, is not
intoxicating liquor for purposes of this code, the Ohio Revised Code, or any
rules adopted under it.
   CIDER. All liquids that are fit to use for beverage purposes that contain
0.5% of alcohol by volume, but not more than 6% of alcohol by weight that are
made through the normal alcoholic fermentation of the juice of sound, ripe
apples, including without limitation flavored, sparkling or carbonated cider
and cider made from pure condensed apple must.
   CLUB. A corporation or association of individuals organized in good faith
for social, recreational, benevolent, charitable, fraternal, political,
patriotic or athletic purposes, which is the owner, lessor or occupant of a
permanent building or part of a permanent building operated solely for those
purposes, membership in which entails the prepayment of regular dues, and
includes the place so operated.
   COMMUNITY FACILITY. Either of the following:
      (1)   Any convention, sports or entertainment facility or complex, or any
combination of these, that is used by or accessible to the general public and
that is owned or operated in whole or in part by the state, a state agency or a
political subdivision of the state or that is leased from, or located on
property owned by or leased from, the state, a state agency, a political
subdivision of the state or a convention facilities authority created pursuant
to R.C. § 351.02;
      (2)   An area designated as a community entertainment district pursuant
to R.C. § 4301.80.
   CONTROLLED ACCESS ALCOHOL AND BEVERAGE CABINET. A closed container, either
refrigerated, in whole or in part, or nonrefrigerated, access to the interior
of which is restricted by means of a device that requires the use of a key,
magnetic card or similar device and from which beer, intoxicating liquor, other
beverages or food may be sold.
   HOTEL. The same meaning as in R.C. § 3731.01, subject to the exceptions
mentioned in R.C. § 3731.03.
   INTOXICATING LIQUOR and LIQUOR. All liquids and compounds, other than beer,
containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume which are fit to use for beverage
purposes, from whatever source and by whatever process produced, by whatever
name called, and whether they are medicated, proprietary or patented.
INTOXICATING LIQUOR and LIQUOR include cider and alcohol, and all solids and
confections which contain 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.
   LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGE. Any brewed or fermented malt product or any product
made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits or other agricultural products
that contains either no alcohol or less than 0.5% of alcohol by volume. The
beverages described in this definition do not include a soft drink such as root
beer, birch beer or ginger beer.
   MANUFACTURE. All processes by which beer or intoxicating liquor is produced,
whether by distillation, rectifying, fortifying, blending, fermentation,
brewing, or in any other manner.
   MANUFACTURER. Any person engaged in the business of manufacturing beer or
intoxicating liquor.
   MIXED BEVERAGES. Includes bottled and prepared cordials, cocktails,
highballs, and solids and confections that are obtained by mixing any type of
whiskey, neutral spirits, brandy, gin or other distilled spirits with, or over,
carbonated or plain water, pure juices from flowers and plants, and other
flavoring materials. The completed product shall contain not less than 0.5% of
alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume. The phrase
includes the contents of a pod.
   NIGHTCLUB. A place habitually operated for profit, where food is served for
consumption on the premises, and one or more forms of amusement are provided or
permitted for a consideration that may be in the form of a cover charge or may
be included in the price of the food and beverages, or both, purchased by
patrons.
   PERSON. Includes firms and corporations.
   PHARMACY. An establishment as defined in R.C. § 4729.01, that is under the
management or control of a licensed pharmacist in accordance with R.C. §
4729.27.
   POD. Means a sealed capsule made from plastic, glass, aluminum, or a
combination thereof to which all of the following apply:
      (1)   The capsule contains intoxicating liquor of more than 21% of
alcohol by volume.
      (2)   The capsule also contains a concentrated flavoring mixture.
      (3)   The contents of the capsule are not readily accessible or intended
for consumption unless certain manufacturer’s processing instructions are
followed.
      (4)   The instructions include releasing the contents of the capsule
through a machine specifically designed to process the contents.
      (5)   After being properly processed according to the manufacturer’s
instructions, the final product produced from the capsule contains not less
than 0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume.
   RESTAURANT. A place located in a permanent building provided with space and
accommodations wherein, in consideration of the payment of money, hot meals are
habitually prepared, sold and served at noon and evening, as the principal
business of the place. The term does not include pharmacies, confectionery
stores, lunch stands, nightclubs and filling stations.
   SALE and SELL. The exchange, barter, gift, offer for sale, sale,
distribution and delivery of any kind, and the transfer of title or possession
of beer and intoxicating liquor either by constructive or actual delivery by
any means or devices whatever, including the sale of beer or intoxicating
liquor by means of a controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet pursuant to
R.C. § 4301.21. These terms do not include the mere solicitation of orders for
beer or intoxicating liquor from the holders of permits issued by the Division
of Liquor Control authorizing the sale of the beer or intoxicating liquor, but
no solicitor shall solicit any orders until the solicitor has been registered
with the Division pursuant to R.C. § 4303.25.
   SALES AREA OR TERRITORY. An exclusive geographic area or territory that is
assigned to a particular A or B permit holder and that either has one or more
political subdivisions as its boundaries or consists of an area of land with
readily identifiable geographic boundaries. SALES AREA OR TERRITORY does not
include, however, any particular retail location in an exclusive geographic
area or territory that had been assigned to another A or B permit holder before
April 9, 2001.
   SEALED CONTAINER. Any container having a capacity of not more than 128 fluid
ounces, the opening of which is closed to prevent the entrance of air.
   SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR. All intoxicating liquors containing more than 21% of
alcohol by volume. The phrase does not include the contents of a pod.
   VEHICLE. All means of transportation by land, by water or by air, and
everything made use of in any way for the transportation.
   WHOLESALE DISTRIBUTOR and DISTRIBUTOR. A person engaged in the business of
selling to retail dealers for purposes of resale.
   WINE. All liquids fit to use for beverage purposes containing not less than
0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume, that is
made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other agricultural
products. The term includes cider, except as used in R.C. §§ 4301.13, 4301.421,
4301.422, 4301.432, and 4301.44, and, for purposes of determining the rate of
the tax that applies, R.C. § 4301.43(B), the term does not include cider.
(R.C. §§ 4301.01, 4301.244)
§ 612.02 SALES TO UNDERAGE PERSONS; PROHIBITIONS AND MISREPRESENTATIONS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor to an underage person, shall
buy beer or intoxicating liquor for an underage person, or shall furnish it to
an underage person unless given by a physician in the regular line of the
physician’s practice or given for established religious purposes or unless the
underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an underage
person, or legal guardian. In proceedings before the Liquor Control Commission,
no permit holder, or no employee or agent of a permit holder, charged with a
violation of this division (a) shall be charged, for the same offense, with a
violation of R.C. § 4301.422 (A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (b)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private place
shall knowingly or recklessly allow any underage person to remain in or on the
public or private place while possessing or consuming beer or intoxicating
liquor, unless the intoxicating liquor or beer is given to the person
possessing or consuming it by that person’s parent, spouse who is not an
underage person, or legal guardian and the parent, spouse who is not an
underage person, or legal guardian is present at the time of the person’s
possession or consumption of the beer or intoxicating liquor. An owner of a
public or private place is not liable for acts or omissions in violation of
this division that are committed by a lessee of that place, unless the owner
authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee’s acts or omissions.
   (c)   No person shall engage or use accommodations at a hotel, inn, cabin,
campground, or restaurant when the person knows or has reason to know either of
the following:
      (1)   That beer or intoxicating liquor will be consumed by an underage
person on the premises of the accommodations that the person engages or uses,
unless the person engaging or using the accommodations is the spouse of the
underage person and who is not an underage person, or is the parent or legal
guardian of all of the underage persons, who consume beer or intoxicating
liquor on the premises and that person is on the premises at all times when
beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by an underage person; or
      (2)   That a drug of abuse will be consumed on the premises of the
accommodations by any person, except a person who obtained the drug of abuse
pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed health professionals authorized
to prescribe drugs and has the drug of abuse in the original container in which
it was dispensed to the person.
   (d)   (1)   No person is required to permit the engagement of accommodations
at any hotel, inn, cabin or campground by an underage person or for an underage
person, if the person engaging the accommodations knows or has reason to know
that the underage person is intoxicated, or that the underage person possesses
any beer or intoxicating liquor and is not supervised by a parent, spouse who
is not an underage person, or legal guardian who is or will be present at all
times when the beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by the underage
person.
      (2)   No underage person shall knowingly engage or attempt to engage
accommodations at any hotel, inn, cabin or campground by presenting
identification that falsely indicates that the underage person is 21 years of
age or older for the purpose of violating this section.
   (e)   (1)   No underage person shall knowingly order, pay for, share the
cost of, attempt to purchase, possess, or consume any beer or intoxicating
liquor in any public or private place. No underage person shall knowingly be
under the influence of any beer or intoxicating liquor in any public place. The
prohibitions set forth in this division (e) against an underage person
knowingly possessing, consuming or being under the influence of any beer or
intoxicating liquor shall not apply if the underage person is supervised by a
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or the beer or
intoxicating liquor is given by a physician in the regular line of the
physician’s practice or given for established religious purposes.
      (2)   A.   If a person is charged with violating division (e)(1) of this
section in a complaint filed under R.C. § 2151.27, the court may order the
child into a diversion program specified by the court and hold the complaint in
abeyance pending successful completion of the diversion program. A child is
ineligible to enter into a diversion program under this division (e) if the
child previously has been diverted pursuant to this division (e). If the child
completes the diversion program to the satisfaction of the court, the court
shall dismiss the complaint and order the child’s record in the case sealed
under R.C. §§ 2151.356 through 2151.358. If the child fails to satisfactorily
complete the diversion program, the court shall proceed with the complaint.
         B.   If a person is charged in a criminal complaint with violating
division (e)(1) of this section, R.C. § 2935.36 shall apply to the offense,
except that a person is ineligible for diversion under that section if the
person previously has been diverted pursuant to divisions (e)(2)A. or (e)(2)B.
of this section. If the person completes the diversion program to the
satisfaction of the court, the court shall dismiss the complaint and order the
record in the case sealed under R.C. § 2953.33. If the person fails to
satisfactorily complete the diversion program, the court shall proceed with the
complaint.
   (f)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
a minor shall knowingly permit the minor to violate this section or R.C. §§
4301.63, 4301.633, or 4301.634, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (g)   The operator of any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground shall make the
provisions of this section available in writing to any person engaging or using
accommodations at the hotel, inn, cabin, or campground.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Drug of abuse” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
      (2)   “Hotel” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3731.01.
      (3)   “Licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs” and
“prescription” have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
      (4)   “Minor” means a person under the age of 18 years.
      (5)   “Underage person” means a person under the age of 21 years.
(R.C. § 4301.69)
   (i)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person under the age of 21 years shall purchase beer or intoxicating liquor.
(R.C. § 4301.63)
   (j)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the name, age or
other identification of any person under 21 years of age, for the purpose of
obtaining, or with the intent to obtain, beer or intoxicating liquor for a
person under 21 years of age, by purchase, or as a gift.
(R.C. § 4301.633)
   (k)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person under the age of 21 years shall knowingly show or give false
information concerning his or her name, age, or other identification for the
purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining beer or intoxicating liquor in any
place in this municipality where beer or intoxicating liquor is sold under a
permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control, or sold by the Division of
Liquor Control.
(R.C. § 4301.634)
   (l)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor, shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, and in
addition to the fine, may be imprisoned for a definite term of not more than
six months.
(R.C. § 4301.99(I))
   (m)   Whoever violates division (b), (c), (d), (f), (g) or (j) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C))
   (n)   Whoever violates division (e)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If an offender who violates division (e)(1) of
this section was under the age of 18 years at the time of the offense and the
offense occurred while the offender was the operator of or a passenger in a
motor vehicle, the court, in addition to any other penalties it imposes upon
the offender, shall suspend the offender’s temporary instruction permit or
probationary driver’s license for a period of six months. If the offender is 15
years and six months of age or older and has not been issued a temporary
instruction permit or probationary driver’s license, the offender shall not be
eligible to be issued such a license or permit for a period of six months. If
the offender has not attained the age of 15 years and six months, the offender
shall not be eligible to be issued a temporary instruction permit until the
offender attains the age of 16 years.
(R.C. § 4301.99(D))
   (o)   Whoever violates division (i) of this section shall be fined not less
than $25 nor more than $100. The court imposing a fine for a violation of this
section may order that the fine be paid by the performance of public work at a
reasonable hour rate established by the court. The court shall designate the
time within which the public work shall be completed.
(R.C. § 4301.99(E))
   (p)   (1)   Whoever violates division (k) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If, in committing a first violation of
division (k), the offender presented to the permit holder or his or her
employee or agent a false, fictitious or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $250 and not
more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more
than six months.
      (2)   On a second violation in which, for the second time, the offender
presented to the permit holder or his or her employee or agent a false,
fictitious or altered identification card, a false or fictitious driver’s
license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s license issued by any
state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, and
may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months. The
court also may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operation privilege from
the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
      (3)   On a third or subsequent violation in which, for the third or
subsequent time, the offender presented to the permit holder or his or her
employee or agent a false, fictitious or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more
than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than
six months. Except as provided in this division (o), the court also may impose
a class six suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified
in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6), and the court may order that the suspension or denial
remain in effect until the offender attains the age of 21 years. The court, in
lieu of suspending the offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary
driver’s license, or driver’s license, instead may order the offender to
perform a determinate number of hours of community service, with the court
determining the actual number of hours and the nature of the community service
the offender shall perform.
(R.C. § 4301.99(F))
(Ord. 81-2017, passed 5-22-2017)
§ 612.03 SALES TO INTOXICATED PERSONS.
   (a)   No permit holder and no agent or employee of a permit holder shall
sell or furnish beer or intoxicating liquor to an intoxicated person.
(R.C. § 4301.22(B))
   (b)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(D), (H))
§ 612.04 CONSUMPTION IN MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (a)   No person shall consume any beer or intoxicating liquor in a motor
vehicle. This section does not apply to persons described in R.C. § 4301.62(D)
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 4301.64)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If an offender who violates this section was under the age of 18 years
at the time of the offense, the court, in addition to any other penalties it
imposes upon the offender, may suspend the offender’s temporary instruction
permit, probationary driver’s license or driver’s license for a period of not
less than six months and not more than one year. In lieu of suspending the
offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or
driver’s license, the court instead may require the offender to perform
community service for a number of hours determined by the court. If the
offender is 15 years and six months of age or older and has not been issued a
temporary instruction permit or probationary driver’s license, the offender
shall not be eligible to be issued such a license or permit for a period of six
months. If the offender has not attained the age of 15 years and six months,
the offender shall not be eligible to be issued a temporary instruction permit
until the offender attains the age of 16 years.
(R.C. § 4301.99(B))
§ 612.05 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   (1)   No person personally or by the person’s clerk, agent or
employee, shall manufacture, manufacture for sale, offer, keep or possess for
sale, furnish or sell, or solicit the purchase or sale of any beer or
intoxicating liquor in this state, or transport, import or cause to be
transported or imported any beer, intoxicating liquor or alcohol in or into
this municipality for delivery, use or sale, unless the person has fully
complied with R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 or is the holder of a permit issued
by the Division of Liquor Control and in force at the time.
      (2)   No manufacturer, supplier, wholesale distributor, broker or
retailer of beer or intoxicating liquor, or other person shall employ, retain
or otherwise utilize any person in this state to act as an employee, agent,
solicitor or salesperson, or act in any other representative capacity to sell,
solicit, take orders or receive offers to purchase or expressions of interest
to purchase beer or intoxicating liquor from any person, at any location other
than a liquor permit premises, except as specifically authorized by R.C.
Chapter 4301 or Chapter 4303 or rules adopted thereunder. No function, event or
party shall take place at any location other than a liquor permit premises
where any person acts in any manner to sell, solicit, take orders or receive
offers to purchase or expressions of intent to purchase beer or intoxicating
liquor to or from any person, except as specifically authorized by R.C. Chapter
4301 or Chapter 4303 or rules adopted thereunder.
(R.C. § 4303.25)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 612.06 POSTING AGE WARNING SIGNS.
   (a)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4301.691, every place in
this municipality where beer, intoxicating liquor, or any low-alcohol beverage
is sold for beverage purposes shall display at all times, in a prominent place
on the premises thereof, a printed card, which shall be furnished by the
Division of Liquor Control and which shall read substantially as follows:
   WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER AGE
   If you are under the age of 21
      Under the statutes of the state of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the
cost of, or attempt to purchase, or possess or consume beer or intoxicating
liquor in any public place, or furnish false information as to name, age, or
other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $1,000, or
imprisonment up to 6 months, or both.
   If you are under the age of 18
      Under the statutes of the state of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the
cost of, or attempt to purchase, or possess or consume, any type of beer or
wine that contains either no alcohol or less than one-half of one per cent of
alcohol by volume in any public place, or furnish false information as to the
name, age, or other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $250 or
to imprisonment up to 30 days, or both.
      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any
proceedings before the Department or the Liquor Control Commission for failing
to display this card. No permit issued by the Department shall be suspended,
revoked, or canceled because of the failure of the permit holder to display
this card.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. 54-2020, passed 4-27-2020)
§ 612.07 OPEN CONTAINER PROHIBITED.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Chauffeured limousine.” A vehicle registered under R.C. § 4503.24.
      (2)   “Street,” “highway,” and “motor vehicle.” Have the same meanings as
in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (b)   No person shall have in the person’s possession an opened container of
beer or intoxicating liquor in any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(1)E. of this section, in a state
liquor store;
      (2)   Except as provided in division (c) or (j) of this section, on the
premises of the holder of any permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control;
      (3)   In any other public place;
      (4)   Except as provided in division (d) or (e) of this section while
operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on any street, highway
or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking;
      (5)   Except as provided in division (d) or (e) of this section while
being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on any street, highway or other
public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking.
   (c)   (1)   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened container
of any of the following:
         A.   Beer or intoxicating liquor that has been lawfully purchased for
consumption on the premises where bought from the holder of an A-1-A, A-2, A-
2f, A-3a, D-1, D-2, D-3, D-3a, D-4, D-4a, D-5, D-5a, D-5b, D-5c, D-5d, D-5e, D-
5f, D-5g, D-5h, D-5i, D-5j, D-5k, D-5l, D-5m, D-5n, D-5o, D-7, D-8, D-9, E, F,
F-2, F-5, F-7, F-8, or F-9 permit;
         B.   Beer, wine, or mixed beverages served for consumption on the
premises by the holder of an F-3 permit, wine served as a tasting sample by an
A-2, A-2f, S-1, or S-2 permit holder for consumption on the premises of a
farmers market for which an F-10 permit has been issued, or wine served for
consumption on the premises by the holder of an F-4 or F-6 permit;
         C.   Beer or intoxicating liquor consumed on the premises of a
convention facility as provided in R.C. § 4303.201;
         D.   Beer or intoxicating liquor to be consumed during tastings and
samplings approved by rule of the Liquor Control Commission;
         E.   Spiritous liquor to be consumed for purposes of a tasting sample,
as defined in R.C. § 4301.171.
      (2)   A person may have in the person’s possession on an F liquor permit
premises an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was not
purchased from the holder of the F permit if the premises for which the F
permit is issued is a music festival and the holder of the F permit grants
permission for that possession on the premises during the period for which the
F permit is issued. As used in this division (c)(2), “music festival” means a
series of outdoor live musical performances extending for a period of at least
three consecutive days and located on an area of land of at least 40 acres.
      (3)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession on a D-2 liquor
permit premises an opened or unopened container of wine that was not purchased
from the holder of the D-2 permit if the premises for which the D-2 permit is
issued is an outdoor performing arts center, the person is attending an
orchestral performance, and the holder of the D-2 permit grants permission for
the possession and consumption of wine in certain predesignated areas of the
premises during the period for which the D-2 permit is issued.
         B.   As used in division (c)(3)A. of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
            1.   “Orchestral performance.” A concert comprised of a group of
not fewer than 40 musicians playing various musical instruments.
            2.   “Outdoor performing arts center.” An outdoor performing arts
center that is located on not less than 150 acres of land and that is open for
performances from the first day of April to the last day of October of each
year.
      (4)   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened or unopened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location at which the
person is attending an orchestral performance as defined in division (c)(3)B.
of this section if the person with supervision and control over the performance
grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating
liquor in certain predesignated areas of that outdoor location.
      (5)   A person may have in the person’s possession on an F-9 liquor
permit premises an opened or unopened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
that was not purchased from the holder of the F-9 permit if the F-9 permit
holder grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or
intoxicating liquor in certain predesignated areas of the premises during the
period for which the F-9 permit is issued.
      (6)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession on the property
of an outdoor motorsports facility an opened or unopened container of beer or
intoxicating liquor that was not purchased from the owner of the facility if
both of the following apply:
            1.   The person is attending a racing event at the facility; and
            2.   The owner of the facility grants permission for the possession
and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor on the property of the facility.
         B.   As used in division (c)(6)A. of this section:
            1.   “Outdoor motorsports facility.” An outdoor racetrack to which
all of the following apply:
               a.   It is 2.4 miles or more in length.
               b.   It is located on 200 acres or more of land.
               c.   The primary business of the owner of the facility is the
hosting and promoting of racing events.
               d.   The holder of a D-1, D-2, or D-3 permit is located on the
property of the facility.
            2.   “Racing event.” A motor vehicle racing event sanctioned by one
or more motor racing sanctioning organizations.
      (7)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location within an
outdoor refreshment area created under R.C. § 4301.82 if the opened container
of beer or intoxicating liquor was purchased from an A-1, A-1-A, A-1c, A-2, A-
2f, D class, or F class permit holder to which both of the following apply:
            1.   The permit holder’s premises is located within the outdoor
refreshment area.
            2.   The permit held by the permit holder has an outdoor
refreshment area designation.
         B.   Division (c)(7) of this section does not authorize a person to do
either of the following:
            1.   Enter the premises of an establishment within an outdoor
refreshment area while possessing an opened container of beer or intoxicating
liquor acquired elsewhere;
            2.   Possess an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
while being in or on a motor vehicle within an outdoor refreshment area, unless
the possession is otherwise authorized under division (d) or (e) of this
section.
         C.   As used in division (c)(7) of this section, “D class permit
holder” does not include a D-6 or D-8 permit holder.
      (8)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession on the property
of a market, within a defined F-8 permit premises, an opened container of beer
or intoxicating liquor that was purchased from a D permit premises that is
located immediately adjacent to the market if both of the following apply:
            1.   The market grants permission for the possession and
consumption of beer and intoxicating liquor within the defined F-8 permit
premises;
            2.   The market is hosting an event pursuant to an F-8 permit and
the market has notified the division of liquor control about the event in
accordance with R.C. § 4303.208(A)(3).
         B.   As used in division (c)(8) of this section, “market” means a
market, for which an F-8 permit is held, that has been in operation since 1860.
   (d)   This section does not apply to a person who pays all or a portion of
the fee imposed for use of a chauffeured limousine pursuant to a prearranged
contract or the guest of the person, when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The person or guest is a passenger in the limousine.
      (2)   The person or guest is located in the limousine, but is not
occupying a seat in the front compartment of the limousine where the operator
of the limousine is located.
      (3)   The limousine is located on any street, highway or other public or
private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking.
   (e)   An opened bottle of wine that was purchased from the holder of a
permit that authorizes the sale of wine for consumption on the premises where
sold is not an opened container for the purposes of this section if both of the
following apply:
      (1)   The opened bottle of wine is securely resealed by the permit holder
or an employee of the permit holder before the bottle is removed from the
premises. The bottle shall be secured in such a manner that it is visibly
apparent if the bottle has been subsequently opened or tampered with.
      (2)   The opened bottle of wine that is resealed in accordance with
division (e)(1) of this section is stored in the trunk of a motor vehicle or,
if the motor vehicle does not have a trunk, behind the last upright seat or in
an area not normally occupied by the driver or passengers and not easily
accessible by the driver.
   (f)   (1)   Except if an ordinance or resolution is enacted or adopted under
division (f)(2) of this section, this section does not apply to a person who,
pursuant to a prearranged contract, is a passenger riding on a commercial
quadricycle when all of the following apply:
         A.   The person is not occupying a seat in the front of the commercial
quadricycle where the operator is steering or braking.
         B.   The commercial quadricycle is being operated on a street,
highway, or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking.
         C.   The person has in their possession on the commercial quadricycle
an opened container of beer or wine.
         D.   The person has in their possession on the commercial quadricycle
not more than either 36 ounces of beer or 18 ounces of wine.
      (2)   The legislative authority may enact an ordinance or adopt a
resolution, as applicable, that prohibits a passenger riding on a commercial
quadricycle from possessing an opened container of beer or wine.
      (3)   As used in this section, “commercial quadricycle” means a vehicle
that has fully-operative pedals for propulsion entirely by human power and that
meets all of the following requirements:
         A.   It has four wheels and is operated in a manner similar to a
bicycle.
         B.   It has at least five seats for passengers.
         C.   It is designed to be powered by the pedaling of the operator and
the passengers.
         D.   It is used for commercial purposes.
         E.   It is operated by the vehicle owner or an employee of the owner.
   (g)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person that has in the person’s
possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor on the premises
of a market if the beer or intoxicating liquor has been purchased from a D
liquor permit holder that is located in the market.
      (2)   As used in division (g) of this section, “market” means an
establishment that:
         A.   Leases space in the market to individual vendors, not less than
50% of which are retail food establishments or food service operations licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3717;
         B.   Has an indoor sales floor area of not less than 22,000 square
feet;
         C.   Hosts a farmer’s market on each Saturday from April through
December.
   (h)   (1)   As used in this section, “alcoholic beverage” has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 4303.185.
      (2)   An alcoholic beverage in a closed container being transported under
R.C. § 4303.185 to its final destination is not an opened container for the
purposes of this section if the closed container is securely sealed in such a
manner that it is visibly apparent if the closed container has been
subsequently opened or tampered with after sealing.
   (i)   This section does not apply to a person who has in the person’s
possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor in a public-use
airport, as described in R.C. § 4303.181(D)(2)(a)(iii), when both of the
following apply:
(1)   Consumption of the opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor occurs
in the area of the airport terminal that is restricted to persons taking
flights to and from the airport; and
(2)   The consumption is authorized under R.C. § 4303.181(D)(2)(a).
   (j)   This section does not apply to a person that has in the person’s
possession an opened container of homemade beer or wine that is served in
accordance with R.C. § 4301.201(E).
(R.C. § 4301.62)
   (k)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4301.99(A))
§ 612.08 HOURS OF SALE OR CONSUMPTION.
   (a)   This section shall apply to the retail sale of beer, wine, mixed
beverages or spirituous liquor.
   (b)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor shall be sold or
delivered by an A-1, A-1C, A-2, B-1, B-2, B-4, B-5, C-1, C-2, C-2X, D-1, D-2,
D-2X, D-3 when issued without a D-3A, D-3X, D-4, D-5H, D-5K, D-8, F, F-1, F-2,
F-3, F-4, F-5, F-6, F-7, F-8, F-9, G, or I permit holder:
      (1)   From Monday to Saturday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30
a.m.
      (2)   On Sunday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and Sunday midnight,
unless statutorily authorized otherwise.
      (3)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages or spirituous liquor is
also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit
holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages
or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.
   (c)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages or spirituous liquor shall be sold or
delivered by an A-1A, D-3 when issued with a D-3A, D-4A, D-5, D-5A, D-5B, D-5C,
D-5D, D-5E, D-5F, D-5G, D-5I, D-5J, D-5L, D-5M, D-5N, D-5O, or D-7 permit
holder:
      (1)   From Monday to Saturday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:30
a.m.
      (2)   On Sunday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and Sunday midnight,
unless statutorily authorized otherwise.
      (3)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages or spirituous liquor is
also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit
holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages
or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.
   (d)   Permit holders authorized to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages or
spirituous liquor at retail who are not specifically identified in divisions
(b) or (c) above shall be subject to the provisions of division (b), unless
statutorily authorized otherwise.
   (e)   The hours on Sunday during which sales, delivery or consumption of
alcoholic beverages may take place are established by statute, but in no event
shall they begin prior to 5:30 a.m.
(O.A.C. 4301:1-1-49)
   (f)   No association, corporation, local unit of an association or
corporation or D permit holder who holds an F-2 permit shall sell beer or
intoxicating liquor beyond the hours of sale allowed by the permit. This
division imposes strict liability on the holder of the permit and on any
officer, agent or employee of the permit holder.
(R.C. § 4303.202(D)(2))
   (g)   No F-8 permit holder shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor beyond the
hours of sale allowed by the permit. This division imposes strict liability on
the holder of an F-8 permit and on any officer, agent or employee of that
permit holder.
(R.C. § 4303.208(C))
   (h)   Whoever violates divisions (f) or (g) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4303.99(D))
§ 612.09 CONVEYING INTOXICATING LIQUOR OR CASH ONTO GROUNDS OF DETENTION
FACILITIES OR OTHER SPECIFIED GOVERNMENTAL FACILITIES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly convey, or attempt to convey, onto the
grounds of a detention facility or of an institution, office building or other
place that is under the control of the Department of Mental Health and
Addiction Services, the Department of Developmental Disabilities, the
Department of Youth Services or the Department of Rehabilitation and
Correction, any of the following items:
      (1)   Any drug of abuse, as defined in R.C. § 3719.011.
      (2)   Any intoxicating liquor, as defined in R.C. § 4301.01.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any person who conveys
or attempts to convey an item onto the grounds of a detention facility or of an
institution, office building or other place under the control of the Department
of Mental Health and Addiction Services, the Department of Developmental
Disabilities, the Department of Youth Services or the Department of
Rehabilitation and Correction, with written authorization of the person in
charge of the detention facility or the institution and in accordance with the
written rules of the detention facility or the institution, office building or
other place.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, to a prisoner who is temporarily released from confinement
for a work assignment, or to any patient in an institution under the control of
the Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services, or the Department of
Developmental Disabilities, any item listed in division (a) of this section.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly deliver or attempt to deliver cash to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment.
   (e)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment a cellular telephone, two-way radio or other
electronic communications device.
   (f)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (c) of this
section that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by law from delivering the
item to the confined person, the child, the prisoner or the patient and that
either of the following applies:
      (1)   The actor was permitted by the written rules of the detention
facility or the institution, office building or other place to deliver the item
to the confined person or the patient.
      (2)   The actor was given written authorization by the person in charge
of the detention facility or the institution, office building or other place to
deliver the item to the confined person or the patient.
   (g)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) of this section or commits a
violation of division (c) of this section involving any drug of abuse is guilty
of illegal conveyance of drugs of abuse onto the grounds of a specified
governmental facility, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(2) of this section or commits a
violation of division (c) of this section involving any intoxicating liquor is
guilty of illegal conveyance of intoxicating liquor onto the grounds of a
specified governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of illegal
conveyance of cash onto the grounds of a detention facility, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (d) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, illegal conveyance of cash onto
the grounds of a detention facility is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (e) of this section is guilty of illegal
conveyance of a communications device onto the grounds of a specified
governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (e)
of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
illegal conveyance of a communications device onto the grounds of a detention
facility is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(Ord. 54-2020, passed 4-27-2020)
§ 612.10 SALES OF LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGES TO UNDERAGE PERSONS; PROHIBITIONS AND
MISREPRESENTATIONS.
   (a)   As used in this section, “underage person” means a person under 18
years of age.
   (b)   No underage person shall purchase any low-alcohol beverage.
   (c)   No underage person shall order, pay for, share the cost of or attempt
to purchase any low-alcohol beverage.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the
name, age or other identification of any underage person for the purpose of
obtaining or with the intent to obtain any low-alcohol beverage for an underage
person, by purchase or as a gift.
   (e)   No underage person shall knowingly show or give false information
concerning his or her name, age or other identification for the purpose of
purchasing or otherwise obtaining any low-alcohol beverage in any place in this
municipality.
   (f)   No person shall sell or furnish any low-alcohol beverage to, or buy
any low-alcohol beverage for, an underage person, unless given by a physician
in the regular line of his or her practice or given for established religious
purposes, or unless the underage person is accompanied by a parent, spouse who
is not an underage person, or legal guardian.
   (g)   (1)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private
place shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place
while possessing or consuming any low- alcohol beverage, unless the low-alcohol
beverage is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that person’s
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, and the
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present when
the person possesses or consumes the low-alcohol beverage.
      (2)   An owner of a public or private place is not liable for acts or
omissions in violation of division (g)(1) that are committed by a lessee of
that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee’s acts or
omissions.
   (h)   No permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control shall be suspended,
revoked or cancelled because of a violation of either division (f) or (g).
   (i)   No underage person shall knowingly possess or consume any low-alcohol
beverage in any public or private place, unless he or she is accompanied by a
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or unless the
low-alcohol beverage is given by a physician in the regular line of his or her
practice or given for established religious purposes.
   (j)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
an underage person shall knowingly permit the underage person to violate this
section.
(R.C. § 4301.631)
   (k)   No low-alcohol beverage shall be sold to any person under 18 years of
age.
(R.C. § 4301.22(A)(2))
   (l)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section shall be fined not less
than $25 nor more than $100. The court imposing a fine for a violation of
division (b) of this section may order that the fine be paid by the performance
of public work at a reasonable hour rate established by the court. The court
shall designate the time within which the public work shall be completed.
(R.C. § 4301.99(E))
   (m)   Whoever violates divisions (c) through (k) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(B))
§ 612.11 ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   (a)   As used in this section, “alcohol vaporizing device” means a machine
or other device that mixes beer or intoxicating liquor with pure oxygen or any
other gas to produce a vaporized product for the purpose of consumption by
inhalation.
   (b)   No person shall sell or offer for sale an alcohol vaporizing device.
   (c)   No person shall purchase or use an alcohol vaporizing device.
(R.C. § 4301.65)
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
misdemeanor of the third degree. For a second or subsequent violation occurring
within a period of five consecutive years after the first violation, a person
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(J))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4301.99(A))
CHAPTER 618: ANIMALS
Section
618.01 Dogs and other animals running at large
618.02 Abandoning animals
618.03 Killing or injuring animals
618.04 Poisoning animals
618.05 Cruelty to animals; cruelty to companion animals
618.06 Coloring rabbits and baby poultry; sale or display of poultry
618.07 Barking, howling or destructive dogs
618.08 Registration of dogs required
618.09 Hindering capture of unregistered dog
618.10 Dogs required to wear tags
618.11 Unlawful tags
618.12 Rabies quarantine
618.13 Hunting prohibited; exceptions
618.14 Nuisance conditions prohibited
618.15 Impounding and disposition; records
618.16 Nuisance, dangerous and vicious dogs; definitions and transfer of
ownership
618.17 Impoundment of a dog for public safety
618.18 Impoundment of a dog for public safety
618.19 Confining, restraining, debarking nuisance, dangerous, and vicious dogs
618.20 Potential nuisance dog classification
618.21 Control of potential nuisance dogs
618.22 Declassification of dogs
618.23 Dog classified by another jurisdiction
618.24 Objection hearings
618.25 Dangerous and vicious dog ownership restrictions
618.26 Exemptions
618.27 Strict liability
618.28 Restrictions on dog ownership for certain convicted felons
618.29 Sexual conduct with an animal
§ 618.01 DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (a)   No person who is the owner or keeper of horses, mules, cattle, sheep,
goats, swine, dogs, poultry or other fowl or animals shall permit them to run
at large upon any public way or upon unenclosed land.
   (b)   No person who is the owner of or in charge or control of a cat shall
permit or allow, by any means or in any manner, such cat to go or remain upon
any public street or ground within the city, except when under such control as
to prevent such cat from entering private property or from chasing or attacking
any person or domestic animal.
   (c)   Except when a dog is lawfully engaged in hunting and accompanied by
the owner, keeper or harborer of the dog, no owner, keeper or harborer of any
dog shall fail at any time to do either of the following:
      (1)   Keep the dog physically confined or restrained upon the premises of
the owner, keeper or harborer by a leash, tether, adequate locked fence, which
fence is located in the rear yard with self-closing/self-latching gates on any
openings of the fenced yard, supervision of some person, or secure enclosure to
prevent such dog from escaping or from injuring any person or domestic animal;
or
      (2)   Keep the dog under the reasonable control of some person and
restrained by a leash or tether no longer than six feet in length when off the
premises of the owner to prevent such dog from entering private property,
escaping or from injuring any person or animal.
   (d)   The running at large of any such animal in or upon any of the places
mentioned in this section is prima facie evidence that it is running at large
in violation of this section.
   (e)   A cat found running at large shall be impounded by the Municipal
Animal Warden or any police officer, kept in an animal shelter and confined in
a humane manner. Immediately upon impounding, every reasonable effort shall be
made to ascertain and notify the owner of the conditions whereby custody of the
cat may be regained. A cat not claimed by its owner within five full days after
impounding shall become the property of the city, regardless of whether or not
the owner is ascertained and notified as provided in this division (e).
   (f)   The owner of a cat so impounded may reclaim such animal upon
presentation of proof of ownership, upon execution of a form wherein the
municipality is released from any liability for any damage or injury to the cat
being reclaimed, and wherein the municipality is indemnified for any claim by
another person regarding ownership, damages or injury to the cat being
reclaimed, upon execution of a statement under oath or affirmation stating that
the affiant is the true and legal owner of such cat and upon payment of an
impounding fee and boarding charge as set forth in Chapter 208 of the
Administration Code, the General Fee Schedule.
   (g)   References to “aggressively bite” in §§
618.01 through
618.25 shall mean any bite, not committed in play, that causes a physical
injury, including a bruise, puncture, tearing of the skin, or laceration.
   (h)   References to “unprovoked” or “without provocation” in this section
and §§
618.20 through
618.21 shall mean that the dog was not:
      (1)   Being abused, teased, tormented or physically threatened or injured
by a person;
      (2)   Being abused or physically threatened or injured by an animal;
      (3)   Being aggressively teased or tormented by an animal;
      (4)   Directing its behavior at a trespasser on the property of its
owner, keeper or harborer;
      (5)   Reasonably coming to the defense of a human or domestic animal
within the immediate vicinity of the dog and under perceived threat; or
      (6)   Directing its behavior at a domestic animal that was running at
large and unattended by some person.
   (i)   References to “classified dog” in this section shall mean a dog that
has been previously classified as a potential nuisance dog, nuisance dog,
dangerous dog or vicious dog pursuant to this code of ordinances, or similar
designation in another jurisdiction, under the provisions of R.C. §§ 955.11 et
seq. or comparable local ordinance.
   (j)   Penalties.
      (1)   Whoever violates this section, where the animal at large is not a
classified dog, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the first offense, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on the second offense, and a misdemeanor of
the second degree on the third or any subsequent offense.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (j)(1) of this section, where the animal
at large is not a classified dog and the animal aggressively bites a domestic
animal without provocation as a result of a violation of this section, then
whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
Additionally, where a violation of this section involves a dog, the court may
order the offender to complete dog obedience training within a specified period
of time and provide written proof thereof to the Police Chief.
      (3)   Notwithstanding division (j)(1) of this section, where the animal
at large is not a classified dog and the animal aggressively bites a human
without provocation as a result of a violation of this section, then whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
Additionally, where a violation of this section involves a dog, the court may
order the offender to complete dog obedience training within a specified period
of time and provide written proof thereof to the Police Chief.
      (4)   Notwithstanding division (j)(1) of this section, where the animal
at large is not a classified dog and the animal aggressively bites a human or
domestic animal without provocation and causes serious injury as defined by
R.C. § 955.11(A)(5), as a result of a violation of this section, then whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
Additionally, where a violation of this section involves a dog, the court may
order the offender to complete dog obedience training within a specified period
of time and provide written proof thereof to the Police Chief.
(Ord. 132-2015, passed 10-13-2015; Ord. 23-47, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 618.02 ABANDONING ANIMALS.
   (a)   No owner or keeper of a dog, cat or other domestic animal shall
abandon the animal.
(R.C. § 959.01)
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
first degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 959.99(E)(3))
§ 618.03 KILLING OR INJURING ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the consent of
the owner, kill or injure a dog, cat or any other domestic animal that is the
property of another. This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian
acting in an official capacity.
(R.C. § 959.02)
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
If the value of the animal killed or the injury done amounts to $300 or more,
whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 959.99(B))
§ 618.04 POISONING ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the consent of
the owner, administer poison, except a licensed veterinarian acting in that
capacity, to a dog, cat or any other domestic animal that is the property of
another; and no person shall, willfully and without the consent of the owner,
place any poisoned food where it may be easily found and eaten by any such
animal, either upon his or her own lands or the lands of another.
(R.C. § 959.03)
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 959.99(C))
§ 618.05 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS; CRUELTY TO COMPANION ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person shall:
      (1)   Torture an animal, deprive one of necessary sustenance,
unnecessarily or cruelly beat, needlessly mutilate or kill, or impound or
confine an animal without supplying it during the confinement with a sufficient
quantity of good wholesome food and water;
      (2)   Impound or confine an animal without affording it, during the
confinement, access to shelter from wind, rain, snow or excessive direct
sunlight, if it can reasonably be expected that the animal would otherwise
become sick or in some other way suffer. This division does not apply to
animals impounded or confined prior to slaughter. For the purpose of this
section, “shelter” means an artificial enclosure, windbreak, sunshade or
natural windbreak or sunshade that is developed from the earth’s contour, tree
development or vegetation;
      (3)   Carry or convey an animal in a cruel or inhuman manner;
      (4)   Keep animals other than cattle, poultry or fowl, swine, sheep or
goats in an enclosure without wholesome exercise and change of air, nor feed
cows on food that produces impure or unwholesome milk;
      (5)   Detain livestock in railroad cars or compartments longer than 28
hours after they are so placed without supplying them with necessary food,
water and attention, nor permit the stock to be so crowded as to overlie,
crush, wound or kill each other.
   (b)   Upon the written request of the owner or person in custody of any
particular shipment of livestock, which written request shall be separate and
apart from any printed bill of lading or other railroad form, the length of
time in which the livestock may be detained in any cars or compartment without
food, water, and attention may be extended to 36 hours without penalty
therefor. Division (a) of this section does not prevent the dehorning of
cattle.
   (c)   All fines collected for violations of division (a) of this section
shall be paid to the Society or Association for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals, if there is one in the municipality; otherwise, all fines shall be
paid to the General Fund.
(R.C. § 959.13)
   (d)   Cruelty to companion animals.
      (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   “Animal rescue for dogs.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
956.01.
         B.   “Boarding kennel.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 956.01.
         C.   “Captive white-tailed deer.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
1531.01.
         D.   “Companion animal.” Any animal that is kept inside a residential
dwelling and any dog or cat regardless of where it is kept, including a pet
store as defined in R.C. § 956.01. “Companion animal” does not include
livestock or any wild animal.
         E.   “Cruelty.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.
         F.   “Dog kennel.” Means an animal rescue for dogs, a boarding kennel,
or a training kennel.
         G.   “Federal Animal Welfare Act.” The “Laboratory Animal Act of
1966”, Pub. L. No. 89-544, 80 Stat. 350 (1966), 7 U.S.C. §§ 2131 et seq., as
amended by the “Animal Welfare Act of 1970”, Pub. L. No. 91-579, 84 Stat. 1560
(1970), the “Animal Welfare Act Amendments of 1976”, Pub. L. No. 94-279, 90
Stat. 417 (1976), and the “Food Security Act of 1985”, Pub. L. No. 99-198, 99
Stat. 1354 (1985), and as it may be subsequently amended.
         H.   “Livestock.” Means horses, mules, and other equidae; cattle,
sheep, goats, and other bovidae; swine and other suidae; poultry; alpacas;
llamas; captive white-tailed deer; and any other animal that is raised or
maintained domestically for food or fiber.
         I.   “Practice of veterinary medicine.” Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 4741.01.
         J.   “Residential dwelling.” A structure or shelter or the portion of
a structure or shelter that is used by one or more humans for the purpose of a
habitation.
         K.   “Serious physical harm.” Means any of the following:
            1.   Physical harm that carries an unnecessary or unjustifiable
substantial risk of death;
            2.   Physical harm that involves either partial or total permanent
incapacity;
            3.   Physical harm that involves acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering or that involves any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain.
         L.   “Torment.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.
         M.   “Torture.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.
         N.   “Training kennel.” Means an establishment operating for profit
that keeps, houses, and maintains dogs for the purpose of training the dogs in
return for a fee or other consideration.
         O.   “Wild animal.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1531.01.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or
maim, cruelly beat, poison, needlessly kill or commit an act of cruelty against
a companion animal.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly cause serious physical harm to a
companion animal.
      (4)   No person who confines or who is the custodian or caretaker of a
companion animal shall negligently do any of the following:
         A.   Torture, torment, or commit an act of cruelty against the
companion animal;
         B.   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it can reasonably be
expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way
as a result of or due to the deprivation or confinement;
         C.   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected
that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a
result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (5)   No person who confines or who is the custodian or caretaker of a
companion animal shall recklessly deprive the companion animal of necessary
sustenance or confine the companion animal without supplying it during the
confinement with sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water.
      (6)   No owner, manager, or employee of a dog kennel who confines or is
the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall knowingly do any of the
following:
         A.   Torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or maim, cruelly beat,
poison, needlessly kill, or commit an act of cruelty against the companion
animal;
         B.   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it is reasonably
expected that the companion animal would die or experience unnecessary or
unjustifiable pain or suffering as a result of the deprivation or confinement;
         C.   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it is reasonably expected
that the companion animal would die or experience unnecessary or unjustifiable
pain or suffering as a result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (7)   No owner, manager, or employee of a dog kennel who confines or is
the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall negligently do any of
the following:
         A.   Torture, torment, or commit an act of cruelty against the
companion animal;
         B.   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it can reasonably be
expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way
as a result of or due to the deprivation or confinement;
         C.   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected
that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a
result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (8)   Divisions (d)(2), (d)(3), (d)(4), (d)(5),(d)(6), and (d)(7) of this
section do not apply to any of the following:
         A.   A companion animal used in scientific research conducted by an
institution in accordance with the federal animal welfare act and related
regulations;
         B.   The lawful practice of veterinary medicine by a person who has
been issued a license, temporary permit, or registration certificate to do so
under R.C. Chapter 4741;
         C.   Dogs being used or intended for use for hunting or field trial
purposes, provided that the dogs are being treated in accordance with usual and
commonly accepted practices for the care of hunting dogs;
         D.   The use of common training devices, if the companion animal is
being treated in accordance with usual and commonly accepted practices for the
training of animals;
         E.   The administering of medicine to a companion animal that was
properly prescribed by a person who has been issued a license, temporary
permit, or registration certificate under R.C. Chapter 4741.
(9)   Notwithstanding any section of the Ohio Revised Code that otherwise
provides for the distribution of fine moneys, the Clerk of Court shall forward
all fines the Clerk collects that are so imposed for any violation of this
division (d) to the Treasurer of the municipality, whose county humane society
or law enforcement agency is to be paid the fine money as determined under this
division. The Treasurer shall pay the fine moneys to the county humane society
or the county, township, municipal corporation, or state law enforcement agency
in this state that primarily was responsible for or involved in the
investigation and prosecution of the violation. If a county humane society
receives any fine moneys under this division, the county humane society shall
use the fine moneys either to provide the training that is required for humane
society agents under R.C. § 1717.061 or to provide additional training for
humane society agents.
(R.C. § 959.131)
   (e)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree. In addition, the court may order the offender
to forfeit the animal or livestock and may provide for its disposition,
including but not limited to the sale of the animal or livestock. If an animal
or livestock is forfeited and sold pursuant to this division, the proceeds from
the sale first shall be applied to pay the expenses incurred with regard to the
care of the animal from the time it was taken from the custody of the former
owner. The balance of the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be paid to the
former owner of the animal.
(R.C. § 959.99(D))
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (d)(2) or (d)(5) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (d)(3) of this section is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (d)(4) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
first degree on each subsequent offense.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (d)(6) of this section is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (d)(7) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   A.   A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of division (d) of this section to forfeit to an
impounding agency, as defined in R.C. § 959.132, any or all of the companion
animals in that person’s ownership or care. The court also may prohibit or
place limitations on the person’s ability to own or care for any companion
animals for a specified or indefinite period of time.
         B.   A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty
to a violation of division (a) of this section or division (d) of this section
to reimburse an impounding agency for the reasonably necessary costs incurred
by the agency for the care of a companion animal that the agency impounded as a
result of the investigation or prosecution of the violation, provided that the
costs were not otherwise paid under R.C. § 959.132.
      (7)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of division (d) of this section has a mental or
emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may impose as a
community control sanction or as a condition of probation a requirement that
the offender undergo psychological evaluation or counseling. The court shall
order the offender to pay the costs of the evaluation or counseling.
(R.C. § 959.99(E))
Statutory reference:
   Impoundment of companion animals; notice and hearing, see R.C. § 959.132
§ 618.06 COLORING RABBITS AND BABY POULTRY; SALE OR DISPLAY OF POULTRY.
   (a)   No person shall dye or otherwise color any rabbit or baby poultry,
including but not limited to chicks and ducklings. No person shall sell, offer
for sale, expose for sale, raffle or give away any rabbit or baby poultry which
has been dyed or otherwise colored. No poultry younger than four weeks of age
may be sold, given away or otherwise distributed to any person in lots of less
than three. Stores, shops, vendors and others offering young poultry for sale
or other distribution shall provide and operate brooders or other heating
devices that may be necessary to maintain poultry in good health, and shall
keep adequate food and water available to the poultry at all times.
(R.C. § 925.62)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on a first offense; each subsequent offense is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
(R.C. § 925.99(B))
§ 618.07 BARKING, HOWLING OR DESTRUCTIVE DOGS.
   (a)   No person shall keep or harbor any dog which, by barking, howling or
yelping, causes inconvenience, annoyance or alarm to another person. Any person
who allows any such dog to habitually remain or be lodged or fed within any
dwelling, building, yard or enclosure, which such person occupies or owns,
shall be considered to be harboring such dog.
   (b)   No person shall keep or harbor any dog which by its conduct in any way
or in any manner injures any other person, or which destroys or damages any
other person’s lawn, trees, shrubs, buildings or other property.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 863, passed 9-14-1950; Ord. 91-91, passed 7-8-1991)
§ 618.08 REGISTRATION OF DOGS REQUIRED.
   (a)   No owner, keeper or harborer of a dog more than three months of age,
nor owner of a dog kennel, shall fail to file an application for registration
required by R.C. § 955.01, nor shall he or she fail to pay the legal fee
therefor.
(R.C. § 955.21)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $25 nor
more than $100 on a first offense, and on each subsequent offense shall be
fined not less than $75 nor more than $250 and may be imprisoned for not more
than 30 days.
(R.C. § 955.99(E))
§ 618.09 HINDERING CAPTURE OF UNREGISTERED DOG.
   (a)   No person shall obstruct or interfere with anyone lawfully engaged in
capturing an unlicensed dog or making an examination of a dog wearing a tag.
(R.C. § 955.24)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(B))
§ 618.10 DOGS REQUIRED TO WEAR TAGS.
   (a)   No owner of a dog, except a dog constantly confined to a dog kennel
registered under R.C. Chapter 955 or one licensed under R.C. Chapter 956, shall
fail to require the dog to wear, at all times, a valid tag issued in connection
with a certificate of registration. A dog found not wearing at any time a valid
tag shall be prima facie evidence of lack of registration and shall subject any
dog found not wearing such a tag to impounding, sale, or destruction.
(R.C. § 955.10)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(B))
(Prior Code, § 618.095)
§ 618.11 UNLAWFUL TAGS.
   (a)   No person shall own, keep or harbor a dog wearing a fictitious,
altered or invalid registration tag or a registration tag not issued by the
County Auditor in connection with the registration of that animal.
(R.C. § 955.25)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(B))
(Prior Code, § 618.10)
§ 618.12 RABIES QUARANTINE.
   (a)   No person having knowledge of the existence of rabies in an animal, or
knowledge that an animal has exhibited symptoms or behavior suggestive of
rabies, or knowledge that an animal has bitten any person, shall fail to
immediately report that information to the Mayor or the Police Chief.
   (b)   Whenever it is established by the Mayor or Police Chief that any
animal has bitten any person or exhibits symptoms or behavior suggestive of
rabies, the person who owns, harbors or otherwise cares for the animal shall
confine it in close quarantine and isolation or shall place the animal in the
establishment of a veterinarian until, in either case, it is determined by the
County Board of Health that the animal is not afflicted with rabies. The
isolation and quarantine period hereby required shall be not less than ten days
from the date the person was bitten. If the animal has, or develops, any
symptoms suspicious of rabies during the ten-day period, the County Board of
Health shall be notified immediately. All expenses incurred for the keeping of
the animal, or the necessary tests to determine whether rabies exists, shall be
borne exclusively by the person who owns, harbors or otherwise cares for the
animal.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 618.11)
§ 618.13 HUNTING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Except as provided in divisions (f) and (g) of this section, no person
shall hunt with firearms or other weapons within the city, except for the
taking of white-tailed deer with the use of archery equipment that is legal as
described in O.A.C. 1501:31-15-11 and in accordance with the terms,
requirements, restrictions and conditions of a municipal deer control permit
on:
      (1)   Property not owned or managed by the city during Ohio’s deer
hunting seasons only after the following:
         A.   An application for a municipal deer control permit has been
submitted to the Police Chief during a designated application period
containing:
            1.   A map, with boundaries outlined on the map, of the property or
properties (collectively, the “subject property”) on which the applicant(s)
wishes to take deer and the approximate location(s) on the subject property
where the shooter(s) will be stationed;
            2.   The County Auditor’s parcel numbers of the subject property
and total acreage;
            3.   Signatures of all owners of the subject property;
            4.   A list of the names, current residence addresses and ages of
all shooters that are applying to shoot on the subject property;
             5.   Verification that each shooter identified in the application
has a current Ohio hunting license; and
            6.   Verification that each shooter identified in the application
has satisfactorily completed the Ohio hunter education course.
         B.   The Police Chief or his or her designee has issued a municipal
deer control permit to the applicant(s) after visiting the subject property and
determining that shooting with archery equipment can be safely conducted on the
subject property and approving the shooters identified in the application,
taking into account the following factors:
            1.   Proximity of the proposed shooting locations to structures
adjacent to the subject property; and
            2.   Characteristics of the subject property and neighboring
properties.
      (2)   Property owned or managed by the city (the “subject city property”)
during Ohio’s deer hunting seasons only after the following:
         A.   An application for a municipal deer control permit to take deer
on the subject city property has been submitted to the Police Chief during a
designated application period containing:
            1.   A list of the names, current residence addresses and ages of
all shooters that are applying to take deer on the subject city property;
            2.   Verification that each shooter identified in the application
has a current Ohio hunting license; and
            3.   Verification that each shooter identified in the application
has satisfactorily completed the Ohio hunter education course.
         B.   The Police Chief or his or her designee has issued a municipal
deer control permit to the applicant(s) after visiting the subject property and
determining that shooting with archery equipment can be safely conducted on the
subject property and approving the shooters identified in the application,
taking into account the following factors:
            1.   Proximity of the proposed shooting locations to structures
adjacent to the subject property; and
            2.   Characteristics of the subject property and neighboring
properties.
      (3)   Property not owned or managed by the city for which a deer damage
control permit (ODNR 9003) from the Ohio Division of Wildlife has been issued
(the “control property”) only after the following:
         A.   Not later than 15 days after the owner(s) of the control property
has received a deer damage control permit from the Ohio Division of Wildlife,
an application by the owner of the control property for a municipal deer
control permit to shoot on the control property has been submitted to the
Police Chief containing:
            1.   A map, with boundaries outlined on the map, of the control
property and the approximate location(s) on the control property where the
shooter(s) will be stationed;
            2.   The County Auditor’s parcel numbers of the control property
and total acreage;
            3.   A list of the names, current residence addresses and ages of
all shooters that will be permitted to take deer on the control property;
            4.   A copy of the deer damage control permit issued by the Ohio
Division of Wildlife;
            5.   Verification that each shooter identified in the application
has a current Ohio hunting license; and
            6.   Verification that each shooter identified in the application
has satisfactorily completed the Ohio hunter education course.
         B.   The Police Chief or his or her designee has issued a municipal
deer control permit to the applicant after visiting the control property and
determining that shooting with archery equipment can be safely conducted on the
control property and approving the shooters identified in the application,
taking into account the following factors:
            1.   Proximity of the proposed shooting locations to structures
adjacent to the control property; and
            2.   Characteristics of the control property and neighboring
properties.
      (4)   Property owned or managed by the city for which a deer damage
control permit from the Ohio Division of Wildlife has been issued (the “control
city property”) only after the following:
         A.   An application for a municipal deer control permit to take deer
on the control city property has been submitted to the Police Chief containing:
            1.   A list of the names, current residence addresses and ages of
all shooters that are applying to take deer on the control city property;
            2.   Verification that each shooter identified in the application
has a current Ohio hunting license; and
            3.   Verification that each shooter identified in the application
has satisfactorily completed the Ohio hunter education program.
         B.   The Police Chief or his or her designee has issued a municipal
deer control permit to the applicant(s) after determining that shooting with
archery equipment can be safely conducted on the control city property and
approving the shooters identified in the application, taking into account the
following factors:
            1.   Proximity to structures adjacent to the control city property;
and
            2.   Characteristics of the control city property and neighboring
properties.
   (b)   A municipal deer control permit may be denied if:
      (1)   Any of the applicants has violated any provision of this section on
any prior occasion;
      (2)   The application is incomplete; or
      (3)   False information has been provided on the application.
   (c)   The Police Chief or his or her designee may attach to a municipal deer
control permit any terms, requirements, restrictions or conditions that the
Police Chief or his or her designee may deem appropriate for the protection of
the public or neighboring properties.
   (d)   Shooting may only be conducted from a fixed elevated position at least
ten feet off the ground, unless the Police Chief or his or her designee waives
such requirement.
   (e)   Prior to the issuance of a municipal deer control permit, the Police
Chief or his or her designee shall personally notify or notify by ordinary mail
the occupants of properties that share a common boundary with any portion of
the subject property, subject city property, control property or control city
property, as the case may be, that an application for a municipal deer control
permit for use on such subject property, subject city property, control
property or control city property has been received, unless the Police Chief or
his or her designee, in his or her discretion determines that such notification
is unnecessary or impractical. The failure of the Police Chief or his or her
designee to provide such notification shall not invalidate a municipal deer
control permit.
   (f)   Except as otherwise provided by and excepting white-tailed deer,
taking by the use of traps shall not be prohibited.
   (g)   The city may utilize sharpshooters with firearms to cull white-tailed
deer: (i) on property owned or managed by the city, (ii) with the consent of
the co-owners or co-managers, on property co-owned or co-managed by the city,
or, (iii) with the consent of the owners, on unimproved property (other than
property owned or managed by the Lorain County Metropolitan Park District or
its Board of Commissioners) that is contiguous at all points along its
boundaries with: (A) property owned or managed by the Lorain County
Metropolitan Park District or its Board of Commissioners, (B) property owned or
managed by the city (including improved and unimproved streets), (C) property
the owners of which have given their consent for sharpshooters to cull deer on
their property in accordance with this division, or (D) a combination of
properties described in the foregoing clauses (A), (B) or (C), provided that:
      (1)   The Police Chief or his or her designee has determined that such
sharpshooting can be safely conducted on such property;
      (2)   Such sharpshooters are obtained through a federal or state agency;
and
      (3)   Such culling has been approved by the Ohio Department of Natural
Resources, Division of Wildlife.
   (h)   No person may, for the purpose of hindering or preventing the lawful
culling of white-tailed deer pursuant to division (g) of this section engage in
any of the following conduct:
      (1)   Block, obstruct, impede or attempt to block, obstruct or impede a
person lawfully engaged in such culling;
      (2)   Erect a barrier with the intent to deny ingress or egress from the
areas where such culling is lawfully being conducted;
      (3)   Make or attempt to make unauthorized physical contact with or in
any way interfere with a person lawfully engaged in such culling; or
      (4)   Make or attempt to make loud noises or gestures, set out or attempt
to set out animal baits, scents, lures or human scent, use any other natural or
artificial visual, aural, olfactory or physical stimuli, or engage in or
attempt to engage in any other similar action or activity in order to interfere
with such culling.
   (i)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree and shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Prior Code, § 618.12) (Ord. 4-2013, passed 1-14-2013; Ord. 104-2014, passed 7-
14-2014; Ord. 28-2015, passed 3-9-2015; Ord. 136-2015, passed 10-26-2015)
§ 618.14 NUISANCE CONDITIONS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall keep or harbor any animal or fowl within the
municipality so as to create noxious or offensive odors or unsanitary
conditions which endanger the health, comfort or safety of any other person, or
contribute to the damage of real or personal property of any other person.
   (b)   No person shall intentionally or recklessly provide food within the
municipality to any wild or feral animal so as to create noxious or offensive
odors or unsanitary conditions, endanger the health, comfort or safety of any
other person, or contribute to the damage of real or personal property of any
other person.
   (c)   As used in division (b), “food” does not include:
      (1)   Growing plants, including, but not limited to, shrubs, trees,
flowers, grasses, fruits, grains, nuts, seeds and vegetables;
      (2)   Mulch and/or compost, including mulch and/or compost consisting of
grains, fruits, vegetable material or residue from lawns, gardens or fields;
      (3)   Food dispensed from bird feeders;
      (4)   Food authorized by City Council or the Mayor to be fed to wildlife
on a temporary basis for a specific public purpose as determined by the City
Council or the Mayor;
      (5)   Incidental spills, including spills of seed materials from bird
feeders or of materials intended for planting or of crop materials that have
been harvested if the spills are incidental to the feeding of birds or normal
agricultural operations and such materials are not intentionally made available
to wild or feral animals (other than birds feeding at such bird feeders);
      (6)   Food provided by any Health Department employee, law enforcement
officer or state or federal game official acting within the scope of his or her
official duties; or
      (7)   Food provided pursuant to activities permitted by the Ohio Division
of Wildlife hunting regulations when provided by an individual holding a valid
state hunting license and in those areas where wildlife hunting is otherwise
authorized by law.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section and fails to cure such violation within
five business days after receipt of notice of violation from the Police
Department shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the first offense, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on the second offense, and a misdemeanor of
the third degree on the third or any subsequent offense.
(Prior Code, § 618.13) (Ord. 78-2012, passed 6-11-2012; Ord. 52-2019, passed 5-
13-2019)
§ 618.15 IMPOUNDING AND DISPOSITION; RECORDS.
   (a)   A police officer or animal warden may impound every dog or other
animal found in violation of §
618.01. If the impounded dog is not wearing a valid registration tag, the dog
shall forthwith be turned over to an officer charged by law with the custody
and disposal of such dogs. If the dog is wearing a valid registration tag or
the identity of the owner or harborer is otherwise established, notice shall
immediately be given to the owner or harborer that the dog has been impounded.
Notice may be by telephone or by ordinary mail to the last known address of the
owner or harborer. The dog shall not be released except upon the payment of
reasonable expenses for its taking and keeping. Any dog not redeemed within
three days of the time it is seized or impounded may be sold or otherwise
disposed of as provided by R.C. § 955.16.
   (b)   A record of all dogs impounded, the disposition of the same, the
owner’s name and address, if known, and a statement of any costs or receipts
involving the dog shall be kept.
(Prior Code, § 618.14)
§ 618.16 NUISANCE, DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS; DEFINITIONS AND TRANSFER OF
OWNERSHIP.
   (a)   The definitions and provisions as set forth in R.C. § 955.11 shall
apply inside the city, with the exception of R.C. § 955.11(D), which shall be
construed to include vicious dogs in addition to dangerous dogs.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, “without provocation” in §§
618.17 and
618.19 shall mean that a dog was not teased by a person or animal, tormented by
a person or animal, or abused by a person, or that the dog was not coming to
the aid or the defense of a person who was not engaged in illegal or criminal
activity and who was not using the dog as a means of carrying out such
activity.
   (c)   References in §§
618.17 through
618.19 to Police Chief shall mean the Police Chief or his or her designee or
any person authorized to enforce R.C. Chapter 955.
(Prior Code, § 618.17) (Ord. 126-2015, passed 10-13-2015)
§ 618.17 IMPOUNDMENT OF A DOG FOR PUBLIC SAFETY.
   (a)   As used in this section, “nuisance dog”, “dangerous dog” and “vicious
dog” have the same meanings as in R.C. § 955.11. As used in §§
618.17 through
618.25, “final determination” means a determination that is not subject to
appeal.
   (b)   The Police Chief shall have authority to determine whether a dog is a
nuisance dog, dangerous dog or vicious dog. This determination may be based
upon an investigation that includes observation of and testimony about the
dog’s behavior, including the dog’s upbringing and the owner’s or keeper’s
control of the dog, and other relevant evidence as determined by the Police
Chief. These observations and testimony can be provided by any witness who
personally observed the behavior. Such witness shall sign a written statement
attesting to the observed behavior and agree to provide testimony regarding the
dog’s behavior. Forms for providing witness testimony shall be made available
at the Police Department.
   (c)   Upon reasonable determination by the Police Chief that a dog is a
nuisance dog, dangerous dog or vicious dog, the Police Chief shall give the
dog’s owner or keeper written notice by certified mail or personal service. The
notice shall state:
      (1)   The description of the dog;
      (2)   The level of classification;
      (3)   The facts upon which the classification is based;
      (4)   The availability of a hearing to object to the classification and
instructions to request that hearing;
      (5)   The restrictions placed on the dog as a result of the
classification;
      (6)   The penalties for violation of the restrictions; and
      (7)   The availability of declassification procedures.
   (d)   Upon receipt of notice of the dog’s classification as a nuisance dog,
dangerous dog or vicious dog pursuant to division (c) of this section, the
owner or keeper shall comply with the restrictions specified in §
618.19.
   (e)   If the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog disagrees with the
designation of the dog as a nuisance dog, dangerous dog or vicious dog, as
applicable, the owner, keeper or harborer may request a hearing regarding the
determination pursuant to R.C. § 955.222.
(Prior Code, § 618.18) (Ord. 126-2015, passed 10-13-2015)
§ 618.18 IMPOUNDMENT OF A DOG FOR PUBLIC SAFETY.
   (a)   As used in this section, “serious injury” has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 955.11.
   (b)   Upon a resultant death or serious injury of a domestic animal or
human, the Police Department shall have the authority but not the duty, in the
interest of public safety, to seize the killing/seriously injuring dog and
impound it. Any person keeping or harboring a dog sought to be impounded shall
give possession of such dog to a police officer or health officer upon demand.
   (c)   If a dangerous or vicious dog aggressively bites any person or
domestic animal, the Police Department shall have the authority but not the
duty, in the interest of public safety, to seize the offending dog and impound
it. Any person keeping or harboring a dog sought to be impounded shall give
possession of such dog to a police officer or health officer upon demand.
   (d)   The owner, keeper or harborer of the dog shall be responsible for any
and all costs associated with the housing of the dog.
   (e)   A dog impounded pursuant to division (b) of this section shall remain
impounded until there has been a final determination as to the dog’s
classification or until the owner or keeper provides satisfactory proof to the
Police Chief that they have complied with all applicable provisions of §
618.19 and renders payment for the costs of housing the dog. Upon a final
determination, the owner or keeper of an impounded dog shall claim it within 14
calendar days by rendering proof to the Police Chief that they have complied
with all applicable provisions of §
618.19 and payment for the costs of housing the dog. If the dog is not claimed
pursuant to the foregoing provisions, the city may dispose of the dog at its
discretion.
   (f)   A dog impounded pursuant to division (c) of this section shall remain
impounded until the court makes a final determination as to whether a violation
of §
618.20 has occurred or until the owner or keeper provides satisfactory proof to
the Police Chief that they have complied with all applicable provisions of §
618.19 and renders payment for the costs of housing the dog. Upon a final
determination, the owner or keeper of an impounded dog shall claim it within 14
calendar days by rendering proof to the Police Chief that they have complied
with all applicable provisions of §
618.19 and payment for the costs of housing the dog. If the dog is not claimed
pursuant to the foregoing provisions, the city may dispose of the dog at its
discretion.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (b) or (c) of this section by refusing or
otherwise purposefully failing to give possession of a dog that the Police
Department is authorized by such divisions to seize and impound is guilty of a
second degree misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Prior Code, § 618.19) (Ord. 126-2015, passed 10-13-2015)
§ 618.19 CONFINING, RESTRAINING, DEBARKING NUISANCE, DANGEROUS, AND VICIOUS
DOGS.
   (a)   As used in this section, “nuisance dog”, “dangerous dog”, and “vicious
dog” have the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.11 .
   (b)   No owner, keeper or harborer of a nuisance dog shall fail to do the
following:
      (1)   While the dog is on the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer,
so as to prevent it from causing injury to any person or domestic animal:
         A.   Securely confine the dog indoors;
         B.   Securely confine the dog in a locked pen which has a secured top
and keep the dog under direct supervision by a person who is of sufficient size
and strength to control the dog;
         C.   Securely confine the dog in a locked fenced yard, which fence is
at least six feet tall, and keep the dog under direct supervision by a person
who is of sufficient size and strength to control the dog; or
         D.   Keep the dog restrained by a non-retractable tether or a leash no
longer than six feet in length and have the leash or tether controlled by a
person who is of sufficient size and strength to control the dog or securely
attach, tie or affix the leash or tether to the ground or a stationary object
or fixture so that the dog is adequately restrained and station such person in
close proximity.
      (2)   While the dog is off the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer,
so as to prevent it from causing injury to any person or domestic animal:
         A.   Keep the dog restrained by a non-retractable tether or a leash no
longer than six feet in length and have the leash or tether controlled by a
person who is of sufficient size and strength to control the dog or securely
attach, tie or affix the leash or tether to the ground or a stationary object
or fixture so that the dog is adequately restrained and station such person in
close proximity; and
         B.   Identify the dog with a leash, collar, harness, vest or other
garment that is colored neon yellow, without patterns or other adornments
except designs intended to increase visibility of the dog at night. The
identifying garment shall be visible and identifiable to an ordinary person
from at least 15 feet away so as to provide reasonable warning to that person
about the dog’s classification.
      (3)   Post and display on the premises where the nuisance dog is kept a
conspicuous and legible sign visible from all areas of customary or actual
public access warning the public that there is a nuisance dog on the premises.
Such sign shall be at least eight inches by ten inches in rectangular
dimensions and shall contain only the words “NUISANCE DOG” in lettering not
less than two inches in height. Such sign shall also include a visual symbol
for any children or people who cannot read words. All signs in residential
areas must be set back from the front property line a minimum of five feet. All
signs are to be purchased from the city.
      (4)   Within ten calendar days of the notice of classification, provide
the Police Department with an identifying color photograph of the dog and
microchip information if the dog is microchipped.
      (5)   Notify the Police Department immediately if the dog is loose or
unconfined or has aggressively bitten a human or a domestic animal.
      (6)   Notify the Police Department in writing within five calendar days
if the dog is transferred to another owner or keeper or dies. If the dog is
transferred to another owner, the written notice shall include the name,
address and phone number of the transferee.
      (7)   Notify veterinarians, veterinary staff, groomers and other members
of the public who come into direct contact with the designated dog that the dog
has been designed as a nuisance dog prior to such contact.
      (8)   Maintain a policy of liability insurance with an insurer authorized
to write liability insurance in this state providing coverage in each
occurrence, subject to a limit, exclusive of interest and costs, of not less
than $10,000 because of damage or bodily injury to or death of a person or
animal caused by the dog. Such insurance must be obtained within 14 calendar
days of the final determination of the dog as a nuisance dog. The owner of any
nuisance dog shall provide a copy of the policy for liability insurance to the
Police Chief on a yearly basis.
   (c)   No owner, keeper or harborer of a dangerous or vicious dog shall fail
to do the following:
      (1)   While the dog is on the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer,
so as to prevent it from causing injury to any person or domestic animal,
securely confine it at all times:
         A.   In a locked pen that has a secured top, under the direct
supervision of a person who is at least 18 years of age and of sufficient size
and strength to control the dog;
         B.   In a locked, fenced yard, which fence is located in the rear yard
with self-closing/ self- latching gates on any openings of the fenced yard, at
least six feet tall, and restrained by a leash or tether no longer than ten
feet in length controlled by a person who is at least 18 years of age and of
sufficient size and strength to control the dog or securely attach, tie or
affix the leash or tether to the ground or a stationary object or fixture so
that the dog is adequately restrained and station such person in close
proximity; or
         C.   In any other locked enclosure that has a secured top, including a
house. If the dog is confined in any other locked enclosure that has a top
outdoors, keep the dog under the direct supervision of a person who is at least
18 years of age and of sufficient size and strength to control the dog.
      (2)   While that dog is off the premises of the owner, keeper or
harborer, so as to prevent it from causing injury to any person or domestic
animal:
         A.   Muzzle the dog with a muzzle made in a manner that will not cause
injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but allows the
dog to eat and drink and prevents it from biting any person or animal, and also
keep the dog restrained by a chain-link leash or tether no longer than six feet
in length controlled by a person who is at least 18 years of age and of
sufficient size and strength to control the dog or securely attach, tie, or
affix the leash or tether to the ground or a stationary object or fixture so
that the dog is adequately restrained and station such person in close
proximity;
         B.   Keep the dog in a locked fenced yard, which fence is located in
the rear yard with self- closing/self-latching gates on any openings of the
fenced yard, at least six feet tall, and restrained by a leash or tether no
longer than ten feet in length and have the leash or tether controlled by a
person who is at least 18 years of age and of sufficient size and strength to
control the dog or securely attach, tie or affix the leash or tether to the
ground or a stationary object or fixture so that the dog is adequately
restrained and station such person in close proximity;
         C.   Keep the dog in a locked pen that has a secure top, under the
direct supervision of a person who is at least 18 years of age and of
sufficient size and strength to control the dog; or
         D.   Keep the dog in another locked enclosure that has a secure top,
including a house. If the dog is confined in an other locked enclosure that has
a top outdoors, keep the dog under the direct supervision of a person who is at
least 18 years of age and of sufficient size and strength to control the dog.
   (d)   No owner, keeper or harborer of a dangerous or vicious dog shall fail
to identify the dog at all times with a leash, collar, harness, vest or other
garment that is colored neon yellow, without patterns or other adornments
except designs intended to increase visibility of the dog at night. While the
dog is off the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer, the identifying
garment shall be visible and identifiable to an ordinary person from at least
15 feet away so as to provide reasonable warning to that person about the dog’s
classification and to prevent the dog from causing injury to any person or
domestic animal.
   (e)   No owner, keeper, or harborer of a dangerous or vicious dog shall fail
to do the following:
      (1)   Maintain a policy of liability insurance with an insurer authorized
to write liability insurance in this state providing coverage in each
occurrence, subject to a limit, exclusive of interest and costs, of not less
than $100,000 for a dangerous or vicious dog because of damage or bodily injury
to or death of a person or animal caused by the dog. Such insurance must be
obtained within 14 calendar days of the final determination of the dog as a
dangerous or vicious dog. The owner or keeper of any dangerous or vicious dog
shall provide a copy of the policy for liability insurance to the Police Chief
on a yearly basis and provide proof of that liability insurance upon request to
any law enforcement officer, county dog warden, or public health official
charged with enforcing this section.
      (2)   Obtain a dangerous dog registration certificate from the County
Auditor pursuant to R.C. § 955.22(I) within 14 calendar days of the final
determination of the dog as a dangerous or vicious dog, affix a tag that
identifies the dog as a dangerous or vicious dog to the dog’s collar, ensure
that the dog wears the collar and tag at all times, and present the dangerous
dog registration certificate upon being requested to do so by any law
enforcement officer, dog warden, animal warden or control officer, or public
health official, including evidence that the dog has been microchipped, rabies
vaccinated, and neutered or spayed, unless a licensed veterinarian determines
that neutering or spaying of the dog is medically contraindicated.
      (3)   Notify the local dog warden and Police Department immediately if
any of the following occurs:
         A.   The dog is loose or unconfined;
         B.   The dog bites a person, unless the dog is on the property of the
owner of the dog, and the person who is bitten is unlawfully trespassing or
committing a criminal act within the boundaries of that property;
         C.   The dog attacks another animal while the dog is off the property
of the owner of the dog; or
         D.   The dog is sold, given to another person, or dies, within ten
calendar days of the sale, transfer or death, and also notify the County
Auditor.
      (4)   Post and display on the premises where the dangerous or vicious dog
is kept a conspicuous and legible sign visible from all areas of customary or
actual public access warning the public that there is a dangerous or nuisance
dog on the premises. Such sign shall be at least eight inches by ten inches in
rectangular dimensions and shall contain only the words “DANGEROUS DOG” or
“VICIOUS DOG” in lettering not less than two inches in height. Such sign shall
also include a visual symbol for any children or people who cannot read words.
All signs in residential areas must be setback from the front property line a
minimum of five feet. All signs are to be purchased from the city.
      (5)   Within ten calendar days of the notice of classification, provide
the Police Department with an identifying color photograph of the dog.
      (6)   Notify veterinarians, veterinary staff, groomers and other members
of the public who come into direct contact with the designated dog that the dog
has been designed as a dangerous or vicious dog prior to such contact.
      (7)   Successfully complete a dog obedience or behavior modification
course that includes a minimum of six hours of in-person professional training
or behavior modification within 90 calendar days of the final determination of
the dog as a dangerous or vicious dog and provide proof of completion to the
Police Chief.
      (8)   Consent to an inspection of the property where the dog is kept,
other than within any private structure unless otherwise authorized by law, by
the Police Chief for the purpose of determining compliance with the
requirements of this section.
   (f)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Debark or surgically silence a dog that the person knows or has
reason to believe is a dangerous or vicious dog;
      (2)   Possess a dangerous or vicious dog if the person knows or has
reason to believe that the dog has been debarked or surgically silenced; or
      (3)   Falsely attest on a waiver form provided by the veterinarian under
R.C. § 955.22(F) that the person’s dog is not a dangerous or vicious dog or
otherwise provide false information on that written waiver form. It is an
affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of this division (f) that the
veterinarian who is charged with the violation obtained, prior to debarking or
surgically silencing the dog, a written waiver form that complies with R.C. §
955.22(F) and that attests that the dog is not a dangerous or vicious dog.
   (g)   Penalties.
      (1)   Whoever violates this section when the violation involves a
nuisance dog is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on the first
offense, a misdemeanor of the third degree on the second offense, and a
misdemeanor of the first degree on the third or any subsequent offense.
      Notwithstanding the foregoing penalties, if the dog aggressively bites a
domestic animal or human without provocation as a result of a violation of this
section, then whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree. Additionally, the court shall order the offender to complete dog
obedience training within a specified period of time and provide written proof
thereof to the Police Chief.
      (2)   Whoever violates this section when the violation involves a
dangerous dog is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree on the first
offense, a misdemeanor of the second degree on the second offense, and a
misdemeanor of the first degree on the third or any subsequent offense.
      Notwithstanding the foregoing penalties, if the dog aggressively bites a
domestic animal or human without provocation as a result of a violation of this
section, then whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree. Additionally, the court shall order the offender to complete dog
obedience training within a specified period of time and provide written proof
thereof to the Police Chief. The court may further impose reasonable terms,
conditions and restrictions deemed necessary to protect the public health,
safety and welfare.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing penalties, if the dog kills a domestic animal
or causes serious injury to a human as a result of a violation of this section,
then whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. The court may impose reasonable terms, conditions and restrictions
deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, including
imposing additional keeping requirements on the dog while it is kept or
harbored within the city, requiring the owner, keeper or harborer of the dog to
temporarily or permanently remove the dog from being kept or harbored in the
city, or requiring humane euthanasia of the dog by a licensed veterinarian.
      (3)   Whoever violates this section when the violation involves a vicious
dog is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree on the first offense, a
misdemeanor of the first degree on the second offense or any subsequent
offense.
      Notwithstanding the foregoing penalties, if the dog aggressively bites a
domestic animal or human without provocation as a result of a violation of this
section, then whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree. Additionally, the court shall order the offender to complete dog
obedience training within a specified period of time and provide written proof
thereof to the Police Chief. The court may further impose reasonable terms,
conditions and restrictions deemed necessary to protect the public health,
safety and welfare.
      Notwithstanding the foregoing penalties, if the dog kills domestic animal
or causes serious injury to a human as a result of a violation of this section,
then whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. The court may impose reasonable terms, conditions and restrictions
deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, including
humane euthanasia of the dog by a licensed veterinarian.
      Notwithstanding the foregoing penalties, it is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law if the dog kills a person as a result of a
violation of R.C. § 955.22(C). The penalties in this section shall not apply
whenever the conduct proscribed in this section constitutes a felony under R.C.
§ 955.99.
(Prior Code, § 618.20) (Ord. 126-2015, passed 10-13-2015; Ord. passed 165-2016,
passed 12-12-2016)
§ 618.20 POTENTIAL NUISANCE DOG CLASSIFICATION.
   (a)   Definitions.
      (1)   Classification of a dog as a potential nuisance dog shall be based
upon specific behaviors exhibited by the dog. For purposes of this section,
behaviors establishing various levels of a potential nuisance dog are the
following:
         A.   Level 1 classification is established if a dog off the premises
of its owner, keeper or harborer aggressively bites any domestic animal without
provocation.
         B.   Level 2 classification is established if a dog off the premises
of its owner, keeper or harborer displays threatening or aggressive behavior
toward or otherwise threatens or endangers the safety of any animal without
provocation, or if a dog on the premises of its owner, keeper or harborer
displays threatening or aggressive behavior toward or otherwise threatens or
endangers the safety of any domestic animal or person without provocation.
      (2)   References to “designated dog” or “classified dog” in this section
shall mean a dog classified as a Level 1 or Level 2 potential nuisance dog.
      (3)   References to “Police Chief” in §§
618.20 through
618.25 shall mean the Police Chief or his or her designee.
      (4)   References to “Director of Public Safety” in §§
618.20 through
618.25 shall mean the Director of Public Safety or his or her designee.
   (b)   The Police Chief shall have authority to determine whether a dog has
engaged in the behaviors specified in divisions (a)(1)A. and (a)(1)B. This
determination may be based upon an investigation that includes observation of
and testimony about the dog’s behavior, including the dog’s upbringing and the
owner’s or keeper’s control of the dog, and other relevant evidence as
determined by the Police Chief. These observations and testimony can be
provided by any witness who personally observed the behavior. Such witness
shall sign a written statement attesting to the observed behavior and agree to
provide testimony regarding the dog’s behavior. Forms for providing witness
testimony shall be made available at the Police Department.
   (c)   Upon reasonable determination by the Police Chief that a dog has
engaged in a behavior specified in divisions (a)(1)A. and (a)(1)B., the Police
Chief shall give the dog’s owner or keeper written notice by certified mail or
personal service. The notice shall state:
      (1)   The description of the dog;
      (2)   The level of classification;
      (3)   The facts upon which the classification is based;
      (4)   The availability of a hearing to object to the classification;
      (5)   The restrictions placed on the dog as a result of the
classification;
      (6)   The penalties for violation of the restrictions; and
      (7)   The availability of declassification procedures.
   (d)   Upon receipt of notice of the dog’s classification as a Level 1 or 2
potential nuisance dog pursuant to division (c) of this section, the owner or
keeper shall comply with the restrictions as specified in §
618.21.
   (e)   Notwithstanding divisions (b) through (d) of this section, the Police
Chief shall have discretionary authority to refrain from classifying a dog as a
potential nuisance dog, even if the dog has engaged in the behaviors specified
in divisions (a)(1)A. and (a)(1)B. of this section, if the Police Chief
determines that the behavior was not unprovoked or other similar mitigating or
extenuating, circumstances existed.
   (f)   If a dog is classified pursuant to division (c) of this section, the
owner or keeper of the dog shall have the right to an administrative hearing to
object to the designation pursuant to §
618.24. At hearing, the Police Chief must show, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that the designated dog is a Level 1 or Level 2 potential nuisance
dog.
(Prior Code, § 618.21) (Ord. 132-2015, passed 10-13-2015)
§ 618.21 CONTROL OF POTENTIAL NUISANCE DOGS.
   (a)   No owner, keeper, or harborer of any Level 1 or 2 potential nuisance
dog shall fail to do the following:
      (1)   While the dog is on the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer,
so as to prevent it from causing injury to any person or domestic animal:
         A.   Securely confine the dog indoors;
         B.   Securely confine the dog in a locked pen which has a secured top
and keep the dog under direct supervision by some person who is of sufficient
size and strength to control the dog;
         C.   Securely confine the dog in a locked fenced yard, which fence is
located in the rear yard with self-closing/self-latching gates on any openings
of the fenced yard, at least six feet high, and keep the dog under direct
supervision by a person who is of sufficient size and strength to control the
dog; or
         D.   Keep the dog restrained by a non-retractable leash or tether no
longer than six feet in length and have the leash or tether controlled by a
person who is of sufficient size and strength to control the dog or securely
attach, tie or affix the leash or tether to the ground or a stationary object
or fixture so that the dog is adequately restrained and station such person in
close proximity.
      (2)   While the dog is off the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer,
so as to prevent it from causing injury to any person or domestic animal:
         A.   Keep the dog restrained by a non-retractable tether leash or a
leash no longer than six feet in length and have the leash or tether controlled
by a person who is of sufficient size and strength to control the dog or
securely attach, tie, or affix the leash or tether to the ground or a
stationary object or fixture so that the dog is adequately restrained and
station such person in close proximity; and
         B.   Identify the dog as a potential nuisance dog with a leash,
collar, harness, vest or other garment that is colored neon yellow, without
patterns or other adornments except designs intended to increase visibility of
the dog at night. The identifying garment shall be visible and identifiable to
an ordinary person from at least 15 feet away so as to provide reasonable
warning to that person about the dog’s classification.
      (3)   Post and display on the premises where the potential nuisance dog
is kept a conspicuous and legible sign visible from all areas of customary or
actual public access warning the public that there is a Level 1 or 2 potential
nuisance dog on the premises. Such sign shall be at least eight inches by ten
inches in rectangular dimensions and shall contain only the words “LEVEL 1
THREAT DOG” or “LEVEL 2 THREAT DOG” in lettering not less than two inches in
height. Such sign shall also include a visual symbol for any children or people
who cannot read words. All signs in residential areas must be set back from the
front property line a minimum of five feet. All signs are to be purchased from
the city.
      (4)   Within ten calendar days of the notice of classification, provide
the Police Department with an identifying color photograph of the dog and
microchip information if the dog is microchipped.
      (5)   Notify the Police Department immediately if the dog is loose or
unconfined or has aggressively bitten a human or another domestic animal.
      (6)   Notify the Police Department in writing within five calendar days
if the dog is transferred to another owner or keeper or dies. If the dog is
transferred to another owner, the written notice shall include the name,
address and phone number of the transferee.
      (7)   Notify veterinarians, veterinary staff, groomers and other members
of the public who come into direct contact with the designated dog that the dog
has been designed as a Level 1 or Level 2 potential nuisance dog prior to such
contact.
   (b)   In addition to the provisions of division (a) of this section, no
owner or keeper of any Level 1 potential nuisance dog shall fail to do the
following:
      (1)   Muzzle the dog while the dog is off the premises of the owner,
keeper or harborer. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will not cause
injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but must prevent
it from biting any person or animal;
      (2)   Microchip the dog within 14 calendar days of the final
determination of the dog as Level 1 potential nuisance dog and provide the
microchip information to the Police Chief upon demand;
      (3)   Vaccinate the dog for rabies yearly and provide proof of
vaccination to the Police Chief upon demand;
      (4)   Neuter or spay the dog within 14 calendar days of the final
determination of the dog as Level 1 potential nuisance dog, unless a licensed
veterinarian determines that neutering or spaying of the dog is medically
contraindicated, and provide proof of alteration or exemption to the Police
Chief upon demand; and
      (5)   Maintain a policy of liability insurance with an insurer authorized
to write liability insurance in this state providing coverage in each
occurrence, subject to a limit, exclusive of interest and costs, of not less
than $10,000 because of damage or bodily injury to or death of a person or
animal caused by the dog. Such insurance must be obtained within 14 calendar
days of the final determination of the dog as a Level 1 potential nuisance dog.
The owner of any Level 1 potential nuisance dog shall provide a copy of the
policy for liability insurance to the Police Chief on a yearly basis.
   (c)   Notwithstanding divisions (a) and (b) of this section, the Police
Chief shall have the discretion to decrease or increase a classified dog’s
restrictions at the time of classification based upon relevant circumstances
and may order the owner or keeper to complete dog obedience training within a
specified period of time. The Police Chief shall notify the owner or keeper of
any modifications to the restrictions in writing.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section when the violation involves a Level 2
potential nuisance dog is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on the
first offense, a misdemeanor of the third degree on the second offense, and a
misdemeanor of the first degree on the third or any subsequent offense.
Notwithstanding the foregoing penalties, if a domestic animal or human is
aggressively bitten by the dog without provocation as a result of a violation
of this section, then whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree. Additionally, the court shall order the offender to
complete dog obedience training within a specified period of time and provide
written proof thereof to the Police Chief.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section when the violation involves a Level 1
potential nuisance dog is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree on the
first offense, a misdemeanor of the second degree on the second offense, and a
misdemeanor of the first degree on the third or any subsequent offense.
Notwithstanding the foregoing penalties, if a domestic animal or human is
aggressively bitten by the dog without provocation as a result of a violation
of this section, then whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree. Additionally, the court shall order the offender to
complete dog obedience training within a specified period of time and provide
written proof thereof to the Police Chief.
(Prior Code, § 618.22) (Ord. 132-2015, passed 10-13-2015)
§ 618.22 DECLASSIFICATION OF DOGS.
   (a)   Level 2 potential nuisance dogs shall be declassified when, for a
period of one year following the classification, there have been no further
Level 2 behaviors demonstrated or violations of §
618.21.
   (b)   Level 1 potential nuisance dogs and nuisance dogs shall be
declassified when, for a period of one year following the classification, there
have been no Level 1 or Level 2 behaviors demonstrated or violations of §
618.21 or R.C. § 955.22, and the owner or keeper has satisfactorily completed
obedience training for the dog classified.
   (c)   Dangerous dogs shall be declassified when, for a period of four years
following the classification, there have been no Level 1, Level 2, nuisance dog
or dangerous dog behaviors demonstrated or violations of §
618.19 or R.C. § 955.22, and the owner or keeper has satisfactorily completed
obedience training for the dog classified and has passed the American Kennel
Club “Canine Good Citizen” test.
   (d)   The owner or keeper of the dog seeking declassification shall file a
written application with the Police Department that demonstrates satisfaction
of all required declassification conditions.
   (e)   Upon declassification, the restrictions for dogs classified as a Level
1 or 2 potential nuisance dog or nuisance dog shall be removed and restrictions
on dogs classified as a dangerous dog shall be removed, with the exception of
the insurance requirements.
   (f)   Upon reasonable determination by the Police Chief that a dog meets the
requirements for declassification, the Police Chief shall give the dog’s owner
or keeper written notice by certified mail or personal service.
   (g)   If the Police Chief denies the declassification application, the
Police Chief shall give the dog’s owner or keeper written notice by certified
mail or personal service notifying the owner or keeper of the right to object
to that determination pursuant to §
618.24. At hearing, the dog’s owner or keeper must show, by clear and
convincing evidence, that all condition of declassification have been
satisfied.
   (h)   If a declassification application is denied, the owner or keeper may
reapply for declassification after a period of six months has elapsed.
(Prior Code, § 618.23) (Ord. 132-2015, passed 10-13-2015)
§ 618.23 DOG CLASSIFIED BY ANOTHER JURISDICTION.
   (a)   Any person desiring to bring a dog to live in the city which has been
previously declared to be a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, vicious dog or similar
designation in another jurisdiction, under the provisions of R.C. §§  955.11
et seq., or comparable local ordinance, must notify the Police Department prior
to moving the dog to the city.
   (b)   The Police Chief shall have authority to determine whether a
previously classified dog has engaged in the behaviors specified in §§
618.16 or
618.20. This determination may be based upon an investigation that includes
observation of and testimony about the dog’s behavior, including the dog’s
upbringing and the owner’s or keeper’s control of the dog, and other relevant
evidence as determined by the Police Chief. The owner or keeper of the dog
shall provide the Police Chief with all information requested related to that
dog.
   (c)   Upon reasonable determination by the Police Chief that a previously
classified dog has engaged in the behaviors specified in §§
618.16 or
618.20, the Police Chief shall give the dog’s owner or keeper written notice by
certified mail or personal service. The notice shall state:
      (1)   The description of the dog;
      (2)   The level of classification;
      (3)   The facts upon which the classification is based;
      (4)   The availability of a hearing to object to the classification;
      (5)   The restrictions placed on the dog as a result of the
classification;
      (6)   The penalties for violation of the restrictions; and
      (7)   The availability of declassification procedures.
   (d)   Upon receipt of notice of the dog’s classification as a potential
nuisance dog, nuisance dog, dangerous dog or vicious dog pursuant to division
(c) of this section, the owner or keeper shall comply with the restrictions
specified in §§
618.17 or
618.21 for that dog.
   (e)   If a dog is classified pursuant to division (c) of this section, the
owner or keeper of the dog shall have the right to an administrative hearing to
object to the designation pursuant to §
618.24. At hearing, the dog’s owner or keeper must show, by clear and
convincing evidence, that the classification as determined by the Police Chief
does not match the dog’s previous behavior or classification.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a second
degree misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Prior Code, § 618.24) (Ord. 132-2015, passed 10-13-2015)
§ 618.24 OBJECTION HEARINGS.
   (a)   If a dog is classified pursuant to §§
618.20 or
618.23, or is denied declassification pursuant to §
618.22, the owner or keeper of the dog shall have the right to an
administrative hearing to object to the determination. The hearing shall be
heard by the Director of Public Safety. An owner or keeper has ten calendar
days from the date listed on the written notice of the determination to inform
the Director of Public Safety in writing that a hearing is requested. The
Director of Public Safety will schedule the hearing and notify the party
requesting the hearing in writing of the time, date, and location of the
hearing.
   (b)   The objection hearing shall be conducted as follows.
      (1)   Parties may appear pro se or be represented by an attorney.
      (2)   Parties may present their position, arguments and contentions,
including by making statements, presenting evidence and offering witnesses on
their behalf, on any relevant issue.
      (3)   Parties may refute evidence and testimony offered in opposition to
their position, arguments and contentions, including by making statements,
presenting evidence and offering witnesses on their behalf, on any relevant
issue.
      (4)   Parties shall be entitled to the right of cross-examination.
      (5)   The hearing shall be quasi-judicial in nature and all testimony
shall be under oath.
      (6)   Any party shall be entitled to transcribe the proceeding at his or
her own cost.
      (7)   After considering all substantial, reliable and probative evidence
accepted for review, the Director of Public Safety shall affirm, deny or affirm
with conditions the determination.
      (8)   Within five business days of such hearing, the Director of Public
Safety shall issue a written decision making a factual finding as to the
determination and shall serve the decision upon all parties. The decision of
the Director of Public Safety is a final order.
(Prior Code, § 618.25) (Ord. 132-2015, passed 10-13-2015)
§ 618.25 DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOG OWNERSHIP RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   No person shall own, keep, maintain, allow, harbor or permit more than
one dangerous or vicious dog at any one residence that has aggressively bitten
and killed a dog or aggressively bitten and caused serious injury or death to a
person.
   (b)   The provisions as set forth in R.C. § 955.54 shall apply inside the
city, with the exception of division (A)(2), which shall be construed to
include vicious dogs in addition to dangerous dogs.
   (c)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a second
degree misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a first
degree misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Prior Code, § 618.26) (Ord. 132-2015, passed 10-13-2015)
§ 618.26 EXEMPTIONS.
   
Chapter 618 of this code of ordinances shall exempt the following:
   (a)   Any dog which is lawfully engaged in hunting or training for the
purpose of hunting while accompanied by a licensed hunter. However, such dogs
at all other times and in all other respects shall be subject to the ordinance
or resolution permitted by this section, unless actually in the field and
engaged in hunting or in legitimate training for such purpose;
   (b)   A service animal, as defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act of
1990 and the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, that has caused injury
or serious injury to any person or has killed a person or a domestic animal
while the service animal is actually being used to assist a person in the
performance of that animal’s trained duties; and
   (c)   A police dog that has caused injury or serious injury to any person or
has killed a person or a domestic animal while the police dog is actually being
used to assist one or more law enforcement officers in the performance of their
official duties.
(Prior Code, § 618.27) (Ord. 132-2015, passed 10-13-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, see 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq.
§ 618.27 STRICT LIABILITY.
   Strict liability is imposed for the violation of any provision of §§
618.01,
618.18,
618.19,
618.21,
618.23, and
618.25.
(Prior Code, § 618.28) (Ord. 165-2016, passed 12-12-2016)
§ 618.28 RESTRICTIONS ON DOG OWNERSHIP FOR CERTAIN CONVICTED FELONS.
   (a)   No person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a felony offense of
violence committed on or after May 22, 2012 or a felony violation of any
provision of R.C. Chapter 959, R.C. Chapter 2923 or R.C. Chapter 2925 committed
on or after May 22, 2012 shall knowingly own, possess, have custody of, or
reside in a residence with either of the following for a period of three years
commencing either upon the date of release of the person from any period of
incarceration imposed for the offense or violation or, if the person is not
incarcerated for the offense or violation, upon the date of the person’s final
release from the other sanctions imposed for the offense or violation:
      (1)   An unspayed or unneutered dog older than 12 weeks of age;
      (2)   Any dog that has been determined to be a dangerous dog under R.C.
Chapter 955 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (b)   A person described in division (a) of this section shall microchip for
permanent identification any dog owned, possessed by, or in the custody of the
person.
   (c)   (1)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any person who is
confined in a correctional institution of the Department of Rehabilitation and
Correction.
      (2)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any person with
respect to any dog that the person owned, possessed, had custody of, or resided
in a residence with prior to May 22, 2012.
(R.C. § 955.54)
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 955.99(O))
§ 618.29 SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH AN ANIMAL.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Animal”. Means a nonhuman mammal, bird, reptile, or amphibian,
either dead or alive.
      (2)   “Offense.” Means a violation of this section or an attempt, in
violation of R.C. § 2923.02, to violate this section.
      (3)   “Officer.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 959.132.
      (4)   “Sexual conduct.” Means either of the following committed for the
purpose of sexual gratification:
         A.   Any act done between a person and animal that involves contact of
the penis of one and the vulva of the other, the penis of one and the penis of
the other, the penis of one and the anus of the other, the mouth of one and the
penis of the other, the mouth of one and the anus of the other, the vulva of
one and the vulva of the other, the mouth of one and the vulva of the other,
any other contact between a reproductive organ of one and a reproductive organ
of the other, or any other insertion of a reproductive organ of one into an
orifice of the other;
         B.   Without a bona fide veterinary or animal husbandry purpose to do
so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of a person’s body or any
instrument, apparatus, or other object into the vaginal, anal, or reproductive
opening of an animal.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly engage in sexual conduct with an animal or
knowingly possess, sell, or purchase an animal with the intent that it be
subjected to sexual conduct.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly organize, promote, aid, or abet in the
conduct of an act involving any sexual conduct with an animal.
(R.C. § 959.21)
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
second degree. In addition, the court may order the offender to forfeit the
animal or livestock and may provide for its disposition including but not
limited to the sale of the animal or livestock. If an animal or livestock is
forfeited and sold pursuant to this division, the proceeds from the sale first
shall be applied to pay the expenses incurred with regard to the care of the
animal from the time it was taken from the custody of the former owner. The
balance of the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be paid to the former
owner of the animal.
(R.C. § 959.99(D))
      (2)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of this section suffers from a mental or
emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may impose as a
community control sanction or as a condition of probation a requirement that
the offender undergo psychological evaluation or counseling. The court shall
order the offender to pay the costs of the evaluation or counseling.
(R.C. § 959.99(E)(7))
CHAPTER 624: DRUGS
Section
624.01 Definitions
624.02 Adult use cannabis control; limitations on conduct by individuals
624.03 Cultivation of marihuana
624.04 Drug possession offenses
624.05 Possession of drug abuse instruments
624.06 Permitting drug abuse
624.07 Abusing harmful intoxicants
624.08 Improperly dispensing or distributing nitrous oxide
624.09 Possessing nitrous oxide in motor vehicles
624.10 Illegal dispensing of drug samples
624.11 Possession, sale and disposal of hypodermics
624.12 Evidence
624.13 Double jeopardy
624.14 Controlled substance schedules
624.15 Controlled substance or prescription labels
624.16 Sale of paraphernalia generally
624.17 Counterfeit controlled substances
624.18 Pseudoephedrine sales
624.19 Sale of pure caffeine product
624.20 Sale of dextromethorphan
§ 624.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words,
terms and phrases and their derivatives used in this chapter which are not
defined in this section shall have the meanings given to them in the Ohio
Revised Code.
   ADMINISTER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   ADULTERATE. To cause a drug to be adulterated as described in R.C. §
3715.63.
   ALCOHOL AND DRUG ADDICTION SERVICES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5119.01.
   BULK AMOUNT. Of a controlled substance, means any of the following:
      (1)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in
Schedule I, Schedule II, or Schedule III, with the exception of any controlled
substance analog, marihuana, cocaine, L.S.D., heroin, any fentanyl-related
compound, and hashish and except as provided in division (2), (5), or (6) of
this definition, whichever of the following is applicable:
         A.   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams or 25 unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a
Schedule I opiate or opium derivative;
         B.   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams of a compound, mixture,
preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of raw or gum opium;
         C.   An amount equal to or exceeding 30 grams or ten unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a
Schedule I hallucinogen other than tetrahydrocannabinol or lysergic acid amide,
or a Schedule I stimulant or depressant;
         D.   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the
maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II opiate or opium
derivative;
         E.   An amount equal to or exceeding five grams or ten unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of
phencyclidine;
         F.   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule II stimulant that is in a final dosage form
manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act
(21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal drug abuse control laws,
as defined in this section, that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II
depressant substance or a Schedule II hallucinogenic substance;
         G.   An amount equal to or exceeding three grams of a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule
II stimulant, or any of its salts or isomers, that is not in a final dosage
form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic
Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal drug abuse control
laws;
      (2)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III or IV substance other than an anabolic
steroid or a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (3)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (4)   An amount equal to or exceeding 250 milliliters or 250 grams of a
compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a
Schedule V substance;
      (5)   An amount equal to or exceeding 200 solid dosage units, 16 grams,
or 16 milliliters of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III anabolic steroid;
      (6)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is a
combination of a fentanyl- related compound and any other compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V,
if the defendant is charged with a violation of R.C. § 2925.11 and the
sentencing provisions set forth in R.C. § 2925.11(C)(10)(b) and (C)(11) will
not apply regarding the defendant and the violation, the bulk amount of the
controlled substance for purposes of the violation is the amount specified in
division (1), (2), (3), (4), or (5) of this definition for the other Schedule
III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V controlled substance that is combined with the
fentanyl-related compound.
   CERTIFIED GRIEVANCE COMMITTEE. A duly constituted and organized committee of
the Ohio State Bar Association or of one or more local bar associations of the
state that complies with the criteria set forth in Rule V, Section 6 of the
Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   COCAINE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A cocaine salt, isomer or derivative, a salt of a cocaine isomer or
derivative, or the base form of cocaine.
      (2)   Coca leaves or a salt, compound, derivative or preparation of coca
leaves, including ecgonine, a salt, isomer or derivative of ecgonine, or a salt
of an isomer or derivative of ecgonine.
      (3)   A salt, compound, derivative or preparation of a substance
identified in division (1) or (2) of this definition that is chemically
equivalent to or identical with any of those substances, except that the
substances shall not include decocainized coca leaves or extraction of coca
leaves if the extractions do not contain cocaine or ecgonine.
   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A JUVENILE. An offense is COMMITTED IN THE
VICINITY OF A JUVENILE if the offender commits the offense within 100 feet of a
juvenile or within the view of a juvenile, regardless of whether the offender
knows the age of the juvenile, whether the offender knows the offense is being
committed within 100 feet of or within view of the juvenile, or whether the
juvenile actually views the commission of the offense.
   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL. An offense is COMMITTED IN THE
VICINITY OF A SCHOOL if the offender commits the offense on school premises, in
a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of any school
premises, regardless of whether the offender knows the offense is being
committed on school premises, in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the
boundaries of any school premises.
   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER OR A
RECOVERING ADDICT. An offense is COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SUBSTANCE
ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER OR A RECOVERING ADDICT if either of the following
apply:
      (1)   The offender commits the offense on the premises of a substance
addiction services provider’s facility, including a facility licensed prior to
June 29, 2019, under R.C. § 5119.391 to provide methadone treatment or an
opioid treatment program licensed on or after that date under R.C. § 5119.37,
or within 500 feet of the premises of a substance addiction services provider’s
facility and the offender knows or should know that the offense is being
committed within the vicinity of the substance addiction services provider’s
facility.
      (2)   The offender sells, offers to sell, delivers, or distributes the
controlled substance or controlled substance analog to a person who is
receiving treatment at the time of the commission of the offense, or received
treatment within 30 days prior to the commission of the offense, from a
substance addiction services provider and the offender knows that the person is
receiving or received that treatment.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE ANALOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any drug that bears, or whose container or label bears, a
trademark, trade name or other identifying mark used without authorization of
the owner of rights to the trademark, trade name or identifying mark.
      (2)   Any unmarked or unlabeled substance that is represented to be a
controlled substance manufactured, processed, packed or distributed by a person
other than the person that manufactured, processed, packed or distributed it.
      (3)   Any substance that is represented to be a controlled substance but
is not a controlled substance or is a different controlled substance.
      (4)   Any substance other than a controlled substance that a reasonable
person would believe to be a controlled substance because of its similarity in
shape, size and color, or its markings, labeling, packaging, distribution or
the price for which it is sold or offered for sale.
   CULTIVATE. Includes planting, watering, fertilizing or tilling.
   DANGEROUS DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   DECEPTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   DISCIPLINARY COUNSEL. The disciplinary counsel appointed by the Board of
Commissioners on Grievances and Discipline of the Ohio Supreme Court under the
Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   DISPENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   DISTRIBUTE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2913.02(A) that constitutes theft of drugs,
or any violation of R.C. § 2925.02, 2925.03, 2925.04, 2925.041, 2925.05,
2925.06, 2925.11, 2925.12, 2925.13, 2925.22, 2925.23, 2925.24, 2925.31,
2925.32, 2925.36 or 2925.37.
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former law of any municipality, state
or of the United States, that is substantially equivalent to any section listed
in division (1) of this definition.
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former law of any municipality,
state or of the United States, of which planting, cultivating, harvesting,
processing, making, manufacturing, producing, shipping, transporting,
delivering, acquiring, possessing, storing, distributing, dispensing, selling,
inducing another to use, administering to another, using or otherwise dealing
with a controlled substance is an element.
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing or attempting to commit, any offense under division (1), (2) or (3)
of this definition.
   DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
   FELONY DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Any drug abuse offense that would constitute a
felony under the laws of this state, any other state or the United States.
   FENTANYL-RELATED COMPOUND. Any of the following:
      (1)   Fentanyl;
      (2)   Alpha-methylfentanyl (–[1-(alpha-methyl-beta-phenyl)ethyl-4-
piperidyl] propionanilide; 1-(1-methyl-2-phenylethyl)-4-(N-propanilido)
piperidine);
      (3)   Alpha-methylthiofentanyl (–[1-methyl-2-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-
piperidinyl]-N- phenylpropanamide);
      (4)   Beta-hydroxyfentanyl (–[1-(2-hydroxy-2-phenethyl-4-piperidinyl]-N-
phenylpropanamide);
      (5)   Beta-hydroxy-3-methylfentanyl (other name: N-[1-(2-hydroxy-2-
phenethyl)-3-methyl- 4-piperidinyl]-phenylpropanamide);
      (6)   3-methylfentanyl (–[3-methyl-1-(2-phenylethyl)-4-piperidyl]-
phenylpropanamide);
      (7)   3-methylthiofentanyl (–[3-methyl-1-[2-(thienyl)ethyl]-4-
piperidinyl]- phenylpropanamide);
      (8)   Para-fluorofentanyl (–(4-fluorophenyl)-N-[1-(2-phenethyl)-4-
piperidinyl]propanamide;
      (9)   Thiofentanyl (–phenyl-N-[1-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-piperidinyl]-
propanamide;
      (10)   Alfentanil;
      (11)   Carfentanil;
      (12)   Remifentanil;
      (13)   Sufentanil;
      (14)   Acetyl-alpha-methylfentanyl (–[1-(1-methyl-2-phenethyl)-4-
piperidinyl]-N- phenylacetamide); and
      (15)   Any compound that meets all of the following fentanyl
pharmacophore requirements to bind at the mu receptor, as identified by a
report from an established forensic laboratory, including acetylfentanyl,
furanylfentanyl, valerylfentanyl, butyrylfentanyl, isobutyrylfentanyl, 4-
methoxybutyrylfentanyl, para-fluorobutyrylfentanyl, acrylfentanyl, and ortho-
fluorofentanyl:
         A.   A chemical scaffold consisting of both of the following:
            1.   A five, six, or seven member ring structure containing a
nitrogen, whether or not further substituted;
            2.   An attached nitrogen to the ring, whether or not that nitrogen
is enclosed in a ring structure, including an attached aromatic ring or other
lipophilic group to that nitrogen.
         B.   A polar functional group attached to the chemical scaffold,
including but not limited to a hydroxyl, ketone, amide, or ester;
         C.   An alkyl or aryl substitution off the ring nitrogen of the
chemical scaffold; and
         D.   The compound has not been approved for medical use by the United
States food and drug administration.
   HARMFUL INTOXICANT. Does not include beer or intoxicating liquor, but means
any of the following:
      (1)   Any compound, mixture, preparation or substance the gas, fumes or
vapor of which when inhaled can induce intoxication, excitement, giddiness,
irrational behavior, depression, stupefaction, paralysis, unconsciousness,
asphyxiation or other harmful physiological effects, and includes but is not
limited to any of the following:
         A.   Any volatile organic solvent, plastic cement, model cement,
fingernail polish remover, lacquer thinner, cleaning fluid, gasoline or other
preparation containing a volatile organic solvent.
         B.   Any aerosol propellant.
         C.   Any fluorocarbon refrigerant.
         D.   Any anesthetic gas.
      (2)   Gamma Butyrolactone;
      (3)   1,4 Butanediol.
   HASHISH.
      (1)   A resin or a preparation of a resin to which both of the following
apply:
         A.   It is contained in or derived from any part of the plant of the
genus cannabis, whether in solid form or in a liquid concentrate, liquid
extract, or liquid distillate form.
         B.   It has a delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol concentration of more than
0.3%.
      (2)   The term does not include a hemp byproduct in the possession of a
licensed hemp processor under R.C. Chapter 928, provided that the hemp
byproduct is being produced, stored, and disposed of in accordance with rules
adopted under R.C. § 928.03.
   HYPODERMIC. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   JUVENILE. A person under 18 years of age.
   LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS. Has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   L.S.D. Lysergic acid diethylamide.
   MAJOR DRUG OFFENDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   MANDATORY PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   MANUFACTURE. To plant, cultivate, harvest, process, make, prepare or
otherwise engage in any part of the production of a drug, by propagation,
extraction, chemical synthesis or compounding, or any combination of the same,
and includes packaging, repackaging, labeling and other activities incident to
production.
   MANUFACTURER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   MARIHUANA. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01, except that it does
not include hashish.
   METHAMPHETAMINE. Methamphetamine, any salt, isomer or salt of an isomer of
methamphetamine, or any compound, mixture, preparation or substance containing
methamphetamine or any salt, isomer or salt of an isomer of methamphetamine.
   MINOR DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSE. Either of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11, as it existed prior to July 1, 1996,
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11, as it exists on and after July 1,
1996, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that is a misdemeanor
or a felony of the fifth degree.
   OFFICIAL WRITTEN ORDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   PERSON WITH A DRUG DEPENDENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
   PHARMACIST. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   PHARMACY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   POSSESS or POSSESSION. Having control over a thing or substance but may not
be inferred solely from mere access to the thing or substance through ownership
or occupation of the premises upon which the thing or substance is found.
   PREMISES OF A SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER’S FACILITY. Means the
parcel of real property on which any substance addiction service provider’s
facility is situated.
   PRESCRIPTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01
   PRESUMPTION FOR A PRISON TERM or PRESUMPTION THAT A PRISON TERM SHALL BE
IMPOSED. A presumption as described in R.C. § 2929.13(D) that a prison term is
a necessary sanction for a felony in order to comply with the purposes and
principles of sentencing under R.C. § 2929.11.
   PROFESSIONAL LICENSE. Any license, permit, certificate, registration,
qualification, admission, temporary license, temporary permit, temporary
certificate or temporary registration that is described in R.C. § 2925.01(W)(1)
to (W)(37) and that qualifies a person as a professionally licensed person.
   PROFESSIONALLY LICENSED PERSON. Any of the following:
      (1)   A person who has received a certificate or temporary certificate as
a certified public accountant or who has registered as a public accountant
under R.C. Chapter 4701 and who holds an Ohio permit issued under that chapter;
      (2)   A person who holds a certificate of qualification to practice
architecture issued or renewed and registered under R.C. Chapter 4703;
      (3)   A person who is registered as a landscape architect under R.C.
Chapter 4703 or who holds a permit as a landscape architect issued under that
chapter;
      (4)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4707;
      (5)   A person who has been issued a barber’s license, barber
instructor’s license, assistant barber instructor’s license, or independent
contractor’s license under R.C. Chapter 4709;
      (6)   A person licensed and regulated to engage in the business of a debt
pooling company by a legislative authority, under authority of R.C. Chapter
4710;
      (7)   A person who has been issued a cosmetologist’s license, hair
designer’s license, manicurist’s license, esthetician’s license, natural hair
stylist’s license, advanced license to practice cosmetology, advanced license
to practice hair design, advanced license to practice manicuring, advanced
license to practice esthetics, advanced license to practice natural hair
styling, cosmetology instructor’s license, hair design instructor’s license,
manicurist instructor’s license, esthetics instructor’s license, natural hair
style instructor’s license, independent contractor’s license, or tanning
facility permit under R.C. Chapter 4713;
      (8)   A person who has been issued a license to practice dentistry, a
general anesthesia permit, a conscious sedation permit, a limited resident’s
license, a limited teaching license, a dental hygienist’s license or a dental
hygienist’s teacher’s certificate under R.C. Chapter 4715;
      (9)   A person who has been issued an embalmer’s license, a funeral
director’s license, a funeral home license or a crematory license, or who has
been registered for an embalmer’s or funeral director’s apprenticeship under
R.C. Chapter 4717;
      (10)   A person who has been licensed as a registered nurse or practical
nurse, or who has been issued a certificate for the practice of nurse-midwifery
under R.C. Chapter 4723;
      (11)   A person who has been licensed to practice optometry or to engage
in optical dispensing under R.C. Chapter 4725;
      (12)   A person licensed to act as a pawnbroker under R.C. Chapter 4727;
      (13)   A person licensed to act as a precious metals dealer under R.C.
Chapter 4728;
      (14)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 as a pharmacist or
pharmacy intern or registered under that chapter as a registered pharmacy
technician, certified pharmacy technician, or pharmacy technician trainee;
      (15)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 as a manufacturer of
dangerous drugs, outsourcing facility, third-party logistics provider,
repackager of dangerous drugs, wholesale distributor of dangerous drugs, or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs;
      (16)   A person who is authorized to practice as a physician assistant
under R.C. Chapter 4730;
      (17)   A person who has been issued a license to practice medicine and
surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, or podiatric medicine and surgery
under R.C. Chapter 4731 or has been issued a certificate to practice a limited
branch of medicine under that chapter;
      (18)   A person licensed as a psychologist, independent school
psychologist, or school psychologist under R.C. Chapter 4732;
      (19)   A person registered to practice the profession of engineering or
surveying under R.C. Chapter 4733;
      (20)   A person who has been issued a license to practice chiropractic
under R.C. Chapter 4734;
      (21)   A person licensed to act as a real estate broker or real estate
salesperson under R.C. Chapter 4735;
      (22)   A person registered as a registered environmental health
specialist under R.C. Chapter 4736;
      (23)   A person licensed to operate or maintain a junkyard under R.C.
Chapter 4737;
      (24)   A person who has been issued a motor vehicle salvage dealer’s
license under R.C. Chapter 4738;
      (25)   A person who has been licensed to act as a steam engineer under
R.C. Chapter 4739;
      (26)   A person who has been issued a license or temporary permit to
practice veterinary medicine or any of its branches, or who is registered as a
graduate animal technician under R.C. Chapter 4741;
      (27)   A person who has been issued a hearing aid dealer’s or fitter’s
license or trainee permit under R.C. Chapter 4747;
      (28)   A person who has been issued a class A, class B or class C license
or who has been registered as an investigator or security guard employee under
R.C. Chapter 4749;
      (29)   A person licensed to practice as a nursing home administrator
under R.C. Chapter 4751;
      (30)   A person licensed to practice as a speech-language pathologist or
audiologist under R.C. Chapter 4753;
      (31)   A person issued a license as an occupational therapist or physical
therapist under R.C. Chapter 4755;
      (32)   A person who is licensed as a licensed professional clinical
counselor, licensed professional counselor, social worker, independent social
worker, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage and family
therapist, or registered as a social work assistant under R.C. Chapter 4757;
      (33)   A person issued a license to practice dietetics under R.C. Chapter
4759;
      (34)   A person who has been issued a license or limited permit to
practice respiratory therapy under R.C. Chapter 4761;
      (35)   A person who has been issued a real estate appraiser certificate
under R.C. Chapter 4763;
      (36)   A person who has been issued a home inspector license under R.C.
Chapter 4764;
      (37)   A person who has been admitted to the bar by order of the Ohio
Supreme Court in compliance with its prescribed and published rules;
      (38)   A person who has been issued a license to practice as a certified
mental health assistant under R.C. Chapter 4772.
   PUBLIC PREMISES. Any hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall or other
place of public accommodation, business, amusement or resort.
   SALE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   SAMPLE DRUG. A drug or pharmaceutical preparation that would be hazardous to
health or safety if used without the supervision of a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs, or a drug of abuse, and that, at
one time, had been placed in a container plainly marked as a sample by a
manufacturer.
SCHEDULE I, SCHEDULE II, SCHEDULE III, SCHEDULE IV or SCHEDULE V. Have the same
meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   SCHOOL. Any school operated by a board of education, any community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or any nonpublic school for which the
State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under R.C. § 3301.07,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities or training provided
by the school is being conducted at the time a criminal offense is committed.
   SCHOOL BUILDING. Any building in which any of the instruction,
extracurricular activities or training provided by a school is conducted,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities or training provided
by the school is being conducted in the school building at the time a criminal
offense is committed.
   SCHOOL PREMISES. Either of the following:
      (1)   The parcel of real property on which any school is situated,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted on the premises at the time a
criminal offense is committed.
      (2)   Any other parcel of real property that is owned or leased by a
board of education of a school, the governing authority of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or the governing body of a nonpublic
school for which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards
under R.C. § 3301.07 and on which some of the instruction, extracurricular
activities or training of the school is conducted, whether or not any
instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by the school is
being conducted on the parcel of real property at the time a criminal offense
is committed.
   STANDARD PHARMACEUTICAL REFERENCE MANUAL. The current edition, with
cumulative changes if any, of references that are approved by the State Board
of Pharmacy.
   SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Means an agency, association,
corporation or other legal entity, individual, or program that provides one or
more of the following at a facility:
      (1)   Either alcohol addiction services, or drug addiction services, or
both such services that are certified by the Ohio Director of Mental Health and
Addiction Services under R.C. § 5119.36;
      (2)   Recovery supports that are related to either alcohol addiction
services, or drug addiction services, or both such services and paid for with
federal, state, or local funds administered by the Ohio Department of Mental
Health and Addiction Services or a board of alcohol, drug addiction, and mental
health services.
   UNIT DOSE. An amount or unit or a compound, mixture or preparation
containing a controlled substance that is separately identifiable and in a form
that indicates that it is the amount or unit by which the controlled substance
is separately administered to or taken by an individual.
   WHOLESALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
(R.C. § 2925.01)
§ 624.02 ADULT USE CANNABIS CONTROL; LIMITATIONS ON CONDUCT BY INDIVIDUALS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780 and notwithstanding
any conflicting provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code, an adult use
consumer, may do the following:
      (1)   Use adult use cannabis;
      (2)   Possess, transfer without remuneration to another adult consumer,
or transport adult use cannabis, subject to division (b) of this section; and
      (3)   Purchase adult use cannabis from an adult use dispensary per day in
amounts that do not exceed the possession limits set forth in division (b)(1)
of this section.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3796:
      (1)   The amount of cannabis that may be possessed by an adult use
consumer shall not exceed:
         A.   Two and one-half ounces of adult use cannabis in any form except
adult use extract; and
         B.   Fifteen grams of adult use cannabis in the form of adult use
extract.
      (2)   The amount of cannabis that may be transferred by an adult use
consumer without remuneration and not advertised or promoted to the public
shall not exceed:
         A.   Two and one-half ounces of adult use cannabis in any form except
adult use extract; and
         B.   Fifteen grams of adult use cannabis in the form of adult use
extract.
      (3)   The amount of cannabis that may be transported by an adult use
consumer shall not exceed:
         A.   Two and one-half ounces of adult use cannabis in any form except
adult use extract; and
         B.   Fifteen grams of adult use cannabis in the form of adult use
extract.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780, an adult use
consumer shall not be subject to arrest, criminal prosecution, or civil penalty
for engaging in any of the activities authorized under R.C. Chapter 3780,
including:
      (1)   Obtaining, using, possessing, or transporting adult use cannabis;
      (2)   Performing conduct authorized under R.C. § 3780.29;
      (3)   Acquiring, possessing, using, purchasing, manufacturing, selling,
or transporting paraphernalia; and
      (4)   Assisting another adult use consumer, or allowing property to be
used, in any of the acts authorized by R.C. Chapter 3780.
   (d)   (1)   An individual is prohibited from operating a vehicle, motor
vehicle, streetcar, trackless trolley, bike, watercraft, or aircraft while
using adult use cannabis or while under the influence of adult use cannabis and
is subject to R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance
for any violation of this division.
      (2)   An individual is prohibited from smoking, vaporizing, or using any
other combustible adult use cannabis product while in a vehicle, motor vehicle,
streetcar, trackless trolley, bike, watercraft, or aircraft and is subject to
R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for any
violation of this division.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780, no individual under
21 years of age shall knowingly show or give false information concerning the
individual’s name, age, or other identification for the purpose of purchasing
adult use cannabis from an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C. Chapter
3780.
   (f)   Nothing in R.C. Chapter 3780 is intended to permit the transfer or
sale of adult use cannabis, with or without remuneration, to an individual
under 21 years of age, or to allow an individual under 21 years of age to
purchase, possess, use, process, transport, or cultivate cannabis except where
authorized by R.C. Chapter 3796.
   (g)   It is unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly permit their
residence, any other private property under their control, or any vehicle,
conveyance, or watercraft under their control to be used by an invitee of the
parent’s child or the guardian’s ward, if the invitee is under 21 years of age,
in a manner that constitutes a violation of R.C. Chapter 3780.
      (1)   A parent or guardian is deemed to have knowingly permitted their
residence, any other private property under their control, or any vehicle,
conveyance, or watercraft under their control to be used in violation of R.C.
Chapter 3780 if they knowingly authorize or permit consumption of cannabis by
underage invitees.
      (2)   Where the residence or other property has an owner and a tenant or
lessee, the trier of fact may infer that the residence or other property is
occupied only by the tenant or lessee.
(R.C. § 3780.36)
   (h)   Penalties.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3796, R.C. § 2925.11
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall apply when an adult use
consumer possesses an amount of cannabis greater than the limits set forth in
division (b)(1) of this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780, an adult use
consumer who uses adult use cannabis in public areas, or who violates division
(d)(2) of this section as a passenger, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   A.   An individual under 21 years of age who knowingly shows or
gives false information concerning the individual’s name, age, or other
identification for the purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining adult use
cannabis from an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C. Chapter 3780 is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If, in committing a first
violation, the offender presented to an adult use dispensary licensed under
R.C. Chapter 3780 a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $250 and not
more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more
than six months.
         B.   On a second violation in which, for the second time, the offender
presented to an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C. Chapter 3780 a false,
fictitious, or altered identification card, a false or fictitious driver’s
license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s license issued by any
state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, and
may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months. The
court also may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from
the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7). The court, in lieu of suspending
the offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or
driver’s license, instead may order the offender to perform a determinate
number of hours of community service, with the court determining the actual
number of hours and the nature of the community service the offender shall
perform.
         C.   On a third or subsequent violation in which, for the third or
subsequent time, the offender presented to an adult use dispensary licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3780 a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a
false or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a
driver’s license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than
$500 nor more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of
not more than six months. Except as provided in this division, the court also
may impose a class six suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6), and the court may order that the suspension
or denial remain in effect until the offender attains the age of 21 years. The
court, in lieu of suspending the offender’s temporary instruction permit,
probationary driver’s license, or driver’s license, instead may order the
offender to perform a determinate number of hours of community service, with
the court determining the actual number of hours and the nature of the
community service the offender shall perform.
      (4)   An individual who is under 21 years of age and who solicits another
individual to purchase adult use cannabis from an adult use dispensary licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3780 is guilty of:
         A.   For a first violation, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; and
         B.   For a second or subsequent violation, a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
      (5)   An employee or agent of an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C.
Chapter 3780 who knowingly sells cannabis to an individual under 21 years of
age is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   Any individual who violates R.C. § 3780.10(A), or R.C. § 3780.29
(F), is guilty of the illegal trafficking in drugs under R.C. § 2925.03 and the
illegal manufacture of drugs under R.C. § 2925.04.
      (7)   Any individual who violates division (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this
section guilty of the illegal trafficking in drugs under R.C. § 2925.03.
      (8)   Any individual who violates R.C. § 3780.20(B) is guilty of illegal
dispensing of drug samples under R.C. § 2925.36 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
      (9)   A.   An individual who violates division (g) of this section is
guilty of:
            1.   For a first violation, a misdemeanor of the third degree; and
            2.   For a second or subsequent violation, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
         B.   If a violation of division (g) of this section directly or
indirectly results in great bodily harm or death to any individual, the
individual violating division (g) is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 3780.99)
§ 624.03 CULTIVATION OF MARIHUANA.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cultivate marihuana.
   (b)   This section does not apply to any person listed in R.C. § 2925.03(B)
(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, to
the extent and under the circumstances described in that division.
   (c)   Whoever commits a violation of division (a) of this section is guilty
of illegal cultivation of marihuana.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in the following divisions, illegal
cultivation of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor or, if the offense was
committed in the vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 100 grams but
is less than 200 grams, illegal cultivation of marihuana is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree or, if the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school
or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 200 grams,
illegal cultivation of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (d)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s
appearance as a witness.
(R.C. § 2925.04(A), (B), (C)(5), (G)) (Prior Code, § 624.025)
§ 624.04 DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly obtain, possess or use a controlled
substance or a controlled substance analog.
   (b)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         A.   Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to
prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, and other persons whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731,
4741, and 4772.
         B.   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person who is
conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of an
anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States Food and
Drug Administration.
         C.   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes, dispenses or
administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic steroid that is
expressly intended for administration through implants to livestock or other
nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the Federal Food, Drug and
Cosmetic Act, and is sold, offered for sale, prescribed, dispensed or
administered for that purpose in accordance with that Act.
         D.   Any person who obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs if the prescription was issued for a legitimate medical purpose and not
altered, forged, or obtained through deception or commission of a theft
offense. As used in this division (b)(1)D., “deception” and “theft offense”
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (2)   A.   As used in division (b)(2) of this section:
            1.   “Community addiction services provider.” Has the same meaning
as in R.C. § 5119.01.
            2.   “Community control sanction.” Has the same meanings as in R.C.
§ 2929.01
            3.   “Drug treatment program.” Has the same meanings as in R.C. §
2929.01.
            4.   “Health care facility.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2919.16.
            5.   “Minor drug possession offense.” A violation of this section
or R.C. § 2925.11 that is a misdemeanor or a felony of the fifth degree.
            6.   “Peace officer.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
            7.   “Post-release control sanction.” Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2967.28.
            8.   “Public agency.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2930.01.
            9.   “Qualified individual.” A person who is acting in good faith
who seeks or obtains medical assistance for another person who is experiencing
a drug overdose, a person who experiences a drug overdose and who seeks medical
assistance for that overdose, or a person who is the subject of another person
seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that overdose as described in
division (b)(2)B. of this section.
            10.   “Seek or obtain medical assistance.” Includes, but is not
limited to making a 9-1-1 call, contacting in person or by telephone call an
on-duty peace officer, or transporting or presenting a person to a health care
facility.
         B.   Subject to division (b)(2)E. of this section, a qualified
individual shall not be arrested, charged, prosecuted, convicted, or penalized
pursuant to this chapter for a minor drug possession offense or a violation of
R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. § 2925.141 if all of the
following apply:
            1.   The evidence of the obtaining, possession, or use of the
controlled substance or controlled substance analog, drug abuse instruments, or
drug paraphernalia that would be the basis of the offense was obtained as a
result of the qualified individual seeking the medical assistance or
experiencing an overdose and needing medical assistance.
            2.   Subject to division (b)(2)F. of this section, within 30 days
after seeking or obtaining the medical assistance, the qualified individual
seeks and obtains a screening and receives a referral for treatment from a
community addiction services provider or a properly credentialed addiction
treatment professional.
            3.   Subject to division (b)(2)F. of this section, the qualified
individual who obtains a screening and receives a referral for treatment under
division (b)(2)B.2. of this section, upon the request of any prosecuting
attorney, submits documentation to the prosecuting attorney that verifies that
the qualified individual satisfied the requirements of that division. The
documentation shall be limited to the date and time of the screening obtained
and referral received.
         C.   If a person who is serving a community control sanction or is
under a sanction on post- release control acts pursuant to division (b)(2)B. of
this section, then R.C. § 2929.141(B), R.C. § 2929.15(B)(2), R.C. § 2929.25(D)
(3), or R.C. § 2967.28(F)(3) applies to the person with respect to any
violation of the sanction or post-release control sanction based on a minor
drug possession offense, as defined in R.C. § 2925.11, or a violation of R.C. §
2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. § 2925.141.
         D.   Nothing in division (b)(2)B. of this section shall be construed
to do any of the following:
            1.   Limit the admissibility of any evidence in connection with the
investigation or prosecution of a crime with regards to a defendant who does
not qualify for the protections of division (b)(2)B. of this section or with
regards to any crime other than a minor drug possession offense or a violation
of R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. § 2925.141 committed by a
person who qualifies for protection pursuant to division (b)(2)B. of this
section;
            2.   Limit any seizure of evidence or contraband otherwise
permitted by law;
            3.   Limit or abridge the authority of a peace officer to detain or
take into custody a person in the course of an investigation or to effectuate
an arrest for any offense except as provided in that division;
            4.   Limit, modify, or remove any immunity from liability available
pursuant to law in effect prior to September 13, 2016 to any public agency or
to an employee of any public agency.
         E.   Division (b)(2)B. of this section does not apply to any person
who twice previously has been granted an immunity under division (b)(2)B. of
this section. No person shall be granted an immunity under division (b)(2)B. of
this section more than two times.
         F.   Nothing in this section shall compel any qualified individual to
disclose protected health information in a way that conflicts with the
requirements of the “Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of
1996”, 104 Pub. L. No. 191, 110 Stat. 2021, 42 U.S.C. §§ 1320d et seq., as
amended, and regulations promulgated by the United States Department of Health
and Human Services to implement the act or the requirements of 42 C.F.R. Part
2.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of one of the
following:
      (1)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II, with the
exception of marihuana or hashish, whoever violates division (a) of this
section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V,
whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of possession of drugs.
The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(2)B. of this
section, possession of drugs is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the
offender previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         B.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds the bulk
amount, possession of drugs is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the violation is marihuana or a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance containing marihuana other than hashish,
whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of possession of
marihuana. The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(3)B. or (c)(3)C. of
this section, possession of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor.
         B.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 100 grams
but is less than 200 grams, possession of marihuana is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
         C.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 200 grams,
possession of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (4)   If the drug involved in the violation is hashish or a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance containing hashish, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of possession of hashish. The penalty
for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(4)B. or (c)(4)C. of
this section, possession of hashish is a minor misdemeanor.
         B.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds five grams
but is less than ten grams of hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds one
gram but is less than two grams of hashish in a liquid concentrate, liquid
extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
         C.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds ten grams of
hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds two grams of hashish in a liquid
concentrate, liquid extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is a combination of a fentanyl-related compound
and marihuana, one of the following applies:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(5)B. of this
section, the offender is guilty of possession of marihuana and shall be
punished as provided in division (c)(3) of this section. Except as otherwise
provided in division (c)(5)B. of this section, the offender is not guilty of
possession of a fentanyl-related compound under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) and shall
not be charged with, convicted of, or punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) for
possession of a fentanyl-related compound.
         B.   If the offender knows or has reason to know that the compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved contains a
fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of possession of a fentanyl-
related compound and shall be punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11).
      (6)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is a combination of a fentanyl-related compound
and any Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V controlled substance that is
not a fentanyl-related compound, one of the following applies:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(6)B. of this
section, the offender is guilty of possession of drugs and shall be punished as
provided in division (c)(2) of this section. Except as otherwise provided in
division (c)(6)B. of this section, the offender is not guilty of possession of
a fentanyl-related compound under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) and shall not be
charged with, convicted of, or punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) for
possession of a fentanyl-related compound.
         B.   If the offender knows or has reason to know that the compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved contains a
fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of possession of a fentanyl-
related compound and shall be punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11).
   (d)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s
appearance as a witness.
   (e)   In addition to any prison term or jail term authorized or required by
division (c) of this section and R.C. §§ 2929.13, 2929.14, 2929.22, 2929.24,
and 2929.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and in
addition to any other sanction that is imposed for the offense under this
section, R.C. §§ 2929.11 through 2929.18, or R.C. §§ 2929.21 through 2929.28,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, if applicable, the court
shall also do the following:
      (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to
any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
   (f)   (1)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
      (2)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (f) of this section, the
sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.11) (Prior Code, § 624.03)
Statutory reference:
   Felony drug possession offenses, see R.C. § 2925.11(C)
§ 624.05 POSSESSION OF DRUG ABUSE INSTRUMENTS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make, obtain, possess or use any instrument,
article or thing the customary and primary purpose of which is for the
administration or use of a dangerous drug, other than marihuana, when the
instrument involved is a hypodermic or syringe, whether or not of crude or
extemporized manufacture or assembly, and the instrument, article or thing
involved has been used by the offender to unlawfully administer or use a
dangerous drug, other than marihuana, or to prepare a dangerous drug, other
than marihuana, for unlawful administration or use.
   (b)   (1)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies
and other persons whose conduct was in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719,
4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, and 4772.
      (2)   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of this section when a person seeks or obtains medical assistance for
another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a person experiences a drug
overdose and seeks medical assistance for that overdose, or a person is the
subject of another person seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that
overdose.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing drug abuse
instruments, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a drug abuse offense, violation of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
      (3)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016, may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (d)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.12) (Prior Code, § 624.04)
§ 624.06 PERMITTING DRUG ABUSE.
   (a)   No person who is the owner, operator or person in charge of a
locomotive, watercraft, aircraft or other vehicle, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, shall knowingly permit the vehicle to be used for the commission of a
felony drug abuse offense.
   (b)   No person, who is the owner, lessee or occupant, or who has custody,
control or supervision of premises, or real estate, including vacant land,
shall knowingly permit his or her premises, or real estate, including vacant
land, to be used for the commission of a felony drug abuse offense by another
person.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting drug abuse.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, permitting
drug abuse is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Permitting drug abuse is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the felony drug abuse offense in question is a
violation of R.C. § 2925.02, 2925.03, or 2925.04, or if the felony drug abuse
offense in question is a violation of R.C. § 2925.041 and the offender had
actual knowledge, at the time the offender permitted the vehicle, premises, or
real estate to be used as described in division (a) or (b) of this section,
that the person who assembled or possessed the chemicals in question in
violation of R.C. § 2925.041 had assembled or possessed them with the intent to
manufacture a controlled substance in Schedule I or Schedule II in violation of
R.C. § 2925.04.
   (d)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
      (3)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016, may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
similar municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States that
arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender's license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (d)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. § 3719.21, the clerk of
the court shall pay a fine imposed for a violation of this section pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.18(A) in accordance with and subject to the requirements of R.C. §
2925.03(F). The agency that receives the fine shall use the fine as specified
in R.C. § 2925.03(F).
   (f)   Any premises or real estate that is permitted to be used in violation
of division (b) of this section constitutes a nuisance subject to abatement
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2925.13) (Prior Code, § 624.05)
§ 624.07 ABUSING HARMFUL INTOXICANTS.
   (a)   Except for lawful research, clinical, medical, dental or veterinary
purposes, no person, with purpose to induce intoxication or similar
physiological effects, shall obtain, possess or use a harmful intoxicant.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of abusing harmful
intoxicants, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a drug abuse offense, abusing harmful intoxicants is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
      (3)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to the September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (c)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.31) (Prior Code, § 624.07)
§ 624.08 IMPROPERLY DISPENSING OR DISTRIBUTING NITROUS OXIDE.
   (a)   No person who dispenses or distributes nitrous oxide in cartridges
shall fail to comply with either of the following:
      (1)   The record-keeping requirements established under division (c) of
this section.
      (2)   The labeling and transaction identification requirements
established under division (d) of this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is guilty
of improperly dispensing or distributing nitrous oxide, a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (c)   Beginning July 1, 2001, a person who dispenses or distributes nitrous
oxide shall record each transaction involving the dispensing or distribution of
the nitrous oxide on a separate card. The person shall require the purchaser to
sign the card and provide a complete residence address. The person dispensing
or distributing the nitrous oxide shall sign and date the card. The person
shall retain the card recording a transaction for one year from the date of the
transaction. The person shall maintain the cards at the person’s business
address and make them available during normal business hours for inspection and
copying by officers or employees of the State Board of Pharmacy or of other law
enforcement agencies that are authorized to investigate violations of this
code, R.C. Chapter 2925, Chapter 3719 or Chapter 4729, or federal drug abuse
control laws. The cards used to record each transaction shall inform the
purchaser of the following:
      (1)   That nitrous oxide cartridges are to be used only for purposes of
preparing food;
      (2)   That inhalation of nitrous oxide can have dangerous health effects;
and
      (3)   That it is a violation of state law to distribute or dispense
cartridges of nitrous oxide to any person under age 21, punishable as a felony
of the fifth degree.
   (d)   (1)   Each cartridge of nitrous oxide dispensed or distributed in this
municipality shall bear the following printed warning: “Nitrous oxide
cartridges are to be used only for purposes of preparing food. Nitrous oxide
cartridges may not be sold to persons under age 21. Do not inhale contents.
Misuse can be dangerous to your health.”
      (2)   Each time a person dispenses or distributes one or more cartridges
of nitrous oxide, the person shall mark the packaging containing the cartridges
with a label or other device that identifies the person who dispensed or
distributed the nitrous oxide and the person’s business address.
(R.C. § 2925.32(B)(4), (D)(2), (F), (G)) (Prior Code, § 624.073)
Statutory reference:
   Trafficking in harmful intoxicants, felony offenses, see R.C. § 2925.32
§ 624.09 POSSESSING NITROUS OXIDE IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   As used in this section, “motor vehicle,” “street” and “highway” have
the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (b)   Unless authorized by this code of ordinances or by state law, no
person shall possess an open cartridge of nitrous oxide in either of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   While operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on a
street, highway or other public or private property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking.
      (2)   While being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on a street,
highway or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular traffic or parking.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing nitrous oxide in
a motor vehicle, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (d)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for
possessing nitrous oxide in a motor vehicle, the court may suspend for not more
than five years the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit.
(R.C. § 2925.33) (Prior Code, § 624.076)
§ 624.10 ILLEGAL DISPENSING OF DRUG SAMPLES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly furnish a sample drug to another person.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to manufacturers,
wholesalers, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, licensed health professionals
authorized to prescribe drugs, and other persons whose conduct is in accordance
with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4725, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, and 4722.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal dispensing of
drug samples.
      (2)   If the drug involved in the offense is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II, with the
exception of marihuana, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the offense is a dangerous drug or a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule
IV or Schedule V, or is marihuana, the penalty for the offense shall be
determined as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in the following division, illegal
dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
         B.   If the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or in
the vicinity of a juvenile, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
   (d)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
      (3)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016, may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
similar municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States that
arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender's license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (d)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. § 3719.21, the clerk of
the court shall pay a fine imposed for a violation of this section pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.18(A) in accordance with and subject to the requirements of R.C. §
2925.03(F). The agency that receives the fine shall use the fine as specified
in R.C. § 2925.03(F).
(R.C. § 2925.36(A) - (D), (F)) (Prior Code, § 624.08)
Statutory reference:
   Felony offenses, see R.C. § 2925.36(C)(2)
§ 624.11 POSSESSION, SALE AND DISPOSAL OF HYPODERMICS.
   (a)   Possession of a hypodermic is authorized for the following:
      (1)   A manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in hypodermics, or
medication packaged in hypodermics, and any authorized agent of employee of
that manufacturer, distributor or dealer, in the regular course of business;
      (2)   A terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, in the regular course of
business;
      (3)   A person authorized to administer injections, in the regular course
of the person’s profession or employment;
      (4)   A person, when the hypodermic in his or her possession was lawfully
obtained and is kept and used for the purpose of self-administration of insulin
or other drug prescribed for the treatment of disease by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs;
      (5)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for legal research, clinical,
educational or medicinal purposes;
      (6)   A farmer, for the lawful administration of a drug to an animal;
      (7)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for lawful professional,
mechanical, trade or craft purposes.
   (b)   No manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in, hypodermics or
medication packaged in hypodermics, or their authorized agents or employees,
and no terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall display any hypodermic for
sale. No person authorized to possess a hypodermic pursuant to division (a) of
this section shall negligently fail to take reasonable precautions to prevent
any hypodermic in the person’s possession from theft or acquisition by any
unauthorized person.
(R.C. § 3719.172(A), (B))
   (c)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of a violation of division (b) of this section, R.C. § 3719.5, 3719.06,
3719.13, 3719.172(B) or 3719.31, or a drug abuse offense, a violation of
division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 3719.99(E))
(Prior Code, § 624.09)
Statutory reference:
   Felony offenses, see R.C. § 3719.172(C), (D)
§ 624.12 EVIDENCE.
   (a)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of this chapter or
R.C. Chapter 2925 or Chapter 3719, a laboratory report from the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation or a laboratory operated by another
law enforcement agency, or a laboratory established by or under the authority
of an institution of higher education that has its main campus in this state
and that is accredited by the Association of American Universities or the North
Central Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, primarily for the
purpose of providing scientific service to law enforcement agencies, and signed
by the person performing the analysis, stating that the substance that is the
basis of the alleged offense has been weighed and analyzed and stating the
findings as to the content, weight and identity of the substance and that it
contains any amount of a controlled substance and the number and description of
unit dosages, is prima facie evidence of the content, identity and weight or
the existence and number of unit dosages of the substance. In any criminal
prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2925.041 or a violation of this chapter,
R.C. Chapter 2925 or R.C. Chapter 3719 that is based on the possession of
chemicals sufficient to produce a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance
included in Schedule I, Schedule II, Schedule III, Schedule IV or Schedule V, a
laboratory report from the Bureau or from any laboratory that is operated or
established as described in this division that is signed by the person
performing the analysis, stating that the substances that are the basis of the
alleged offense have been weighed and analyzed and stating the findings as to
the content, weight, and identity of each of the substances, is prima facie
evidence of the content, identity and weight of the substances.
      (2)   Attached to that report shall be a copy of a notarized statement by
the signer of the report giving the name of the signer and stating that the
signer is an employee of the laboratory issuing the report and that performing
the analysis is a part of the signer’s regular duties, and giving an outline of
the signer’s education, training and experience for performing an analysis of
materials included under this section. The signer shall attest that
scientifically accepted tests were performed with due caution, and that the
evidence was handled in accordance with established and accepted procedures
while in the custody of the laboratory.
   (b)   The prosecuting attorney shall serve a copy of the report on the
attorney of record for the accused, or on the accused if the accused has no
attorney, prior to any proceeding in which the report is to be used against the
accused other than at a preliminary hearing or grand jury proceeding where the
report may be used without having been previously served upon the accused.
   (c)   The report shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity
and weight or the existence and number of unit dosages of the substance if the
accused or the accused’s attorney demands the testimony of the person signing
the report, by serving the demand upon the prosecuting attorney, within seven
days from the accused or the accused’s attorney’s receipt of the report. The
time may be extended by a trial judge in the interests of justice.
   (d)   Any report issued for use under this section shall contain notice of
the right of the accused to demand, and the manner in which the accused shall
demand, the testimony of the person signing the report.
   (e)   Any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or R.C.
Chapter 2925 or Chapter 3719 is entitled, upon written request made to the
prosecuting attorney, to have a portion of the substance that is, or of each of
the substances that are, the basis of the alleged violation preserved for the
benefit of independent analysis performed by a laboratory analyst employed by
the accused person, or, if the accused is indigent, by a qualified laboratory
analyst appointed by the court. The portion shall be a representative sample of
the entire substance that is, or of each of the substances that are, the basis
of the alleged violation and shall be of sufficient size, in the opinion of the
court, to permit the accused’s analyst to make a thorough scientific analysis
concerning the identity of the substance or substances. The prosecuting
attorney shall provide the accused’s analyst with the sample portion at least
14 days prior to trial, unless the trial is to be held in a court not of record
or unless the accused person is charged with a minor misdemeanor, in which case
the prosecuting attorney shall provide the accused’s analyst with the sample
portion at least three days prior to trial. If the prosecuting attorney
determines that such a sample portion cannot be preserved and given to the
accused’s analyst, the prosecuting attorney shall so inform the accused person,
or the accused’s attorney. In such a circumstance, the accused person is
entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting attorney, to have the
accused’s privately employed or court appointed analyst present at an analysis
of the substance that is, or the substances that are, the basis of the alleged
violation, and, upon further written request, to receive copies of all recorded
scientific data that result from the analysis and that can be used by an
analyst in arriving at conclusions, findings or opinions concerning the
identity of the substance or substances subject to the analysis.
   (f)   In addition to the rights provided under division (e) of this section,
any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2925
or Chapter 3719 that involves a bulk amount of a controlled substance, or any
multiple thereof, or who is accused of a violation of R.C. § 2925.11 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, other than a minor misdemeanor
violation, that involves marihuana, is entitled, upon written request made to
the prosecuting attorney, to have a laboratory analyst of the accused’s choice,
or, if the accused is indigent, a qualified laboratory analyst appointed by the
court, present at a measurement or weighing of the substance that is the basis
of the alleged violation. Also, the accused person is entitled, upon further
written request, to receive copies of all recorded scientific data that result
from the measurement or weighing and that can be used by an analyst in arriving
at conclusions, findings, or opinions concerning the weight, volume or number
of unit doses of the substance subject to the measurement or weighing.
(R.C. § 2925.51)
   (g)   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required under
R.C. §§ 2929.18 and 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required
under any provision of law, the court imposing sentence upon an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a drug abuse offense may order the offender to
pay to the state, municipal or county law enforcement agencies that handled the
investigation and prosecution all of the costs that the state, municipal
corporation or county reasonably incurred in having tests performed under this
section or R.C. § 2925.51 or in any other manner on any substance that was the
basis of, or involved in, the offense to determine whether the substance
contained any amount of a controlled substance if the results of the tests
indicate that the substance tested contained any controlled substance. No court
shall order an offender under this section to pay the costs of tests performed
on a substance if the results of the tests do not indicate that the substance
tested contained any controlled substance. The court shall hold a hearing to
determine the amount of costs to be imposed under this section. The court may
hold the hearing as part of the sentencing hearing for the offender.
(R.C. § 2925.511)
(Prior Code, § 624.10)
§ 624.13 DOUBLE JEOPARDY.
   No person shall be prosecuted for a violation of this chapter if the person
has been acquitted or convicted under the federal drug abuse control laws of
the same act or omission which, it is alleged, constitutes a violation of this
chapter.
(R.C. §§ 2925.50, 3719.19) (Prior Code, § 624.11)
§ 624.14 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE SCHEDULES.
   Controlled Substance Schedules I, II, III, IV and V, as established in R.C.
§ 3719.41 and amended by R.C. §§ 3719.43 and 3719.44, are hereby adopted by
reference, and shall be treated as if set forth in full herein.
(Prior Code, § 624.12)
§ 624.15 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE OR PRESCRIPTION LABELS.
   (a)   Whenever a manufacturer sells a controlled substance, and whenever a
wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility sells a controlled substance in
a package the wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility has prepared, the
manufacturer or the wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility, as the
case may be, shall securely affix to each package in which the controlled
substance is contained a label showing in legible English the name and address
of the vendor and the quantity, kind, and form of controlled substance
contained therein. No person, except a pharmacist for the purpose of dispensing
a controlled substance upon a prescription shall alter, deface, or remove any
label so affixed. As used in this division, “repackager” and “outsourcing
facility” have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   (b)   No person shall alter, deface or remove any label affixed pursuant to
R.C. § 3719.08 as long as any of the original contents remain.
(R.C. § 3719.08(A), (E))
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, or R.C. § 3719.07 or § 3719.08, or a drug abuse offense, a violation
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If
the violation involves the sale, offer to sell, or possession of a Schedule I
or Schedule II controlled substance, with the exception of marihuana, and if
the offender, as a result of the violation, is a major drug offender, then R.C.
§ 3719.99(D) applies.
(R.C. § 3719.99(C))
(Prior Code, § 624.13)
§ 624.16 SALE OF PARAPHERNALIA GENERALLY.
   (a)   As used in this section, “drug paraphernalia” means any equipment,
product or material of any kind that is used by the offender, intended by the
offender for use or designed for use in propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the
human body, a controlled substance in violation of this chapter. “Drug
paraphernalia” includes but is not limited to any of the following equipment,
products or materials that are used by the offender, intended by the offender
for use, or designed by the offender for use, in any of the following manners:
      (1)   A kit for propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting any
species of a plant that is a controlled substance or from which a controlled
substance can be derived.
      (2)   A kit for manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing or preparing a controlled substance.
      (3)   Any object, instrument or device for manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing or preparing methamphetamine.
      (4)   An isomerization device for increasing the potency of any species
of a plant that is a controlled substance.
      (5)   Testing equipment for identifying, or analyzing the strength,
effectiveness, or purity of, a controlled substance, except for those exempted
in division (d)(4) of this section;
      (6)   A scale or balance for weighing or measuring a controlled
substance.
      (7)   A diluent or adulterant, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose or lactose, for cutting a controlled substance.
      (8)   A separation gin or sifter for removing twigs and seeds from, or
otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana.
      (9)   A blender, bowl, container, spoon or mixing device for compounding
a controlled substance.
      (10)   A capsule, balloon, envelope or container for packaging small
quantities of a controlled substance.
      (11)   A container or device for storing or concealing a controlled
substance.
      (12)   A hypodermic syringe, needle or instrument for parenterally
injecting a controlled substance into the human body.
      (13)   An object, instrument or device for ingesting, inhaling or
otherwise introducing into the human body, marihuana, cocaine, hashish or
hashish oil, such as a metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic
pipe, with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head or punctured
metal bowl; water pipe; carburetion tube or device; smoking or carburetion
mask; roach clip or similar object used to hold burning material, such as a
marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the
hand; miniature cocaine spoon, or cocaine vial; chamber pipe; carburetor pipe;
electric pipe; air driver pipe; chillum; bong; or ice pipe or chiller.
   (b)   In determining if any equipment, product or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition
to other relevant factors, the following:
      (1)   Any statement by the owner or by anyone in control of the
equipment, product or material, concerning its use.
      (2)   The proximity in time or space of the equipment, product or
material, or of the act relating to the equipment, product or material, to a
violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2925.
      (3)   The proximity of the equipment, product or material to any
controlled substance.
      (4)   The existence of any residue of a controlled substance on the
equipment, product or material.
      (5)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the owner, or of
anyone in control, of the equipment, product or material, to deliver it to any
person whom he or she knows intends to use the equipment, product or material
to facilitate a violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter
2925. A finding that the owner or anyone in control of the equipment, product
or material is not guilty of a violation of any other provision of this chapter
or R.C. Chapter 2925 does not prevent a finding that the equipment, product or
material was intended or designed by the offender for use as drug
paraphernalia.
      (6)   Any oral or written instruction provided with the equipment,
product or material concerning its use.
      (7)   Any descriptive material accompanying the equipment, product or
material and explaining or depicting its use.
      (8)   National or local advertising concerning the use of the equipment,
product or material.
      (9)   The manner and circumstances in which the equipment, product or
material is displayed for sale.
      (10)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of the sales of the
equipment, product or material to the total sales of the business enterprise.
      (11)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses of the equipment,
product or material in the community.
      (12)   Expert testimony concerning the use of the equipment, product or
material.
   (c)   (1)   Subject to divisions (d)(2), (d)(3), and (d)(4) of this section,
no person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, drug
paraphernalia.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly sell, or possess or manufacture with
purpose to sell, drug paraphernalia, if he or she knows or reasonably should
know that the equipment, product or material will be used as drug
paraphernalia.
      (3)   No person shall place an advertisement in any newspaper, magazine,
handbill or other publication that is published and printed and circulates
primarily within this state, if he or she knows that the purpose of the
advertisement is to promote the illegal sale in this municipality or in this
state of the equipment, product or material that the offender intended or
designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
   (d)   (1)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies
and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715,
4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, and 4772. This section shall not be construed to
prohibit the possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by R.C. §
3719.172.
      (2)   Division (c)(1) of this section does not apply to a person’s use,
or possession with purpose to use, any drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a
product, or material of any kind that is used by the person, intended by the
person for use, or designed for use in storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body
marihuana.
      (3)   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of division (c)(1) of this section when a person seeks or obtains
medical assistance for another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a
person experiences a drug overdose and seeks medical assistance for that
overdose, or a person is the subject of another person seeking or obtaining
medical assistance for that overdose.
      (4)   Division (c)(1) of this section does not apply to a person’s use,
or possession with purpose to use, any drug testing strips to determine the
presence of fentanyl or a fentanyl-related compound.
   (e)   Notwithstanding R.C. Chapter 2981, any drug paraphernalia that was
used, possessed, sold or manufactured in violation of this section shall be
seized, after a conviction for that violation, shall be forfeited, and upon
forfeiture shall be disposed of pursuant to R.C. § 2981.12(B).
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (c)(1) of this section is guilty of
illegal use or possession of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (f)(3) of this section, whoever
violates division (c)(2) of this section is guilty of dealing in drug
paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (c)(2) of this section by selling drug
paraphernalia to a juvenile is guilty of selling drug paraphernalia to
juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (c)(3) of this section is guilty of
illegal advertising of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (g)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33.
      (3)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016, may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (g)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.14)
   (h)   Illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia.
      (1)   As used in this division (h), “drug paraphernalia” has the same
meaning as in division (a) of this section.
      (2)   In determining if any equipment, product, or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition
to other relevant factors, all factors identified in division (b) of this
section.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, any
drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a product, or material of any kind that
is used by the person, intended by the person for use, or designed for use in
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body marihuana.
      (4)   This division (h) does not apply to any person identified in
division (d)(1) of this section, and it shall not be construed to prohibit the
possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by R.C. § 3719.172.
      (5)   A.   Division (e) of this section applies with respect to any drug
paraphernalia that was used or possessed in violation of division (h) of this
section.
         B.   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of this division (h) when a person seeks or obtains medical
assistance for another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a person
experiences a drug overdose and seeks medical assistance for that overdose, or
a person is the subject of another person seeking or obtaining medical
assistance for that overdose.
      (6)   A.   Whoever violates division (h)(3) of this section is guilty of
illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia, a minor misdemeanor.
         B.   Arrest or conviction for a violation of division (h)(3) of this
section does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the
person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s
criminal record, including any inquiries contained in any application for
employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with
the person’s appearance as a witness.
      (7)   A.   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for
a violation of division (h) of this section, the court shall do the following,
if applicable:
            1.   If the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or
the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of
circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or permit for not more than five years.
            2.   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
         B.   1.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under division (h)
of this section prior to September 13, 2016, may file a motion with the
sentencing court requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an
offender who pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another
state or the United States that arose out of the same set of circumstances as
the violation for which the offender’s license or permit was suspended under
division (h) of this section shall not file such a motion.
            2.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (h)(7)B. of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.141)
(Prior Code, § 624.15)
§ 624.17 COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly possess any counterfeit controlled
substance.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section shall be guilty of
possession of counterfeit controlled substances, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 2925.37(A), (G)) (Prior Code, § 624.16)
Statutory reference:
   Trafficking, other felony counterfeit controlled substance offenses, see
R.C. § 2925.37(H) - (M)
§ 624.18 PSEUDOEPHEDRINE SALES.
   (a)   Unlawful purchases.
      (1)   As used in divisions (a), (b), (c) and (d) of this section:
         A.   “Consumer product.” Any food or drink that is consumed or used by
humans and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only
pursuant to a prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by humans.
         B.   “Ephedrine.” Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts
of optical isomers.
         C.   “Ephedrine product.” A consumer product that contains ephedrine.
         D.   “Pseudoephedrine.” Any material, compound, mixture, or
preparation that contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts,
optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers.
         E.   “Pseudoephedrine product.” A consumer product that contains
pseudoephedrine.
         F.   “Retailer.” A place of business that offers consumer products for
sale to the general public.
         G.   “Single-ingredient preparation.” A compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that contains a single active ingredient.
         H.   “Terminal distributor of dangerous drugs.” Has the same meaning
as in R.C. § 4729.01.
      (2)   A.   1.   No individual shall knowingly purchase, receive, or
otherwise acquire an amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
that is greater than either of the following unless the pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product is dispensed by a pharmacist pursuant to a valid
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist and the licensed health professional
authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715,
4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, or 4772:
               a.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single day;
               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
            2.   The limits specified in divisions (a)(2)A.1.a. and (a)
(2)A.1.b. of this section apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine or
base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product,
respectively. The limits do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
         B.   It is not a violation of division (b)(1) of this section for an
individual to receive or accept more than an amount of pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product specified in division (a)(2)A.1.a. or (a)(2)A.1.b. of this
section if the individual is an employee of a retailer or terminal distributor
of dangerous drugs, and the employee receives or accepts from the retailer or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product in a sealed container in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (3)   A.   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly purchase,
receive, or otherwise acquire a pseudoephedrine product, or ephedrine product
unless the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product is dispensed by a
pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist
and the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, or 4772.
         B.   Division (a)(3)A. of this section does not apply to an individual
under 18 years of age who purchases, receives, or otherwise acquires a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product from any of the following:
            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs
or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to that individual and whose conduct is in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, or 4772;
            2.   A parent or guardian of that individual who provides the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            3.   A person, as authorized by that individual’s parent or
guardian, who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            4.   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs who
provides the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to that individual if
the individual is an employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs and the individual receives or accepts from the retailer or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product in a sealed container in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (4)   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly show or give
false information concerning the individual’s name, age, or other
identification for the purpose of purchasing, receiving, or otherwise acquiring
a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
      (5)   No individual shall knowingly fail to comply with the requirements
of R.C. § 3715.051(B).
      (6)   Whoever violates division (a)(2)A. of this section is guilty of
unlawful purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (a)(3)A. of this section is guilty of
underage purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if it could be
committed by an adult.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (a)(4) of this section is guilty of using
false information to purchase a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the first degree if it could be
committed by an adult.
      (9)   Whoever violates division (a)(5) of this section is guilty of
improper purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2925.55)
   (b)   Unlawful retail sales.
      (1)   A.   1.   Except as provided in division (b)(1)B. of this section,
no retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee of a
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall knowingly sell, offer
to sell, hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise provide to any individual an
amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is greater than
either of the following:
               a.   Three and six-tenths grams within a period of a single day;
               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
            2.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions (b)(1)A.1.a. and
(b)(1)A.1.b. of this section apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine
or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product,
respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
         B.   1.   Division (b)(1)A. of this section does not apply to any
quantity of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product dispensed by a
pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs if the conduct of the pharmacist and
the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, or 4772.
            2.   It is not a violation of division (b)(1)A. of this section for
a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee of either to
provide to an individual more than an amount of pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product specified in division (b)(1)A.1.a. or (b)(1)A.1.b. of this
section under either of the following circumstances:
               a.   The individual is an employee of the retailer or terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs, and the employee receives or accepts from the
retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product in a sealed container in
connection with manufacturing, warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging,
loading, or unloading of the product;
               b.   A stop-sale alert is generated after the submission of
information to the national precursor log exchange under the conditions
described in R.C. § 3715.052(A)(2).
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in division (b)(2)B. of this section, no
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee of a
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall sell, offer to sell,
hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise provide a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product to an individual who is under 18 years of age.
         B.   Division (b)(2)A. of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs
or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years of age and whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731,
4741, or 4772;
            2.   A parent or guardian of an individual under 18 years of age
who provides a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            3.   A person who, as authorized by the individual’s parent or
guardian, dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years of age;
            4.   The provision by a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, or employee of either of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
in a sealed container to an employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs who is under 18 years of age in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (3)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail
to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.051(A) or R.C. § 3715.052(A)(2).
      (4)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail
to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.052(A)(1).
      (5)   Whoever violates division (b)(1)A. of this section is guilty of
unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (b)(2)A. of this section is guilty of
unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to a minor, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (b)(3) of this section is guilty of
improper sale of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a misdemeanor
of the second degree.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (b)(4) of this section is guilty of
failing to submit information to the national precursor log exchange, a
misdemeanor for which the offender shall be fined not more than $1,000 per
violation.
(R.C. § 2925.56)
   (c)   Transaction scans.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division and division (d) of this section,
the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
         A.   “Card holder.” Any person who presents a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent or employee
of a seller, to purchase or receive any pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product from the seller, agent or employee.
         B.   “Identification card” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2927.021.
         C.   “Seller.” A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs.
         D.   “Transaction scan.” The process by which a seller or an agent or
employee of a seller checks by means of a transaction scan device the validity
of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card that is
presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving any pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product.
         E.   “Transaction scan device.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2927.021.
      (2)   A.   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a
card holder as a condition for selling, giving away or otherwise distributing
to the card holder a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
         B.   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (c)(2)A. of this section fails to match the information printed
on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information
so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee
of the seller shall sell, give away or otherwise distribute any pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to the card holder.
         C.   Division (c)(2)A. of this section does not preclude a seller or
an agent or employee of a seller as a condition for selling, giving away or
otherwise distributing a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the
person presenting the document from using a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or an identification card if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip
that may be scanned by the device.
      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. §
4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this
division (c) and division (d) of this section.
      (4)   A.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except the following:
            1.   The name, address, and date of birth of the person listed on
the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by
a card holder;
            2.   The expiration date, identification number, and issuing agency
of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by a card holder.
         B.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the
information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be
recorded and maintained under division (c)(4)A. of this section except for
purposes of division (d) of this section, R.C. § 2925.58, or R.C. § 3715.052(A)
(1).
         C.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a
transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified in
division (c)(2)A. of this section.
         D.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or
otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including but not limited to selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by division (d) of this section
or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (c) or division (d) of this section
relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any responsibility to
comply with any other applicable state or federal laws or rules governing the
sale, giving away or other distribution of pseudoephedrine products or
ephedrine products.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (c)(2)B. or (c)(4) of this section is
guilty of engaging in an illegal pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender a civil penalty of
up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court shall pay each
collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into the County
Treasury.
(R.C. § 2925.57)
   (d)   Affirmative defenses.
      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found
guilty of a charge of a violation of division (b) of this section in which the
age of the purchaser or other recipient of a pseudoephedrine product is an
element of the alleged violation if the seller, agent or employee raises and
proves as an affirmative defense that all of the following occurred:
         A.   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive a pseudoephedrine
product presented a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card.
         B.   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that the
license or card was valid.
         C.   The pseudoephedrine product was sold, given away or otherwise
distributed to the card holder in reasonable reliance upon the identification
presented and the completed transaction scan.
      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller
has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (d)(1) of this section,
the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of division (b) of
this section shall consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and
implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of division (b) of this
section. For purposes of division (d)(1)C. of this section, the trier of fact
shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and
the completed transaction scan may require a seller or an agent or employee of
a seller to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a
transaction scan device does not excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a
seller from exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following:
         A.   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a
seller sells, gives away or otherwise distributes a pseudoephedrine product is
18 years of age or older;
         B.   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by
division (d)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a
Deputy Registrar who issued an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50
through 4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of
that issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.
(R.C. § 2925.58)
   (e)   Retailer’s duties.
      (1)   As used in divisions (e) and (f) of this section:
         A.   “Consumer product.” Any food or drink that is consumed or used by
humans and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only
pursuant to a prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by humans.
         B.   “Drug.” Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         C.   “Ephedrine.” Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts
of optical isomers.
         D.   “Ephedrine product.” A consumer product that contains ephedrine.
         E.   “Law enforcement official.” An officer or employee of any agency
or authority of the United States, a state, a territory, a political
subdivision of a state or territory, or an Indian tribe, who is empowered by
the law to investigate or conduct an official inquiry into a potential
violation of law or prosecute or otherwise conduct a criminal, civil, or
administrative proceeding arising from an alleged violation of law.
         F.   “Licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs.” Has
the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         G.   “National Precursor Log Exchange” or “Exchange.” The electronic
system for tracking sales of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products on
a national basis that is administered by the National Association of Drug
Diversion Investigators or a successor organization.
         H.   “Pharmacist.” A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 to engage
in the practice of pharmacy.
         I.   “Pharmacy.” Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         J.   “Prescriber.” Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         K.   “Prescription.” Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         L.   “Proof of age.” A driver’s license, a commercial driver’s
license, a military identification card, a passport, or an identification card
issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows a person is 18 years of age
or older.
         M.   “Pseudoephedrine.” Any material, compound, mixture, or
preparation that contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts,
optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers.
         N.   “Pseudoephedrine product.” A consumer product that contains
pseudoephedrine.
         O.   “Retailer.” A place of business that offers consumer products for
sale to the general public.
         P.   “Single-ingredient preparation.” A compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that contains a single active ingredient.
         Q.   “Stop-sale alert.” A notification sent from the national
precursor log exchange to a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
indicating that the completion of a sale of a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product would result in a violation of R.C. § 2925.56(A)(1) or
federal law.
         R.   “Terminal distributor of dangerous drugs.” Has the same meanings
as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         S.   “Wholesaler.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
      (2)   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs that sells,
offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers, or otherwise provides a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the public shall do all of the
following:
         A.   Segregate pseudoephedrine products or ephedrine products from
other merchandise so that no member of the public may procure or purchase such
products without the direct assistance of a pharmacist or other authorized
employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs;
         B.   With regard to each time a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product is sold or otherwise provided without a valid prescription:
            1.   Determine, by examination of a valid proof of age, that the
purchaser or recipient is at least 18 years of age;
            2.   a.   Using any information available, including information
from the national precursor log exchange if the information is accessible, make
a reasonable attempt to ensure that no individual purchases or receives an
amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is greater than
either of the following:
                  i.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single
day;
                  ii.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
               b.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions (e)(2)B.2.a.i.
and (e)(2)B.2.a.ii. of this section apply to the total amount of base
pseudoephedrine or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product, respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply to the product’s
overall weight.
         C.   Maintain a log book of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product purchases, in accordance with R.C. § 3715.051;
         D.   If required to comply with section R.C. § 3715.052, submit the
information specified in divisions (A)(1)(a) to (A)(1)(d) of that section to
the national precursor log exchange.
      (3)   Prescriptions, orders, and records maintained pursuant to this
section and stocks of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products shall be
open for inspection to federal, state, county, and municipal officers, and
employees of the State Board of Pharmacy whose duty it is to enforce the laws
of this state or of the United States relating to controlled substances. Such
prescriptions, orders, records, and stocks shall be open for inspection by the
State Medical Board and its employees for purposes of enforcing R.C. Chapter
4731.
(R.C. § 3715.05)
   (f)   Theft or loss; reporting requirements.
      (1)   Each retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy,
prescriber or wholesaler that sells, offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers
or otherwise provides any pseudoephedrine product and that discovers the theft
or loss of any pseudoephedrine product in an amount of more than nine grams per
incident of theft or loss shall notify all of the following upon discovery of
the theft or loss:
         A.   The State Board of Pharmacy, by telephone immediately upon
discovery of the theft or loss;
         B.   Law enforcement authorities. If the incident is a theft and the
theft constitutes a felony, the retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, pharmacy, prescriber or wholesaler shall report the theft to the law
enforcement authorities in accordance with R.C. § 2921.22.
      (2)   Within 30 days after making a report by telephone to the State
Board of Pharmacy pursuant to division (f)(1)A. of this section, a retailer,
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy, prescriber or wholesaler
shall send a written report to the State Board of Pharmacy.
      (3)   The reports required under this section shall identify the product
that was stolen or lost, the amount of the product stolen or lost, and the date
and time of discovery of the theft or loss.
(R.C. § 3715.06)
(Prior Code, § 624.17)
§ 624.19 SALE OF PURE CAFFEINE PRODUCT.
   (a)   As used in this section, “pure caffeine product” means:
      (1)   Subject to division (a)(2) of this section, a product that consists
solely or primarily of caffeine and is manufactured into a crystalline, liquid,
or powdered form.
      (2)   The phrase does not include any of the following that contains
caffeine and is formulated, manufactured, and labeled in accordance with the
laws and regulations enforced by the United States Food and Drug
Administration:
         A.   Coffee, tea, any soft drink, any energy drink, or any other
caffeine-containing beverage;
         B.   Any energy product.
   (b)   Except as provided in division (c) of this section, no person shall
knowingly sell or offer for sale a pure caffeine product.
   (c)   Division (b) of this section does not prohibit a person from selling
or offering for sale any product manufactured in a unit-dose form such as a
pill, tablet, or caplet, but only if each unit dose of the product contains not
more than 250 milligrams of caffeine.
   (d)   Nothing in this section prohibits either of the following:
      (1)   Possession of a product described in division (c) of this section;
      (2)   Possession of a pure caffeine product by any of the following:
         A.   A food processing establishment, as defined in R.C. § 3715.021;
         B.   A manufacturer of a drug that is available without a
prescription;
         C.   A laboratory that holds a current, valid category III terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs license issued by the state board of pharmacy
under R.C. § 4729.54;
         D.   A laboratory of any agency or department of this state that
performs testing, analysis, and other laboratory services on behalf of the
state;
         E.   A postal or delivery service that transports or delivers a pure
caffeine product to an entity specified in divisions (d)(2)A. to (d)(2)D. of
this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of illegal
sale of pure caffeine, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor
of the third degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 2925.34)
§ 624.20 SALE OF DEXTROMETHORPHAN.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Dextromethorphan.” Means the dextrorotatory isomer of 3-methoxy-N-
methylmorphinan, including its salts, but not including its racemic or
levorotatory forms.
      (2)   “Evidence of majority and identity.” Means a document issued by the
federal government or a state, county, or municipal government, or a
subdivision or agency of any of the foregoing, including a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, an identification card issued under R.C. §§
4507.50 to 4507.52, a military identification card, or any other form of
identification that bears the name, date of birth, description, and picture of
the person identified.
      (3)   “Retailer.” Means a place of business that offers consumer products
for sale to the general public, including a terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs that is licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 and operated as a pharmacy.
   (b)   No retailer or employee of a retailer shall knowingly supply, deliver,
give, or otherwise provide a drug, material, compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance containing any quantity of dextromethorphan through the sale of any
product to a person under 18 years of age, unless the person has been issued a
prescription for the product being purchased.
   (c)   For purposes of division (b) of this section, the person making the
sale of a product containing dextromethorphan shall require and obtain evidence
of majority and identity from the purchaser, unless from the purchaser’s
outward appearance the person making the sale would reasonably presume the
purchaser to be 25 years of age or older. Proof that the person making the sale
demanded, was shown, and acted in reasonable reliance on the purchaser’s
evidence of majority and identity is a defense to any charge of a violation of
division (b) of this section.
   (d)   A retailer or employee of a retailer is not liable for damages in a
civil action for injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly
arises from an act or omission associated with a failure to prevent the sale of
a product containing dextromethorphan to a person under 18 years of age, unless
the act or omission constitutes willful or wanton misconduct.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of illegally
selling dextromethorphan, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2925.62)
CHAPTER 630: GAMBLING
Section
630.01 Definitions
630.02 Gambling in general
630.03 Operating a gambling house
630.04 Public gaming
630.05 Cheating
630.06 Responsibility of charitable organization conducting bingo game
630.07 Maintenance of records by charitable organizations
630.08 Qualifications of bingo game operator
630.09 Exemption for bingo games conducted for amusement
630.10 Prohibitions where instant bingo game is conducted
630.11 Raffle drawings
630.12 Instant bingo other than at bingo sessions
630.13 Restrictions on owner or lessor of location at instant bingo
630.14 Skill-based amusement machines; prohibited conduct
630.15 Electronic instant bingo; prohibited conduct
§ 630.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BET. The hazarding of anything of value upon the result of an event,
undertaking, or contingency, but does not include a bona fide business risk.
   BINGO. Either of the following:
      (1)   A game with all of the following characteristics:
         A.   The participants use bingo cards or sheets, including paper
formats and electronic representation or image formats, that are divided into
25 spaces arranged in five horizontal and five vertical rows of spaces, with
each space, except the central space, being designated by a combination of a
letter and a number and with the central space being designated as a free
space;
         B.   The participants cover the spaces on the bingo cards or sheets
that correspond to combinations of letters and numbers that are announced by a
bingo game operator;
         C.   A bingo game operator announces combinations of letters and
numbers that appear on objects that a bingo game operator selects by chance,
either manually or mechanically, from a receptacle that contains 75 objects at
the beginning of each game, each object marked by a different combination of a
letter and a number that corresponds to one of the 75 possible combinations of
a letter and a number that can appear on the bingo cards or sheets;
         D.   The winner of the bingo game includes any participant who
properly announces during the interval between the announcements of letters and
numbers, as described in division (1)C. of this definition, that a
predetermined and pre-announced pattern of spaces has been covered on a bingo
card or sheet being used by the participant.
      (2)   Instant bingo, electronic instant bingo, and raffles.
   BINGO GAME OPERATOR. Any person, except security personnel, who performs
work or labor at the site of bingo including but not limited to collecting
money from participants, handing out bingo cards or sheets or objects to cover
spaces on bingo cards or sheets, selecting from a receptacle the objects that
contain the combination of letters and numbers that appear on bingo cards or
sheets, calling out the combinations of letters and numbers, distributing
prizes, selling or redeeming instant bingo tickets or cards, selling or
redeeming electronic instant bingo tickets, credits, or vouchers, accessing an
electronic instant bingo system other than as a participant, supervising the
operation of a punch board, selling raffle tickets, selecting raffle tickets
from a receptacle and announcing the winning numbers in a raffle, and
preparing, selling, and serving food or beverages. BINGO GAME OPERATOR does not
include a person who is installing, maintaining, updating, or repairing an
electronic instant bingo system.
   BINGO SESSION. A period that includes both of the following:
      (1)   Not to exceed five continuous hours for the conduct of one or more
games described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in this section,
instant bingo and electronic instant bingo;
      (2)   A period for the conduct of instant bingo and electronic instant
bingo for not more than two hours before and not more than two hours after the
period described in division (1) of this definition.
   BINGO SUPPLIES. Bingo cards or sheets; instant bingo tickets or cards;
electronic bingo aids; raffle tickets; punch boards; seal cards; instant bingo
ticket dispensers; electronic instant bingo systems; and devices for selecting
or displaying the combination of bingo letters and numbers or raffle tickets.
Items that are “bingo supplies” are not gambling devices if sold or otherwise
provided, and used, in accordance with this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915. For
purposes of this chapter, “bingo supplies” are not to be considered equipment
used to conduct a bingo game.
   BOOKMAKING. The business of receiving or paying off bets.
   CHAMBER OF COMMERCE. Any organization of individuals, professionals and
businesses that has the purpose to advance the commercial, financial,
industrial and civic interests of the community and that is, and has received
from the Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that currently is in
effect stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(6).
   CHARITABLE BINGO GAME. Any bingo game described in divisions (1) or (2) of
the definition of “bingo” in this section that is conducted by a charitable
organization that has obtained a license pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08 and the
proceeds of which are used for a charitable purpose.
   CHARITABLE INSTANT BINGO ORGANIZATION. An organization that is exempt from
federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3) and is
a charitable organization as defined in this section. A CHARITABLE INSTANT
BINGO ORGANIZATION does not include a charitable organization that is exempt
from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3)
and that is created by a veteran’s organization, a fraternal organization, or a
sporting organization in regards to bingo conducted or assisted by a veteran’s
organization, a fraternal organization or a sporting organization pursuant to
R.C. § 2915.13, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, CHARITABLE
ORGANIZATION means either of the following:
         A.   An organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under
IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
         B.   A volunteer rescue service organization, volunteer firefighter’s
organization, veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC §§ 501(c)
(4), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or 501(c)(19).
      (2)   To qualify as a charitable organization, an organization shall have
been in continuous existence as such in this state for a period of two years
immediately preceding either the making of an application for a bingo license
under R.C. § 2915.08 or the conducting of any game of chance as provided in
R.C. § 2915.02(D), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   CHARITABLE PURPOSE. The net profit of bingo, other than instant bingo or
electronic instant bingo, is used by, or is given, donated or otherwise
transferred to, any of the following:
      (1)   Any organization that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)
(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization that is tax exempt
under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3);
      (2)   A veteran’s organization that is a post, chapter or organization of
veterans, or an auxiliary unit or society of, or a trust or foundation for, any
such post, chapter or organization organized in the United States or any of its
possessions, at least 75% of the members of which are veterans and
substantially all of the other members of which are individuals who are
spouses, widows or widowers of veterans, or those individuals, provided that no
part of the net earnings of the post, chapter or organization inures to the
benefit of any private shareholder or individual, and further provided that the
net profit is used by the post, chapter or organization for the charitable
purposes set forth in R.C. § 5739.02(B)(12), is used for awarding scholarships
to or for attendance at an institution mentioned in that division of the
Revised Code, is donated to a governmental agency, or is used for nonprofit
youth activities, the purchase of United States or Ohio flags that are donated
to schools, youth groups or other bona fide nonprofit organizations, promotion
of patriotism or disaster relief;
      (3)   A fraternal organization that has been in continuous existence in
this state for 15 years and that uses the net profit exclusively for religious,
charitable, scientific, literary or educational purposes, or for the prevention
of cruelty to children or animals, if contributions for that use would qualify
as a deductible charitable contribution under IRC 170;
      (4)   A volunteer firefighter’s organization that uses the net profit for
the purposes set forth in the definition of “volunteer firefighter’s
organization” in this section.
   COMMUNITY ACTION AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 122.66.
   CONDUCT. To back, promote, organize, manage, carry on, sponsor or prepare
for the operation of bingo or a game of chance, a scheme of chance, or a
sweepstakes.
   DEAL. A single game of instant bingo tickets, or a single game of electronic
instant bingo tickets, all with the same serial number.
   DISTRIBUTOR. Any person who purchases or obtains bingo supplies and who does
either of the following:
      (1)   Sells, offers for sale or otherwise provides or offers to provide
the bingo supplies to another person for use in this state;
      (2)   Modifies, converts, adds to or removes parts from the bingo
supplies to further their promotion or sale for use in this state.
   ELECTRONIC BINGO AID.
      (1)   “Electronic bingo aid” means an electronic device used by a
participant to monitor bingo cards or sheets purchased at the time and place of
a bingo session and that does all of the following:
         A.   It provides a means for a participant to input numbers and
letters announced by a bingo caller.
         B.   It compares the numbers and letters entered by the participant to
the bingo faces previously stored in the memory of the device.
         C.   It identifies a winning bingo pattern.
      (2)   ELECTRONIC BINGO AID does not include any device into which a coin,
currency, token or an equivalent is inserted to activate play.
   ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO.
      (1)   A form of bingo that consists of an electronic or digital
representation of instant bingo in which a participant wins a prize if the
participant’s electronic instant bingo ticket contains a combination of numbers
or symbols that was designated in advance as a winning combination, and to
which all of the following apply:
         A.   Each deal has a predetermined, finite number of winning and
losing tickets and a predetermined prize amount and deal structure, provided
that there may be multiple winning combinations in each deal and multiple
winning tickets.
         B.   Each electronic instant bingo ticket within a deal has a unique
serial number that is not regenerated.
         C.   Each electronic instant bingo ticket within a deal is sold for
the same price.
         D.   After a participant purchases an electronic instant bingo ticket,
the combination of numbers or symbols on the ticket is revealed to the
participant.
         E.   The reveal of numbers or symbols on the ticket may incorporate an
entertainment or bonus theme, provided that the reveal does not include
spinning reels that resemble a slot machine.
         F.   The reveal theme, if any, does not require additional
consideration or award any prize other than any predetermined prize associated
with the electronic instant bingo ticket.
      (2)   ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO shall not include any of the following:
         A.   Any game, entertainment, or bonus theme that replicates or
simulates any of the following:
            1.   The gambling games of keno, blackjack, roulette, poker, craps,
other casino-style table games;
            2.   Horse racing;
            3.   Gambling games offered in this state on slot machines or video
lottery terminals. As used in this division, “video lottery terminal” has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 3770.21.
         B.   Any device operated by dropping one or more coins or tokens into
a slot and pulling a handle or pushing a button or touchpoint on a touchscreen
to activate one to three or more rotating reels marked into horizontal segments
by varying symbols, where the predetermined prize amount depends on how and how
many of the symbols line up when the rotating reels come to a rest;
         C.   Any device that includes a coin or token slot, tray, or hopper
and the ability to dispense coins, cash, tokens, or anything of value other
than a credit ticket voucher.
   ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO SYSTEM. Means both of the following:
      (1)   A mechanical, electronic, digital, or video device and associated
software to which all of the following apply:
         A.   It is used by not more than one player at a time to play
electronic instant bingo on a single screen that is physically connected to the
device;
         B.   It is located on the premises of the principal place of business
of a veteran’s or fraternal organization that holds a type II or type III bingo
license to conduct electronic instant bingo at that location issued under R.C.
§ 2915.08.
      (2)   Any associated equipment or software used to manage, monitor, or
document any aspect of electronic instant bingo.
   EXPENSES. The reasonable amount of gross profit actually expended for all of
the following:
      (1)   The purchase or lease of bingo supplies;
      (2)   The annual license fee required under R.C. § 2915.08;
      (3)   Bank fees and service charges for a bingo session or game account
described in R.C. § 2915.10;
      (4)   Audits and accounting services;
      (5)   Safes;
      (6)   Cash registers;
      (7)   Hiring security personnel;
      (8)   Advertising bingo;
      (9)   Renting premises in which to conduct a bingo session;
      (10)   Tables and chairs;
      (11)   Expenses for maintaining and operating a charitable organization’s
facilities, including but not limited to a post home, club house, lounge,
tavern or canteen and any grounds attached to the post home, club house,
lounge, tavern or canteen;
      (12)   Payment of real property taxes and assessments that are levied on
a premises on which bingo is conducted;
      (13)   Any other product or service directly related to the conduct of
bingo that is authorized in rules adopted by the Attorney General under R.C. §
2915.08(F)(1).
   FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. Any society, order, state headquarters or
association within this state, except a college or high school fraternity, that
is not organized for profit, that is a branch, lodge or chapter of a national
or state organization, that exists exclusively for the common business or
sodality of its members.
   GAMBLING DEVICE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A book, totalizer or other equipment used for recording bets;
      (2)   A ticket, token or other device representing a chance, share or
interest in a scheme of chance or evidencing a bet;
      (3)   A deck of cards, dice, gaming table, roulette wheel, slot machine
or other apparatus designed for use in connection with a game of chance;
      (4)   Any equipment, device, apparatus or paraphernalia specially
designed for gambling purposes;
      (5)   Bingo supplies sold or otherwise provided, or used, in violation of
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
   GAMBLING OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. Chapter 2915;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 or a violation of R.C. § 2915.06
as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or of the United States, of which gambling is an
element;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under division (1), (2) or (3) of this definition.
   GAME FLARE. The board or placard, or electronic representation of a board or
placard, that accompanies each deal of instant bingo or electronic instant
bingo tickets and that includes the following information for the game:
      (1)   The name of the game;
      (2)   The manufacturer’s name or distinctive logo;
      (3)   The form number;
      (4)   The ticket count;
      (5)   The prize structure, including the number of winning tickets by
denomination and the respective winning symbol or number combinations for the
winning tickets;
      (6)   The cost per play;
      (7)   The serial number of the game.
   GAME OF CHANCE. Poker, craps, roulette or other game in which a player gives
anything of value in the hope of gain, the outcome of which is determined
largely by chance, but does not include bingo.
   GAME OF CHANCE CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. Any game of chance designed to produce
income for the person who conducts or operates the game of chance, but does not
include bingo.
   GROSS ANNUAL REVENUES. The annual gross receipts derived from the conduct of
bingo described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in this section
plus the annual net profit derived from the conduct of bingo described in
division (2) of the definition of “bingo” in this section.
   GROSS PROFIT. Gross receipts minus the amount actually expended for the
payment of prize awards.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. All money or assets, including admission fees, that a person
receives from bingo without the deduction of any amounts for prizes paid out or
for the expenses of conducting bingo. “Gross receipts” does not include any
money directly taken in from the sale of food or beverages by a charitable
organization conducting bingo, or by a bona fide auxiliary unit or society of a
charitable organization conducting bingo, provided all of the following apply:
      (1)   The auxiliary unit or society has been in existence as a bona fide
auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization for at least two years
prior to conducting bingo.
      (2)   The person who purchases the food or beverage receives nothing of
value except the food or beverage and items customarily received with the
purchase of that food or beverage.
      (3)   The food and beverages are sold at customary and reasonable prices.
   HISTORIC RAILROAD. All or a portion of the tracks and right-of-way of a
railroad that was owned and operated by a for-profit common carrier in this
state at any time prior to January 1, 1950.
   INSTANT BINGO. A form of bingo that shall use folded or banded tickets or
paper cards with perforated break-open tabs, a face of which is covered or
otherwise hidden from view to conceal a number, letter, or symbol, or set of
numbers, letters, or symbols, some of which have been designated in advance as
prize winners, and may also include games in which some winners are determined
by the random selection of one or more bingo numbers by the use of a seal card
or bingo blower. INSTANT BINGO also includes a punch board game. In all
“instant bingo” the prize amount and structure shall be predetermined. The term
does not include electronic instant bingo or any device that is activated by
the insertion of a coin, currency, token, or an equivalent, and that contains
as one of its components a video display monitor that is capable of displaying
numbers, letters, symbols, or characters in winning or losing combinations.
   INSTANT BINGO TICKET DISPENSER. A mechanical device that dispenses an
instant bingo ticket or card as the sole item of value dispensed and that has
the following characteristics:
      (1)   It is activated upon the insertion of United States currency.
      (2)   It performs no gaming functions.
      (3)   It does not contain a video display monitor or generate noise.
      (4)   It is not capable of displaying any numbers, letters, symbols or
characters in winning or losing combinations.
      (5)   It does not simulate or display rolling or spinning reels.
      (6)   It is incapable of determining whether a dispensed bingo ticket or
card is a winning or non- winning ticket or card and requires a winning ticket
or card to be paid by a bingo game operator.
      (7)   It may provide accounting and security features to aid in
accounting for the instant bingo tickets or cards it dispenses.
      (8)   It is not part of an electronic network and is not interactive.
   IRC or INTERNAL REVENUE CODE. The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 100 Stat.
2085, 26 U.S.C. §§ 1 et seq., as now or hereafter amended.
   MANUFACTURER. Any person who assembles completed bingo supplies from raw
materials, other items or subparts or who modifies, converts, adds to or
removes parts from bingo supplies to further their promotion or sale.
   MERCHANDISE PRIZE. Any item of value, but shall not include any of the
following:
      (1)   Cash, gift cards or any equivalent thereof;
      (2)   Plays on games of chance, state lottery tickets, or bingo;
      (3)   Firearms, tobacco or alcoholic beverages; or
      (4)   A redeemable voucher that is redeemable for any of the items listed
in division (1), (2) or (3) of this definition.
   NET PROFIT. Gross profit minus expenses.
   NET PROFIT FROM THE PROCEEDS OF THE SALE OF INSTANT BINGO OR ELECTRONIC
INSTANT BINGO. Gross profit minus the ordinary, necessary, and reasonable
expense expended for the purchase of bingo supplies for the purpose of
conducting instant bingo or electronic instant bingo, and, in the case of
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conducted by a veteran’s, fraternal,
or sporting organization, minus the payment by that organization of real
property taxes and assessments levied on a premises on which instant bingo or
electronic instant bingo is conducted.
   PARTICIPANT. Any person who plays bingo.
   PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1.59 and includes any firm or any
other legal entity, however organized.
   POOL NOT CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. A scheme in which a participant gives a
valuable consideration for a chance to win a prize and the total amount of
consideration wagered is distributed to a participant or participants.
   PUNCH BOARD. A form of instant bingo that uses a board containing a number
of holes or receptacles of uniform size in which are placed, mechanically and
randomly, serially numbered slips of paper that may be punched or drawn from
the hole or receptacle. A player may punch or draw the numbered slips of paper
from the holes or receptacles and obtain the prize established for the game if
the number drawn corresponds to a winning number or, if the punch board
includes the use of a seal card, a potential winning number.
   RAFFLE. A form of bingo in which the one or more prizes are won by one or
more persons who have purchased a raffle ticket. The one or more winners of the
raffle are determined by drawing a ticket stub or other detachable section from
a receptacle containing ticket stubs or detachable sections corresponding to
all tickets sold for the raffle. The term does not include the drawing of a
ticket stub or other detachable section of a ticket purchased to attend a
professional sporting event if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The ticket stub or other detachable section is used to select the
winner of a free prize given away at the professional sporting event; and
      (2)   The cost of the ticket is the same as the cost of a ticket to the
professional sporting event on days when no free prize is given away.
   REDEEMABLE VOUCHER. Any ticket, token, coupon, receipt or other noncash
representation of value.
   RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION. Any church, body of communicants, or group that is
not organized or operated for profit and that gathers in common membership for
regular worship and religious observances.
   REVOKE. To void permanently all rights and privileges of the holder of a
license issued under R.C. § 2915.08, 2915.081 or 2915.082 or a charitable
gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   SCHEME OF CHANCE.
      (1)   A slot machine unless authorized under R.C. Chapter 3772, lottery
unless authorized under R.C. Chapter 3770, numbers game, pool conducted for
profit, or other scheme in which a participant gives a valuable consideration
for a chance to win a prize, but does not include bingo, a skill-based
amusement machine, or a pool not conducted for profit. “Scheme of chance”
includes the use of an electronic device to reveal the results of a game entry
if valuable consideration is paid, directly or indirectly, for a chance to win
a prize. Valuable consideration is deemed to be paid for a chance to win a
prize in the following instances:
         A.   Less than 50% of the goods or services sold by a scheme of chance
operator in exchange for game entries are used or redeemed by participants at
any one location;
         B.   Less than 50% of participants who purchase goods or services at
any one location do not accept, use, or redeem the goods or services sold or
purportedly sold;
         C.   More than 50% of prizes at any one location are revealed to
participants through an electronic device simulating a game of chance or a
“casino game” as defined in R.C. § 3772.01;
         D.   The good or service sold by a scheme of chance operator in
exchange for a game entry cannot be used or redeemed in the manner advertised;
         E.   A participant pays more than fair market value for goods or
services offered by a scheme of chance operator in order to receive one or more
game entries;
         F.   A participant may use the electronic device to purchase
additional game entries;
         G.   A participant may purchase additional game entries by using
points or credits won as prizes while using the electronic device;
         H.   A scheme of chance operator pays out in prize money more than 20%
of the gross revenue received at one location; or
         I.   A participant makes a purchase or exchange in order to obtain any
good or service that may be used to facilitate play on the electronic device.
      (2)   As used in this division, “electronic device” means a mechanical,
video, digital, or electronic machine or device that is capable of displaying
information on a screen or other mechanism and that is owned, leased, or
otherwise possessed by any person conducting a scheme of chance, or by that
person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or contractors. “Electronic
device” does not include an electronic instant bingo system.
   SEAL CARD. A form of instant bingo that uses instant bingo tickets in
conjunction with a board or placard that contains one or more seals that, when
removed or opened, reveal predesignated winning numbers, letters or symbols.
   SECURITY PERSONNEL. Any person who either is a Sheriff, Deputy Sheriff,
Marshal, Deputy Marshal, township constable, or member of an organized police
department of a municipal corporation or has successfully completed a peace
officer’s training course pursuant to R.C. §§ 109.71 to 109.79 and who is hired
to provide security for the premises on which bingo is conducted.
   SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINE.
      (1)   A.   A mechanical, video, digital or electronic device that rewards
the player or players, if at all, only with merchandise prizes or with
redeemable vouchers redeemable only for merchandise prizes, provided that with
respect to rewards for playing the game all of the following apply:
            1.   The wholesale value of a merchandise prize awarded as a result
of the single play of a machine does not exceed $10;
            2.   Redeemable vouchers awarded for any single play of a machine
are not redeemable for a merchandise prize with a wholesale value of more than
$10;
            3.   Redeemable vouchers are not redeemable for a merchandise prize
that has a wholesale value of more than $10 times the fewest number of single
plays necessary to accrue the redeemable vouchers required to obtain that
prize; and
            4.   Any redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes are distributed
at the site of the skill-based amusement machine at the time of play.
         B.   A card for the purchase of gasoline is a redeemable voucher for
purposes of division (1) of this definition even if the skill-based amusement
machine for the play of which the card is awarded is located at a place where
gasoline may not be legally distributed to the public or the card is not
redeemable at the location of, or at the time of playing, the skill- based
amusement machine.
      (2)   A device shall not be considered a skill-based amusement machine
and shall be considered a slot machine if it pays cash or one or more of the
following apply:
         A.   The ability of a player to succeed at the game is impacted by the
number or ratio of prior wins to prior losses of players playing the game;
         B.   Any reward of redeemable vouchers is not based solely on the
player achieving the object of the game or the player’s score;
         C.   The outcome of the game, or the value of the redeemable voucher
or merchandise prize awarded for winning the game, can be controlled by a
source other than any player playing the game;
         D.   The success of any player is or may be determined by a chance
event that cannot be altered by player actions;
         E.   The ability of any player to succeed at the game is determined by
game features not visible or known to the player;
         F.   The ability of the player to succeed at the game is impacted by
the exercise of a skill that no reasonable player could exercise.
      (3)   All of the following apply to any machine that is operated as
described in division (1) of this definition:
         A.   As used in this definition of “skill-based amusement machine”,
“game” and “play” mean one event from the initial activation of the machine
until the results of play are determined without payment of additional
consideration. An individual utilizing a machine that involves a single game,
play, contest, competition or tournament may be awarded redeemable vouchers or
merchandise prizes based on the results of play.
         B.   Advance play for a single game, play, contest, competition or
tournament participation may be purchased. The cost of the contest, competition
or tournament participation may be greater than a single non-contest,
competition or tournament play.
         C.   To the extent that the machine is used in a contest, competition
or tournament, that contest, competition or tournament has a defined starting
and ending date and is open to participants in competition for scoring and
ranking results toward the awarding of redeemable vouchers or merchandise
prizes that are stated prior to the start of the contest, competition, or
tournament.
      (4)   For purposes of division (1) of this definition, the mere presence
of a device, such as a pin- setting, ball-releasing or scoring mechanism, that
does not contribute to or affect the outcome of the play of the game does not
make the device a skill-based amusement machine.
   SLOT MACHINE.
      (1)   Either of the following:
   A.   Any mechanical, electronic, video or digital device that is capable of
accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on behalf of a
player who gives the thing of value in the hope of gain;
   B.   Any mechanical, electronic, video or digital device that is capable of
accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on behalf of a
player to conduct bingo or a scheme or game of chance.
      (2)   SLOT MACHINE does not include a skill-based amusement machine, an
instant bingo ticket dispenser, or an electronic instant bingo system.
   SPORTING ORGANIZATION. A hunting, fishing or trapping organization, other
than a college or high school fraternity or sorority, that is not organized for
profit, that is affiliated with a state or national sporting organization,
including but not limited to the League of Ohio Sportsmen, and that has been in
continuous existence in this state for a period of three years.
   SUSPEND. To interrupt temporarily all rights and privileges of the holder of
a license issued under R.C. § 2915.08, 2915.081 or 2915.082 or a charitable
gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   SWEEPSTAKES. Any game, contest, advertising scheme or plan, or other
promotion where consideration is not required for a person to enter to win or
become eligible to receive any prize, the determination of which is based upon
chance. SWEEPSTAKES does not include bingo as authorized under R.C. Chapter
2915, pari-mutuel wagering as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3769, lotteries
conducted by the State Lottery Commission as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3770,
and casino gaming as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3772.
   SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL DEVICE.
      (1)   A mechanical, video, digital, or electronic machine or device that
is owned, leased, or otherwise possessed by any person conducting a
sweepstakes, or by that person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or
contractors, that is intended to be used by a sweepstakes participant, and that
is capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism. A device
is a sweepstakes terminal device if any of the following apply:
         A.   The device uses a simulated game terminal as a representation of
the prizes associated with the results of the sweepstakes entries.
         B.   The device utilizes software such that the simulated game
influences or determines the winning of or value of the prize.
         C.   The device selects prizes from a predetermined finite pool of
entries.
         D.   The device utilizes a mechanism that reveals the content of a
predetermined sweepstakes entry.
         E.   The device predetermines the prize results and stores those
results for delivery at the time the sweepstakes entry results are revealed.
         F.   The device utilizes software to create a game result.
         G.   The device reveals the prize incrementally, even though the
device does not influence the awarding of the prize or the value of any prize
awarded.
         H.   The device determines and associates the prize with an entry or
entries at the time the sweepstakes is entered.
      (2)   As used in this definition and in §
630.02:
         A.   “Enter.” The act by which a person becomes eligible to receive
any prize offered in a sweepstakes.
         B.   “Entry.” One event from the initial activation of the sweepstakes
terminal device until all the sweepstakes prize results from that activation
are revealed.
         C.   “Prize.” Any gift, award, gratuity, good, service, credit,
reward, or any other thing of value that may be transferred to a person,
whether possession of the prize is actually transferred, or placed on an
account or other record as evidence of the intent to transfer the prize.
         D.   “Sweepstakes terminal device facility.” Any location in this
state where a sweepstakes terminal device is provided to a sweepstakes
participant, except as provided in §
630.02(g) and R.C. § 2915.02(G).
   VETERAN’S ORGANIZATION. Any individual post or state headquarters of a
national veteran’s association or an auxiliary unit of any individual post of a
national veteran’s association, which post, state headquarters or auxiliary
unit is incorporated as a nonprofit corporation and either has received a
letter from the state headquarters of the national veteran’s association
indicating that the individual post or auxiliary unit is in good standing with
the national veteran’s association or has received a letter from the national
veteran’s association indicating that the state headquarters is in good
standing with the national veteran’s association. As used in this division,
“national veteran’s association” means any veteran’s association that has been
in continuous existence as such for a period of at least five years and either
is incorporated by an act of the United States Congress or has a national dues-
paying membership of at least 5,000 persons.
   VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER’S ORGANIZATION. Any organization of volunteer
firefighters, as defined in R.C. § 146.01, that is organized and operated
exclusively to provide financial support for a volunteer fire department or a
volunteer fire company and that is recognized or ratified by a county,
municipal corporation or township.
   VOLUNTEER RESCUE SERVICE ORGANIZATION. Any organization of volunteers
organized to function as an emergency medical service organization, as defined
in R.C. § 4765.01.
   YOUTH ATHLETIC ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized for profit,
that is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial support to, or
to operate, athletic activities for persons who are 21 years of age or younger
by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating or contributing to the support of
an athletic team, club, league or association.
   YOUTH ATHLETIC PARK ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized for
profit, that satisfies both of the following:
      (1)   It owns, operates and maintains playing fields that satisfy both of
the following:
         A.   The playing fields are used for athletic activities by one or
more organizations, not organized for profit, each of which is organized and
operated exclusively to provide financial support to, or to operate, athletic
activities for persons who are 18 years of age or younger by means of
sponsoring, organizing, operating or contributing to the support of an athletic
team, club, league, or association.
         B.   The playing fields are not used for any profit-making activity at
any time during the year.
      (2)   It uses the proceeds of bingo it conducts exclusively for the
operation, maintenance, and improvement of its playing fields of the type
described in division (1) of this definition.
(R.C. § 2915.01)
§ 630.02 GAMBLING IN GENERAL.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Engage in bookmaking, or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates bookmaking.
      (2)   Establish, promote or operate or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance.
      (3)   Knowingly procure, transmit, exchange or engage in conduct that
facilitates the procurement, transmission or exchange of information for use in
establishing odds or determining winners in connection with bookmaking or with
any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance.
      (4)   Engage in betting or in playing any scheme or game of chance as a
substantial source of income or livelihood.
      (5)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the
use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility
and either:
         A.   Give to another person any item described in R.C. § 2915.01(VV)
(1), (VV)(2), (VV)(3), or (VV)(4) as a prize for playing or participating in a
sweepstakes; or
         B.   Give to another person any merchandise prize, or a redeemable
voucher for a merchandise prize, the wholesale value of which is in excess of
$10 and which is awarded as a single entry for playing or participating in a
sweepstakes. Redeemable vouchers shall not be redeemable for a merchandise
prize that has a wholesale value of more than $10.
      (6)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the
use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility
without first obtaining a current annual “certificate of registration” from the
Attorney General as required by R.C. § 2915.02(F).
      (7)   With purpose to violate division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4),
(a)(5), or (a)(6) of this section, acquire, possess, control or operate any
gambling device.
   (b)   For purposes of division (a)(1) of this section, a person facilitates
bookmaking if the person in any way knowingly aids an illegal bookmaking
operation, including without limitation placing a bet with a person engaged in
or facilitating illegal bookmaking. For purposes of division (a)(2) of this
section, a person facilitates a game of chance conducted for profit or a scheme
of chance if the person in any way knowingly aids in the conduct or operation
of any such game or scheme, including without limitation playing any such game
or scheme.
   (c)   This section does not prohibit conduct in connection with gambling
expressly permitted by law.
   (d)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Games of chance, if all of the following apply:
         A.   The games of chance are not craps for money or roulette for
money.
         B.   The games of chance are conducted by a charitable organization
that is and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination
letter that is currently in effect, stating that the organization is exempt
from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3).
         C.   The games of chance are conducted at festivals of the charitable
organization that are conducted not more than a total of five days a calendar
year, and are conducted on premises owned by the charitable organization for a
period of no less than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the
games of chance, on premises leased from a governmental unit, or on premises
that are leased from a veteran’s or fraternal organization and that have been
owned by the lessor veteran’s or fraternal organization for a period of no less
than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the games of chance. A
charitable organization shall not lease premises from a veteran’s or fraternal
organization to conduct a festival described in this division, if the veteran’s
or fraternal organization already has leased the premises 12 times during the
preceding year to charitable organizations for that purpose. If a charitable
organization leases premises from a veteran’s or fraternal organization to
conduct a festival described in this division, the charitable organization
shall not pay a rental rate for the premises per day of the festival that
exceeds the rental rate per bingo session that a charitable organization may
pay under R.C. § 2915.09(B)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance when it leases premises from another charitable organization to
conduct bingo games.
         D.   All of the money or assets received from the games of chance
after deduction only of prizes paid out during the conduct of the games of
chance are used by, given, donated or otherwise transferred to any organization
that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that is tax exempt under IRC 501(a) and
described in IRC 501(c)(3).
         E.   The games of chance are not conducted during or within ten hours
of a bingo game conducted for amusement purposes only pursuant to R.C. §
2915.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. No person shall
receive any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or other
form of compensation, directly or indirectly, for operating or assisting in the
operation of any game of chance.
      (2)   Any tag fishing tournament, as defined in R.C. § 1531.01, operated
under a permit issued under R.C. § 1533.92.
      (3)   Bingo conducted by a charitable organization that holds a license
issued under R.C. § 2915.08.
   (e)   Division (d) of this section shall not be construed to authorize the
sale, lease or other temporary or permanent transfer of the right to conduct
games of chance, as granted by that division, by any charitable organization
that is granted that right.
   (f)   Any person desiring to conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a
sweepstakes with the use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes
terminal device facility shall first register with the Office of the Attorney
General and obtain an annual certificate of registration by providing a filing
fee of $200 and all information as required by rule adopted under R.C. §
2915.02(H). Not later than the tenth day of each month, each sweepstakes
terminal device operator shall file a sweepstakes terminal device monthly
report with the Attorney General and provide a filing fee of $50 and all
information required by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H). All information
provided to the Attorney General under this division shall be available to law
enforcement upon request.
   (g)   (1)   A person may apply to the Attorney General, on a form prescribed
by the Attorney General, for a certificate of compliance that the person is not
operating a sweepstakes terminal device facility. The form shall require the
person to include the address of the business location where sweepstakes
terminal devices will be used and to make the following certifications:
         A.   That the person will not use more than two sweepstakes terminal
devices at the business location;
         B.   That the retail value of sweepstakes prizes to be awarded at the
business location using sweepstakes terminal devices during a reporting period
will be less than 3% of the gross revenue received at the business location
during the reporting period;
         C.   That no other form of gaming except lottery ticket sales as
authorized under R.C. Chapter 3770 will be conducted at the business location
or in an adjoining area of the business location;
         D.   That any sweepstakes terminal device at the business location
will not allow any deposit of any money, coin, or token, or the use of any
credit card, debit card, prepaid card, or any other method of similar payment
to be used, directly or indirectly, to participate in a sweepstakes;
         E.   That notification of any prize will not take place on the same
day as a participant’s sweepstakes entry; and
         F.   That the person consents to provide any other information to the
Attorney General as required by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H).
      (2)   The filing fee for a certificate of compliance is $250. The
Attorney General may charge up to an additional $250 for reasonable expenses
resulting from any investigation related to an application for a certificate of
compliance.
      (3)   A certificate of compliance is effective for one year. The
certificate holder may reapply for a certificate of compliance. A person issued
a certificate of compliance shall file semiannual reports with the Attorney
General stating the number of sweepstakes terminal devices at the business
location and that the retail value of prizes awarded at the business location
using sweepstakes terminal devices is less than 3% of the gross revenue
received at the business location.
   (h)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of gambling, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling
offense, gambling is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
Notwithstanding this division, failing to file a sweepstakes terminal device
monthly report as required by division (f) of this section or the semiannual
report required by division (g) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 2915.02(A) - (G), (K))
§ 630.03 OPERATING A GAMBLING HOUSE.
   (a)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control or
supervision of premises, shall:
      (1)   Use or occupy the premises for gambling in violation of R.C. §
2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   Recklessly permit the premises to be used or occupied for gambling
in violation of R.C. § 2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of operating a
gambling house, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously
has been convicted of a gambling offense, operating a gambling house is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   Premises used or occupied in violation of this section constitute a
nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2915.03)
§ 630.04 PUBLIC GAMING.
   (a)   No person, while at a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall or
other place of public accommodation, business, amusement or resort shall make a
bet or play any game of chance or scheme of chance.
   (b)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control or
supervision of a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall or other place
of public accommodation, business, amusement or resort shall recklessly permit
those premises to be used or occupied in violation of division (a) of this
section.
   (c)   Divisions (a) and (b) of this section do not prohibit conduct in
connection with gambling expressly permitted by law.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public gaming. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, public gaming is a minor misdemeanor. If
the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling offense, public
gaming is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (e)   Premises used or occupied in violation of division (b) of this section
constitute a nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2915.04)
§ 630.05 CHEATING.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome
of any of the following:
      (1)   The subject of a bet.
      (2)   A contest of knowledge, skill or endurance that is not an athletic
or sporting event.
      (3)   A scheme or game of chance.
      (4)   Bingo.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Offer, give, solicit or accept anything of value to corrupt the
outcome of an athletic or sporting event.
      (2)   Engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome of an athletic or
sporting event.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
cheating. Except as otherwise provided in this division, cheating is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the potential gain from the cheating is
$1,000 or more or if the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling
offense or of any theft offense as defined in R.C. § 2913.01, cheating is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
corrupting sports. Corrupting sports is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.05)
§ 630.06 RESPONSIBILITY OF CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION CONDUCTING BINGO GAME.
   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo shall fail to do any of
the following:
      (1)   Own all of the equipment used to conduct bingo or lease that
equipment from a charitable organization that is licensed to conduct bingo, or
from the landlord of a premises where bingo is conducted, for a rental rate
that is not more than is customary and reasonable for that equipment;
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(3) of this section,
use all of the gross receipts from bingo for paying prizes, for reimbursement
of expenses for or for renting premises in which to conduct bingo, for
reimbursement of expenses for or for purchasing or leasing bingo supplies used
in conducting bingo, for reimbursement of expenses for or for hiring security
personnel, for reimbursement of expenses for or for advertising bingo, or for
reimbursement of other expenses or for other expenses listed in the definition
for “expenses” in R.C. § 2915.01, provided that the amount of the receipts so
spent is not more than is customary and reasonable for a similar purchase,
lease, hiring, advertising or expense. If the building in which bingo is
conducted is owned by the charitable organization conducting bingo and the
bingo conducted includes a form of bingo described in division (1) of the
definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01, the charitable organization may deduct
from the total amount of the gross receipts from each session a sum equal to
the lesser of $600 or 45% of the gross receipts from the bingo described in
that division as consideration for the use of the premises;
      (3)   Use, or give, donate, or otherwise transfer, all of the net profit
derived from bingo described in R.C. § 2915.01(O)(1) for a charitable purpose
listed in its license application and described in R.C. § 2915.01(V), or
distribute all of the net profit from the proceeds of the sale of instant bingo
or electronic instant bingo as stated in its license application and in
accordance with R.C. § 2915.101, as applicable.
   (b)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01 shall fail to do
any of the following:
      (1)   Conduct the bingo game on premises that are owned by the charitable
organization, on premises that are owned by another charitable organization and
leased from that charitable organization for a rental rate not in excess of the
lesser of $650 per bingo session or 45% of the gross receipts of the bingo
session, on premises that are leased from a person other than a charitable
organization for a rental rate that is not more than is customary and
reasonable for premises that are similar in location, size and quality but not
in excess of $450 per bingo session, or on premises that are owned by a person
other than a charitable organization, that are leased from that person by
another charitable organization, and that are subleased from that other
charitable organization by the charitable organization for a rental rate not in
excess of $450 per bingo session. No charitable organization is required to pay
property taxes or assessments on premises that the charitable organization
leases from another person to conduct bingo sessions. If the charitable
organization leases from a person other than a charitable organization the
premises on which it conducts bingo sessions, the lessor of the premises shall
provide only the premises to the organization and shall not provide the
organization with bingo game operators, security personnel, concessions or
concession operators, bingo supplies, or any other type of service. A
charitable organization shall not lease or sublease premises that it owns or
leases to more than three other charitable organizations per calendar week for
the purpose of conducting bingo sessions on the premises. A person that is not
a charitable organization shall not lease premises that it owns, leases or
otherwise is empowered to lease to more than three charitable organizations per
calendar week for conducting bingo sessions on the premises. In no case shall
more than nine bingo sessions be conducted on any premises in any calendar
week;
      (2)   Display its license conspicuously at the premises where the bingo
session is conducted;
      (3)   Conduct the bingo session in accordance with division (1) of the
definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01.
   (c)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01 shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for operating a bingo
session that is conducted by the charitable organization or for preparing,
selling or serving food or beverages at the site of the bingo session, permit
any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to pay
compensation to any bingo game operator who prepares, sells or serves food or
beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable organization, or
permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to prepare,
sell or serve food or beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable
organization, if the auxiliary unit or society pays any compensation to the
bingo game operators who prepare, sell or serve the food or beverages;
      (2)   Pay consulting fees to any person for any services performed in
relation to the bingo session;
      (3)   Pay concession fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in the bingo session;
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(4) of this section,
conduct more than three bingo sessions in any seven-day period. A volunteer
firefighter’s organization or a volunteer rescue service organization that
conducts not more than five bingo sessions in a calendar year may conduct more
than three bingo sessions in a seven-day period after notifying the Attorney
General when it will conduct the sessions;
      (5)   Pay out more than $6,000 in prizes for bingo games described in
R.C. § 2915.01(S)(1) during any bingo session that is conducted by the
charitable organization. “Prizes” does not include awards from the conduct of
instant bingo;
      (6)   Conduct a bingo session at any time during the eight-hour period
between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., at any time during, or within ten hours of, a
bingo game conducted for amusement only pursuant to R.C. § 2915.12 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, at any premises not specified on
its license, or on any day of the week or during any time period not specified
on its license. This division does not prohibit the sale of instant bingo
tickets beginning at 9:00 a.m. for a bingo session that begins at 10:00 a.m. If
circumstances make it impractical for the charitable organization to conduct a
bingo session at the premises, or on the day of the week or at the time
specified on its license or if a charitable organization wants to conduct bingo
sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than the day or time specified
on its license, the charitable organization may apply in writing to the
Attorney General for an amended license pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08(J). A
charitable organization may apply twice in each calendar year for an amended
license to conduct bingo sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than
the day or time specified on its license. If the amended license is granted,
the organization may conduct bingo sessions at the premises, on the day of the
week, and at the time specified on its amended license;
      (7)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, is under the age of 18 to work as a bingo game operator;
      (8)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any
jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator;
      (9)   Permit the lessor of the premises on which the bingo session is
conducted, if the lessor is not a charitable organization, to provide the
charitable organization with bingo game operators, security personnel,
concessions, bingo supplies or any other type of service;
      (10)   Purchase or lease bingo supplies from any person except a
distributor issued a license under R.C. § 2915.081;
      (11)   A.   Use or permit the use of electronic bingo aids except under
the following circumstances:
            1.   For any single participant, not more than 90 bingo faces can
be played using an electronic bingo aid or aids.
            2.   The charitable organization shall provide a participant using
an electronic bingo aid with corresponding paper bingo cards or sheets.
            3.   The total price of bingo faces played with an electronic bingo
aid shall be equal to the total price of the same number of bingo faces played
with a paper bingo card or sheet sold at the same bingo session but without an
electronic bingo aid.
            4.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be part of an electronic
network other than a network that includes only bingo aids and devices that are
located on the premises at which the bingo is being conducted or be interactive
with any device not located on the premises at which the bingo is being
conducted.
            5.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to participate in bingo
that is conducted at a location other than the location at which the bingo
session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
            6.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to provide for the
input of numbers and letters announced by a bingo caller other than the bingo
caller who physically calls the numbers and letters at the location at which
the bingo session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
         B.   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 119 that govern the use of electronic bingo aids. The rules may include
a requirement that an electronic bingo aid be capable of being audited by the
Attorney General to verify the number of bingo cards or sheets played during
each bingo session.
      (12)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, to be under 18 years of age to play bingo described in division (1)
of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01.
   (d)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (d)(3) of this section,
no charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator, and no bingo
game operator shall receive or accept, any commission, wage, salary, reward,
tip, donation, gratuity or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly,
regardless of the source, for conducting bingo or providing other work or labor
at the site of bingo during a bingo session.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (d)(3) of this section, no
charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator any commission,
wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation,
directly or indirectly regardless of the source, for conducting instant bingo,
electronic instant bingo, or both other than at a bingo session at the site of
instant bingo, electronic instant bingo, or both other than at a bingo session.
      (3)   Nothing in this division (d) of this section prohibits an employee
of a fraternal organization, veteran’s organization or sporting organization
from selling instant bingo tickets or cards to the organization’s members or
invited guests, as long as no portion of the employee’s compensation is paid
from any receipts of bingo.
   (e)   Notwithstanding division (b)(1) of this section, a charitable
organization that, prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into written
agreements for the lease of premises it owns to another charitable organization
or other charitable organizations for the conducting of bingo sessions so that
more than two bingo sessions are conducted per calendar week on the premises,
and a person that is not a charitable organization and that, prior to December
6, 1977, has entered into written agreements for the lease of premises it owns
to charitable organizations for the conducting of more than two bingo sessions
per calendar week on the premises, may continue to lease the premises to those
charitable organizations, provided that no more than four sessions are
conducted per calendar week, that the lessor organization or person has
notified the Attorney General in writing of the organizations that will conduct
the sessions and the days of the week and the times of the day on which the
sessions will be conducted, that the initial lease entered into with each
organization that will conduct the sessions was filed with the Attorney General
prior to December 6, 1977, and that each organization that will conduct the
sessions was issued a license to conduct bingo games by the Attorney General
prior to December 6, 1977.
   (f)   This section does not prohibit a bingo licensed charitable
organization or a game operator from giving any person an instant bingo ticket
as a prize.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of
illegally conducting a bingo game, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a)(1), (a)(3), (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3), (c)(1) to (c)(11), or (d) of
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of division (a)(1), (a)(3), (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)
(3), (c)(1) to (c)(11), or (d) of this section, a violation of division (a)(1),
(a)(3), (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3), (c)(1) to (c)(11), or (d) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates division (c)(12) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (c)(12) of this
section, a violation of division (c)(12) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.09)
§ 630.07 MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS BY CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS.
   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo or a game of chance
pursuant to R.C. § 2915.02(D), or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, shall fail to maintain the following records for at least three
years from the date on which the bingo or game of chance is conducted:
      (1)   An itemized list of the gross receipts of each bingo session, each
game of instant bingo by serial number, each electronic instant bingo game by
serial number, each raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance, and
an itemized list of the gross profits of each game of instant bingo by serial
number and each electronic instant bingo game by serial number;
      (2)   An itemized list of all expenses, other than prizes, that are
incurred in conducting bingo, the name of each person to whom the expenses are
paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses;
      (3)   A list of all prizes awarded during each bingo session, each
raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance conducted by the
charitable organization, the total prizes awarded from each game of instant
bingo by serial number and each electronic instant bingo game by serial number,
and the name, address, and social security number of all persons who are
winners of prizes of $600 or more in value;
      (4)   An itemized list of the recipients of the net profit of bingo or
game of chance, including the name and address of each recipient to whom the
money is distributed, and if the organization uses the net profit of bingo, or
the money or assets received from a game of chance, for any charitable or other
purpose set forth in R.C. § 2915.01(V), 2915.02(D) or 2915.101, a list of each
purpose and an itemized list of each expenditure for each purpose;
      (5)   The number of persons who participate in any bingo session or game
of chance that is conducted by the charitable organization;
      (6)   A list of receipts from the sale of food and beverages by the
charitable organization or one of its auxiliary units or societies, if the
receipts were excluded from “gross receipts” under R.C. § 2915.01(T);
      (7)   An itemized list of all expenses incurred at each bingo session,
each raffle, each punch board game or each game of instant bingo or electronic
instant bingo conducted by the charitable organization in the sale of food and
beverages by the charitable organization or by an auxiliary unit or society of
the charitable organization, the name of each person to whom the expenses are
paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses.
   (b)   A charitable organization shall keep the records that it is required
to maintain pursuant to division (a) of this section at its principal place of
business in this state or at its headquarters in this state and shall notify
the Attorney General of the location at which those records are kept.
   (c)   The gross profit from each bingo session or game described in division
(1) or (2) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01 shall be deposited
into a checking account devoted exclusively to the bingo session or game.
Payments for allowable expenses incurred in conducting the bingo session or
game and payments to recipients of some or all of the net profit of the bingo
session or game shall be made only by checks or electronic fund transfers drawn
on the bingo session or game account.
   (d)   Each charitable organization shall conduct and record an inventory of
all of its bingo supplies as of the first day of November of each year.
   (e)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with R.C. Chapter
119 that establish standards of accounting, record keeping and reporting to
ensure that gross receipts from bingo or games of chance are properly accounted
for.
   (f)   A distributor shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing to another person bingo supplies for use in this state.
The record shall include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name of the manufacturer from which the distributor purchased
the bingo supplies and the date of the purchase;
      (2)   The name and address of the charitable organization or other
distributor to which the bingo supplies were sold or otherwise provided;
      (3)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies;
      (4)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each charitable organization.
   (g)   A manufacturer shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing bingo supplies for use in this state. The record shall
include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name and address of the distributor to whom the bingo supplies
were sold or otherwise provided;
      (2)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies, including
serial numbers;
      (3)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each distributor.
   (h)   (1)   The Attorney General or any law enforcement agency may do all of
the following:
         A.   Investigate any charitable organization, distributor, or
manufacturer or any officer, agent, trustee, member, or employee of the
organization, distributor, or manufacturer;
         B.   Examine the accounts and records of the charitable organization,
distributor, or manufacturer or of any officer, agent, trustee, member, or
employee of the organization, distributor, or manufacturer;
         C.   Conduct inspections, audits and observations of bingo or games of
chance;
         D.   Conduct inspections of the premises where bingo or games of
chance are conducted or where bingo supplies are manufactured or distributed;
         E.   Take any other necessary and reasonable action to determine if a
violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 has occurred
and to determine whether R.C. § 2915.11, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, has been complied with.
      (2)   If any law enforcement agency has reasonable grounds to believe
that a charitable organization, distributor, or manufacturer or an officer,
agent, trustee, member, or employee of the organization, distributor, or
manufacturer has violated any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915,
the law enforcement agency may proceed by action in the proper court to enforce
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, provided that the law enforcement agency
shall give written notice to the Attorney General when commencing an action as
described in this division.
   (i)   No person shall destroy, alter, conceal, withhold, or deny access to
any accounts or records of a charitable organization, distributor, or
manufacturer that have been requested for examination, or obstruct, impede, or
interfere with any inspection, audit, or observation of bingo or a game of
chance, of premises where bingo or a game of chance is conducted, or of
premises where bingo supplies are manufactured or distributed, or refuse to
comply with any reasonable request of, or obstruct, impede, or interfere with
any other reasonable action undertaken by, the Attorney General or a law
enforcement agency pursuant to division (h) of this section.
   (j)   Whoever violates division (a) or (i) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2915.10)
§ 630.08 QUALIFICATIONS OF BINGO GAME OPERATOR.
   (a)   No person shall be a bingo game operator unless the person is 18 years
of age or older.
   (b)   No person who has been convicted of a felony or a gambling offense in
any jurisdiction shall be a bingo game operator.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. Whoever violates division (b) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2915.11)
§ 630.09 EXEMPTION FOR BINGO GAMES CONDUCTED FOR AMUSEMENT.
   (a)   Sections
630.06 to
630.13 and
630.15 do not apply to bingo games that are conducted for the purpose of
amusement only. A bingo game is conducted for the purpose of amusement only if
it complies with all of the requirements specified in either division (a)(1) or
(a)(2) of this section.
      (1)   A.   The participants do not pay any money or any other thing of
value, including an admission fee or any fee, for bingo cards or sheets,
objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in playing bingo, for the
privilege of participating in the bingo game, or to defray any costs of the
game, or pay tips or make donations during or immediately before or after the
bingo game.
         B.   All prizes awarded during the course of the game are non-
monetary, and in the form of merchandise, goods or entitlement to goods or
services only, and the total value of all prizes awarded during the game is
less than $100.00.
         C.   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or
other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         D.   The bingo game is not conducted either during or within ten hours
of any of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to R.C. §§ 2915.07 through 2915.11 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
            2.   A scheme or game of chance, or bingo described in R.C. §
2915.01(O)(2).
         E.   The number of players participating in the bingo game does not
exceed 50.
      (2)   A.   The participants do not pay money or any other thing of value
as an admission fee, and no participant is charged more than $0.25 to purchase
a bingo card or sheet, objects to cover the spaces or other devices used in
playing bingo.
         B.   The total amount of money paid by all of the participants for
bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover the spaces or other devices used in
playing bingo does not exceed $100.00.
         C.   All of the money paid for bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover
spaces or other devices used in playing bingo is used only to pay winners
monetary and nonmonetary prizes and to provide refreshments.
         D.   The total value of all prizes awarded during the game does not
exceed $100.00.
         E.   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or
other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         F.   The bingo game is not conducted during or within ten hours of
either of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to R.C. §§ 2915.07 through 2915.11 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance;
            2.   A scheme of chance or a game of chance, or bingo described in
R.C. § 2915.01(O)(2).
         G.   All of the participants reside at the premises where the bingo
game is conducted.
         H.   The bingo games are conducted on different days of the week and
not more than twice in a calendar week.
   (b)   The Attorney General or any local law enforcement agency may
investigate the conduct of a bingo game that purportedly is conducted for
purposes of amusement only if there is reason to believe that the purported
amusement bingo game does not comply with the requirements of either division
(a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section. A local law enforcement agency may proceed by
action in the proper court to enforce this section if the local law enforcement
agency gives written notice to the Attorney General when commencing the action.
(R.C. § 2915.12)
§ 630.10 PROHIBITIONS WHERE INSTANT BINGO GAME IS CONDUCTED.
   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts instant bingo shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 2915.09(A)(1), (A)
(2) and (A)(3), or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (2)   Conduct instant bingo unless either of the following applies:
         A.   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a), is
described in IRC 501(c)(3), is a charitable organization as defined in R.C. §
2915.01, is in good standing in the state pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08, and is in
compliance with R.C. Chapter 1716;
         B.   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a), is
described in IRC 501(c)(7), (c)(8), (c)(10) or (c)(19) or is a veteran’s
organization described in IRC 501(c)(4), and conducts instant bingo under R.C.
§ 2915.13.
      (3)   Conduct instant bingo on any day, at any time, or at any premises
not specified on the organization’s license issued pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08;
      (4)   Permit any person whom the organization knows or should have known
has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction to be a
bingo game operator in the conduct of instant bingo;
      (5)   Purchase or lease supplies used to conduct instant bingo or punch
board games from any person except a distributor licensed under R.C. §
2915.081;
      (6)   Sell or provide any instant bingo ticket or card for a price
different from the price printed on it by the manufacturer on either the
instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare;
      (7)   Sell an instant bingo ticket or card to a person under 18 years of
age;
      (8)   Fail to keep unsold instant bingo tickets or cards for less than
three years;
      (9)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for conducting
instant bingo that is conducted by the organization or for preparing, selling
or serving food or beverages at the site of the instant bingo game, permit any
auxiliary unit or society of the organization to pay compensation to any bingo
game operator who prepares, sells or serves food or beverages at an instant
bingo game conducted by the organization, or permit any auxiliary unit or
society of the organization to prepare, sell or serve food or beverages at an
instant bingo game conducted by the organization, if the auxiliary unit or
society pays any compensation to the bingo game operators who prepare, sell or
serve the food or beverages;
      (10)   Pay fees to any person for any services performed in relation to
an instant bingo game, except as provided in R.C. § 2915.093(D);
      (11)   Pay fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in an instant bingo game;
      (12)   A.   Allow instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold to bingo game
operators at a premises at which the organization sells instant bingo tickets
or cards or to be sold to employees of a D permit holder who are working at a
premises at which instant bingo tickets or cards are sold;
         B.   Division (a)(12)A. of this section does not prohibit a licensed
charitable organization or a bingo game operator from giving any person an
instant bingo ticket as a prize in place of a cash prize won by a participant
in an instant bingo game. In no case shall an instant bingo ticket or card be
sold or provided for a price different from the price printed on it by the
manufacturer on either the instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare.
      (13)   Fail to display its bingo license, and the serial numbers of the
deal of instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold, conspicuously at each
premises at which it sells instant bingo tickets or cards;
      (14)   Possess a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards that was not
purchased from a distributor licensed under R.C. § 2915.081 as reflected on an
invoice issued by the distributor that contains all of the information required
by R.C. § 2915.10(E);
      (15)   Fail, once it opens a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards, to
continue to sell the tickets or cards in that deal until the tickets or cards
with the top two highest tiers of prizes in that deal are sold;
      (16)   Possess bingo supplies that were not obtained in accordance with
R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (b)   A charitable organization may purchase, lease, or use instant bingo
ticket dispensers to sell instant bingo tickets or cards.
   (c)   Pursuant to R.C. § 2915.091(C), the Attorney General may adopt rules
in accordance with R.C. Chapter 119 that govern the conduct of instant bingo by
charitable organizations.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section or a rule adopted under
division (c) of this section is guilty of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, illegal instant bingo conduct is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of a violation of division (a) of this section or of such a rule adopted under
division (c) of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.091) (Prior Code, § 630.091)
§ 630.11 RAFFLE DRAWINGS.
   (a)   (1)   Subject to division (a)(2) of this section, a person or entity
may conduct a raffle to raise money for the person or entity and does not need
a license to conduct bingo in order to conduct a raffle drawing that is not for
profit if the person or entity is any of the following:
         A.   Exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
         B.   A school district, community school established under R.C.
Chapter 3314, STEM school established under R.C. Chapter 3326, college-
preparatory boarding school established under R.C. Chapter 3328, or chartered
nonpublic school;
         C.   Exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(4), 501(c)(6), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or
501(c)(19).
      (2)   If a person or entity that is described in division (a)(1)C. of
this section conducts a raffle, the person or entity shall distribute at least
50% of the net profit from the raffle to a charitable purpose described in R.C.
§ 2915.01(V) or to a department or agency of the federal government, the state,
or any political subdivision.
   (b)   Except as provided in division (a) of this section, no person shall
conduct a raffle drawing that is for profit or a raffle drawing that is not for
profit.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of illegal
conduct of a raffle. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal
conduct of a raffle is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (b) of this section,
illegal conduct of a raffle is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2915.092) (Prior Code, § 630.092)
§ 630.12 INSTANT BINGO OTHER THAN AT BINGO SESSIONS.
   (a)   As used in this section, “retail income from all commercial activity”
means the income that a person receives from the provision of goods, services
or activities that are provided at the location where instant bingo other than
at a bingo session is conducted, including the sale of instant bingo tickets. A
religious organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC
501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3), at not more than one location at which
it conducts its charitable programs, may include donations from its members and
guests as retail income.
   (b)   (1)   If a charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant
bingo other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued under R.C.
§ 2915.08, the charitable instant bingo organization shall enter into a written
contract with the owner or lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is
conducted to allow the owner or lessor to assist in the conduct of instant
bingo other than at a bingo session, identify each location where the instant
bingo other than at a bingo session is being conducted, and identify the owner
or lessor of each location.
      (2)   A charitable instant bingo organization that conducts instant bingo
other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued under R.C. §
2915.08 is not required to enter into a written contract with the owner or
lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is conducted, provided that
the owner or lessor is not assisting in the conduct of the instant bingo other
than at a bingo session and provided that the conduct of the instant bingo
other than at a bingo session at that location is not more than five days per
calendar year and not more than ten hours per day.
   (c)   Except as provided in division (f) of this section, no charitable
instant bingo organization shall conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo
session at a location where the primary source of retail income from all
commercial activity at that location is the sale of instant bingo tickets.
   (d)   (1)   The owner or lessor of a location that enters into a contract
pursuant to division (b) of this section shall pay the full gross profit to the
charitable instant bingo organization, in return for the deal of instant bingo
tickets. The owner or lessor may retain the money that the owner or lessor
receives for selling the instant bingo tickets, provided, however, that after
the deal has been sold, the owner or lessor shall pay to the charitable instant
bingo organization the value of any unredeemed instant bingo prizes remaining
in the deal of instant bingo tickets. As used in this division, “full gross
profit” means the amount by which the total receipts of all instant bingo
tickets, if the deal has been sold in full, exceeds the amount that would be
paid out if all prizes were redeemed.
      (2)   The charitable instant bingo organization shall pay 6% of the total
gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets for the purpose of
reimbursing the owner or lessor for expenses described in this division.
      (3)   As used in this division, “expenses” means those items provided for
in R.C. § 2915.01(GG)(4), (GG)(5), (GG)(6), (GG)(7), (GG)(8), (GG)(12), and
(GG)(13) and that percentage of the owner’s or lessor’s rent for the location
where instant bingo is conducted. Expenses, in the aggregate, shall not exceed
6% of the total gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets.
   (e)   A charitable instant bingo organization shall provide the Attorney
General with all of the following information:
      (1)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has terminated a
contract entered into pursuant to division (b) of this section with an owner or
lessor of a location;
      (2)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has entered into a
written contract pursuant to division (b) of this section with a new owner or
lessor of a location;
      (3)   That the charitable instant bingo organization is aware of conduct
by the owner or lessor of a location at which instant bingo is conducted that
is in violation of R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (f)   Division (c) of this section does not apply to a volunteer
firefighter’s organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under
IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3), that conducts instant bingo other
than at a bingo session on the premises where the organization conducts
firefighter training, that has conducted instant bingo continuously for at
least five years prior to July 1, 2003, and that, during each of those five
years, had gross receipts of at least $1,500,000.
(R.C. § 2915.093)
   (g)   (1)   Subject to the requirements of R.C. §§ 2915.14 and 2915.15
concerning electronic instant bingo, a veteran’s organization, a fraternal
organization, or a sporting organization authorized to conduct a bingo session
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2915 may conduct instant bingo, electronic instant
bingo, or both other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued
under R.C. § 2915.08 if all of the following apply:
         A.   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to 12
hours during any day, provided that the sale does not begin earlier than 10:00
a.m. and ends not later than 2:00 a.m.
         B.   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to
its own premises and to its own members and invited guests.
         C.   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization is raising money for an organization that is described in IRC 509
(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization
that maintains its principal place of business in this state, that is exempt
from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3),
and that is in good standing in this state and executes a written contract with
that organization as required in division (g)(2) of this section.
      (2)   If a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or sporting
organization authorized to conduct instant bingo or electronic instant bingo
pursuant to division (g)(1) of this section is raising money for another
organization that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) and is either
a governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of
business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC
501(a) and described in IRC 501(c), and that is in good standing in this state,
the veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting organization
shall execute a written contract with the organization that is described in IRC
509(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an
organization that maintains its principal place of business in this state, that
is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC
501(c), and that is in good standing in this state in order to conduct instant
bingo or electronic instant bingo. That contract shall include a statement of
the percentage of the net proceeds that the veteran’s, fraternal or sporting
organization will be distributing to the charitable organization that is
described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit
or an organization that maintains its principal place of business in this
state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and
described in IRC 501(c), and that is in good standing in this state.
      (3)   A.   If a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or
sporting organization authorized to conduct instant bingo or electronic instant
bingo pursuant to division (g)(1) of this section has been issued a liquor
permit under R.C. Chapter 4303, that permit may be subject to suspension,
revocation or cancellation if the veteran’s organization, fraternal
organization or sporting organization violates a provision of this chapter or
R.C. Chapter 2915.
         B.   No veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or sporting
organization that enters into a written contract pursuant to division (g)(2) of
this section shall violate any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915,
or permit, aid or abet any other person in violating any provision of this
chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
      (4)   A veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or sporting
organization shall give all required proceeds earned from the conduct of
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to the organization with which the
veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or sporting organization has
entered into a written contract.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (g) of this section is guilty of illegal
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided
in this division, illegal instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conduct is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (g) of this section, illegal instant bingo
or electronic instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.13)
(Prior Code, § 630.093)
§ 630.13 RESTRICTIONS ON OWNER OR LESSOR OF LOCATION AT INSTANT BINGO.
   (a)   No owner or lessor of a location shall assist a charitable instant
bingo organization in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session at that location unless the owner or lessor has entered into a written
contract, as described in R.C. § 2915.093, with the charitable instant bingo
organization to assist in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session.
   (b)   The location of the lessor or owner shall be designated as a location
where the charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant bingo other
than at a bingo session.
   (c)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in division (a) of this section shall violate any provision of
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, or permit, aid or abet any other person in
violating any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (d)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in division (a) of this section shall violate the terms of the
contract.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this section is guilty
of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division (c) or
(d) of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If an owner or lessor of a location knowingly, intentionally, or
recklessly violates division (c) or (d) of this section, any license that the
owner or lessor holds for the retail sale of any goods on the owner’s or
lessor’s premises that is issued by the state or a political subdivision is
subject to suspension, revocation or payment of a monetary penalty at the
request of the Attorney General.
(R.C. § 2915.094) (Prior Code, § 630.094)
§ 630.14 SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINES; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (a)   No person shall give to another person any item described in division
(ff)(1), (ff)(2), (ff)(3) or (ff)(4) of §
630.01 in exchange for a noncash prize, toy or novelty received as a reward for
playing or operating a skill-based amusement machine or for a free or reduced-
price game won on a skill-based amusement machine.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of skill-based
amusement machine prohibited conduct. A violation of division (a) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree for each redemption of a prize
that is involved in the violation. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (a) of this section, a violation of that
division is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.06)
   (c)   Any regulation of skill-based amusement machines shall be governed by
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 and not by R.C. Chapter 1345.
(R.C. § 2915.061)
(Prior Code, § 630.11)
§ 630.15 ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (a)   No charitable organization shall conduct electronic instant bingo
unless all of the following are true:
      (1)   The organization is a veteran’s organization described in R.C. §
2915.01(J), or is a fraternal organization described in R.C. § 2915.01(L), and
the organization qualified as a veteran’s organization or fraternal
organization, as applicable, on or before June 30, 2021.
      (2)   The organization is a veteran’s organization described in IRC 501
(c)(4) or is, and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a
determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the organization
is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a), and is described in
IRC 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or 501(c)(19).
      (3)   The organization has not conducted a raffle in violation of R.C. §
2915.092(B) using an electronic raffle machine, as described in Ohio Veterans
and Fraternal Charitable Coalition v. DeWine, Case No. 13-CV-13610 (C.P.
Franklin Co. February 23, 2018), at any time on or after January 1, 2022.
   (b)   No charitable organization that conducts electronic instant bingo
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Possess an electronic instant bingo system that was not obtained in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 2915 or with any rule adopted under R.C. Chapter
2915;
      (2)   Conduct electronic instant bingo on any day, at any time, or on any
premises not specified on the organization’s type II or type III license issued
under R.C. § 2915.08;
      (3)   Hold more than one valid license to conduct electronic instant
bingo at any one time;
      (4)   Conduct electronic instant bingo on more than one premises or on
any premises other than the charitable organization’s principal place of
business;
      (5)   Operate more than ten electronic bingo systems at the premises on
which the charitable organization conducts electronic instant bingo under its
license;
      (6)   Fail to display both of the following conspicuously at the premises
on which the charitable organization conducts electronic instant bingo:
         A.   The charitable organization’s bingo license;
         B.   The serial number of each deal of electronic instant bingo
tickets being sold.
      (7)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should have
known, to be under 18 years of age to play electronic instant bingo;
      (8)   Sell or provide to any person an electronic instant bingo ticket
for a price different from the price displayed on the game flare for that deal,
except that the charitable organization may give a participant who wins an
electronic instant bingo game an electronic instant bingo ticket as a prize in
place of a cash prize;
      (9)   Fail, once an electronic instant bingo deal is begun, to continue
to sell tickets in that deal until all prizes have been awarded;
      (10)   Permit any person whom the organization knows, or should have
known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction
to be a bingo game operator in the conduct of electronic instant bingo;
      (11)   Permit a bingo game operator to play electronic instant bingo;
      (12)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(12)B. of this
section, pay compensation to a bingo game operator for conducting electronic
instant bingo.
         B.   Division (b)(12)A. of this section does not prohibit an employee
of a veteran’s organization or fraternal organization from redeeming electronic
instant bingo tickets or vouchers for the organization’s members or invited
guests, so long as no portion of the employee’s compensation is paid from any
bingo receipts.
      (13)   Pay consulting fees to any person in relation to electronic
instant bingo.
   (c)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or otherwise provide or offer to
provide an electronic instant bingo system to any person for use in this
municipality unless the electronic instant bingo system has been approved under
R.C. § 2915.15.
   (d)   Whoever knowingly violates division (a), (b), or (c) of this section
or a rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.14(D) is guilty of illegal electronic
instant bingo conduct. Illegal electronic instant bingo conduct is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, except that if the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of division (a) or (b) of this section, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or state law, or of a rule adopted
under R.C. § 2915.14(D), illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.14)
CHAPTER 636: OFFENSES RELATING TO PERSONS
Section
636.01 Definitions
636.02 Negligent homicide
636.03 Assault
636.04 Negligent assault
636.05 Aggravated menacing
636.06 Menacing by stalking
636.07 Menacing
636.08 Unlawful restraint
636.09 Coercion
636.10 Nonsupport of dependents
636.11 Endangering children
636.12 Interference with custody
636.13 Contributing to the unruliness or delinquency of a child
636.14 Threatening or harassing telecommunications
636.15 Placing harmful substance or objects in food or confection
636.16 Domestic violence
636.17 Safety of crowds attending live entertainment performances
636.18 Hazing
636.19 Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products; transaction scans
636.20 Minors’ curfew
636.21 Wrongful influence on minors
636.22 Ethnic intimidation
636.23 Intimidation in connection with housing
636.24 Failing to provide for a person with a functional impairment
636.25 Unlawful collection of bodily substances
636.26 Illegal use of a tracking device or application
§ 636.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this chapter and any other provision of this code
of ordinances, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Another’s unborn” or “other person’s unborn.” A member of the
species homo sapiens who is or was carried in the womb of another during a
period that begins with fertilization and that continues unless and until live
birth occurs.
      (2)   “Unlawful termination of another’s pregnancy.” Causing the death of
an unborn member of the species homo sapiens who is or was carried in the womb
of another, as a result of injuries inflicted during the period that begins
with fertilization and that continues unless and until live birth occurs.
   (b)   Notwithstanding division (a) of this section, in no case shall the
definitions of the terms “another’s unborn”, “other person’s unborn” and
“unlawful termination of another’s pregnancy” that are set forth in division
(a) of this section be applied or construed in any of the following manners:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(1) of this section, in
a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as prohibiting any
pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion with the consent of
the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman implied by law in a
medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise authorized by law to
consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant woman. An abortion that
violates the conditions described in the immediately preceding sentence may be
punished as any violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04,
2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.21 or
2903.22, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, as applicable. An
abortion that does not violate the conditions described in the second
immediately preceding sentence but that does violate R.C. § 2919.12, 2919.13
(B), 2919.15, 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, may be punished as a violation of the section, as
applicable.
      (2)   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
         A.   Her delivery of a stillborn baby.
         B.   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a viable,
unborn human that she is carrying.
         C.   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who dies
from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human.
         D.   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human.
         E.   Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in any
other manner, an injury, illness or other psychological illness or condition,
regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human that she is
carrying.
(R.C. § 2903.09) (Prior Code, § 636.001)
§ 636.02 NEGLIGENT HOMICIDE.
   (a)   No person shall negligently cause the death of another or the unlawful
termination of another’s pregnancy by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent homicide, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2903.05) (Prior Code, § 636.01)
Statutory reference:
   Reckless homicide, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.041
§ 636.03 ASSAULT.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm to
another or to another’s unborn.
   (b)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to another or
to another’s unborn.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of
assault. Except as provided in R.C. § 2903.13(C), assault is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
   (d)   If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to assault when it
is a misdemeanor also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a specification as
described in R.C. § 2941.1423 (victim of the offense was a woman whom the
defendant knew was pregnant at the time of the offense) that was included in
the indictment, count in the indictment or information charging the offense,
the court shall sentence the offender to a mandatory jail term as provided in
R.C. § 2929.24(F).
   (e)   A prosecution for a violation of division (a) or (b) of this section
does not preclude a prosecution of a violation of any other section of the Ohio
Revised Code. One or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of behavior that
can be prosecuted under division (a) or (b) of this section or any other
section of the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under division (a) or (b) of
this section, the other section of the Ohio Revised Code, the municipal
ordinance, or both sections. However, if an offender is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of division (a) or (b) of this section and also is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of R.C. § 2903.22, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, based on the same conduct
involving the same victim that was the basis of the violation of division (a)
or (b) of this section, the offenses are allied offenses of similar import
under R.C. § 2941.25.
(R.C. § 2903.13) (Prior Code, § 636.02)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated and felonious assault, see R.C. §§ 2903.11 and 2903.12
   Felony assault offenses, see R.C. § 2903.13(C)
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15
   Persons who may seek relief under anti-stalking protection order; ex parte
orders, see R.C. § 2903.214
   Protection order as pretrial condition of release, see R.C. § 2903.213
   Strangulation, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.18
   Vehicular assault and aggravated vehicular assault, felony offenses, see
R.C. § 2903.08
§ 636.04 NEGLIGENT ASSAULT.
   (a)   No person shall negligently, by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, cause physical harm to another or to
another’s unborn.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent assault, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 2903.14) (Prior Code, § 636.03)
§ 636.05 AGGRAVATED MENACING.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the offender
will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the other person,
such other person’s unborn, or a member of that other person’s immediate
family. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that the
offender will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the
other person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s
immediate family, the other person’s belief may be based on words or conduct of
the offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association, or
other organization that employs the other person or to which the other person
belongs.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated menacing. Except
as otherwise provided in this division (b), aggravated menacing is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the victim of the offense is an officer or
employee of a public children services agency or a private child placing agency
and the offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or
anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties, aggravated
menacing is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law or, if the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an offense of
violence, the victim of that prior offense was an officer or employee of a
public children services agency or private child placing agency, and that prior
offense related to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
   (c)   As used in this section, “organization” includes an entity that is a
governmental employer.
(R.C. § 2903.21) (Prior Code, § 636.04)
§ 636.06 MENACING BY STALKING.
   (a)   Prohibited conduct.
      (1)   A.   No person by engaging in a pattern of conduct shall knowingly
cause another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to
the other person or a family or household member of the other person or cause
mental distress to the other person or a family or household member of the
other person. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that
the offender will cause physical harm to the other person or the other person’s
family or household member or mental distress to the other person or the other
person’s family or household member, the other person’s belief or mental
distress may be based on words or conduct of the offender that are directed at
or identify a corporation, association, or other organization that employs the
other person or to which the other person belongs.
         B.   No person, through the use of any form of written communication
or any electronic method of remotely transferring information, including but
not limited to any computer, computer network, computer program, computer
system, or telecommunication device, shall post a message or use any
intentionally written or verbal graphic gesture with purpose to do either of
the following:
            1.   Violate division (a)(1)A. of this section;
            2.   Urge or incite another to commit a violation of division (a)
(1)A. of this section.
         C.   No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate division (a)
(1)A. or (a)(1)B. of this section.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) of this section is guilty of
menacing by stalking.
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(2)B. of this
section, menacing by stalking is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   Menacing by stalking is a felony, to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law, if any of the following applies:
            1.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 2903.211 or a violation of R.C. § 2911.211, or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to either of these offenses.
            2.   In committing the offense under division (a)(1)A., (a)(1)B. or
(a)(1)C. of this section, the offender made a threat of physical harm to or
against the victim, or as a result of an offense committed under division (a)
(1)B. or (a)(1)C. of this section, a third person induced by the offender’s
posted message made a threat of physical harm to or against the victim.
            3.   In committing the offense under division (a)(1)A., (a)(1)B. or
(a)(1)C. of this section, the offender trespassed on the land or premises where
the victim lives, is employed or attends school, or as a result of an offense
committed under division (a)(1)B. or (a)(1)C. of this section, a third person
induced by the offender’s posted message trespassed on the land or premises
where the victim lives, is employed or attends school.
            4.   The victim of the offense is a minor.
            5.   The offender has a history of violence towards the victim or
any other person or a history of other violent acts towards the victim or any
other person.
            6.   While committing the offense under division (a)(1)A. of this
section or a violation of division (a)(1)C. of this section based on conduct in
violation of division (a)(1)A. of this section, the offender had a deadly
weapon on or about the offender’s person or under the offender’s control.
Division (a)(2)B.6. of this section does not apply in determining the penalty
for a violation of division (a)(1)B. of this section or a violation of division
(a)(1)C. of this section based on conduct in violation of division (a)(1)B. of
this section.
            7.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
the subject of a protection order issued under R.C. § 2903.213 or 2903.214,
regardless of whether or not the person to be protected under the order is the
victim of the offense or another person.
            8.   In committing the offense under division (a)(1)A., (a)(1)B. or
(a)(1)C. of this section, the offender caused serious physical harm to the
premises at which the victim resides, to the real property on which that
premises is located, or to any personal property located on that premises, or
as a result of an offense committed under division (a)(1)B. of this section or
an offense committed under division (a)(1)C. of this section based on a
violation of division (a)(1)B. of this section, a third person induced by the
offender’s posted message caused serious physical harm to that premises, that
real property or any personal property on that premises.
            9.   Prior to committing the offense, the offender had been
determined to represent a substantial risk of physical harm to others as
manifested by evidence of then-recent homicidal or other violent behavior,
evidence of then-recent threats that placed another in reasonable fear of
violent behavior and serious harm, or other evidence of then-present
dangerousness.
            10.   The victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a
public children services agency or a private child placing agency and the
offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties.
            11.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an
officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child
placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer’s or employee’s
performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties.
      (3)   R.C. § 2919.271 applies in relation to a defendant charged with a
violation of this section.
      (4)   For the purpose of division (a) of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         A.   “Computer,” “computer network,” “computer program,” “computer
system,” and “telecommunications device.” Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
2913.01.
         B.   “Emergency facility person.” The singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
         C.   “Emergency medical services person.”The singular of “emergency
medical services personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
         D.   “Family or household member.” Means any of the following:
            1.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
person against whom the act prohibited in division (a)(1) of this section is
committed:
               a.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse
of the person;
               b.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the person, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the person;
               c.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the person, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
person.
            2.   The natural parent of any child of whom the person against
whom the act prohibited in division (a)(1) of this section is committed is the
other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
         E.   “Mental distress.” Any of the following:
            1.   Any mental illness or condition that involves some temporary
substantial incapacity;
            2.   Any mental illness or condition that would normally require
psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment or other mental health services,
whether or not any person requested or received psychiatric treatment,
psychological treatment, or other mental health services.
         F.   “Organization.” Includes an entity that is a governmental
employer.
         G.   “Pattern of conduct.” Two or more actions or incidents closely
related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any
of those actions or incidents, or two or more actions or incidents closely
related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any
of those actions or incidents, directed at one or more persons employed by or
belonging to the same corporation, association, or other organization. Actions
or incidents that prevent, obstruct or delay the performance by a public
official, firefighter, rescuer, emergency medical services person or emergency
facility person of any authorized act within the public official’s,
firefighter’s, rescuer’s, emergency medical services person’s or emergency
facility person’s official capacity, or the posting of messages, use of
intentionally written or verbal graphic gestures, or receipt of information or
data through the use of any form of written communication or an electronic
method of remotely transferring information, including but not limited to a
computer, computer network, computer program, computer system or
telecommunications device, may constitute a “pattern of conduct.”
         H.   “Person living as a spouse.” Means a person who is living or has
lived with the person against whom the act prohibited in division (a)(1) of
this section is committed in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise
is cohabiting with that person, or who otherwise has cohabited with the person
within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in
question.
         I.   “Post a message.” Transferring, sending, posting, publishing,
disseminating or otherwise communicating, or attempting to transfer, send,
post, publish, disseminate or otherwise communicate, any message or
information, whether truthful or untruthful, about an individual, and whether
done under one’s own name, under the name of another or while impersonating
another.
         J.   “Public official.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.01.
         K.   “Sexual motivation.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2971.01.
         L.   “Third person.” In relation to conduct as described in division
(a)(1)B. of this section, an individual who is neither the offender nor the
victim of the conduct.
      (5)   The prosecution does not need to prove in a prosecution under
division (a) of this section that a person requested or received psychiatric
treatment, psychological treatment or other mental health services in order to
show that the person was caused mental distress as described in division (a)
(4)E.2. of this section.
      (6)   A.   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a person solely
because the person provided access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control,
including having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access
or connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the
information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the
material that is the subject of the access or connection. In addition, any
person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control shall not be
liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or
transmission through its service of any information that it believes is or will
be sent in violation of division (a) of this section.
         B.   Division (a)(6)A. of this section does not create an affirmative
duty for any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control to
block the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that
it believes is or will be sent in violation of division (a) of this section
except as otherwise provided by law.
         C.   Division (a)(6)A. of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of division (a) of this section or who
knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.
(R.C. § 2903.211)
   (b)   Protection order. Consult R.C. § 2903.213 for current provisions
regarding protection orders, consent agreements, anti-stalking protection
orders and orders issued by a court of another state.
   (c)   Violating a protection order, consent agreement, anti-stalking
protection order or order issued by a court of another state.
      (1)   No person shall recklessly violate the terms of any of the
following:
         A.   A protection order issued or consent agreement approved pursuant
to R.C. § 2919.26 or 3113.31;
         B.   A protection order issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213 or
2903.214;
         C.   A protection order issued by a court of another state.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
violating a protection order.
   B.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(2)C. or (c)(2)D. of this
section, violating a protection order is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   C.   Violating a protection order is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the offender previously has been convicted of, pleaded
guilty to, or been adjudicated a delinquent child for any of the following:
            1.   A violation of a protection order issued or consent agreement
approved pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213, 2903.214, 2919.26, or 3113.31,
or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance;
            2.   Two or more violations of R.C. § 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22,
or 2911.211, or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
or any combination of those offenses, that involved the same person who is the
subject of the protection order or consent agreement;
            3.   One or more violations of this section, or any substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance.
         D.   If the offender violates a protection order or consent agreement
while committing a felony offense, violating a protection order is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         E.   If the protection order violated by the offender was an order
issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34 or 2903.214 that required electronic
monitoring of the offender pursuant to that section, the court may require in
addition to any other sentence imposed upon the offender that the offender be
electronically monitored for a period not exceeding five years by a law
enforcement agency designated by the court. If the court requires under this
division that the offender be electronically monitored, unless the court
determines that the offender is indigent, the court shall order that the
offender pay the costs of the installation of the electronic monitoring device
and the cost of monitoring the electronic monitoring device.
      (3)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (c)(1)C. of
this section that the protection order issued by a court of another state does
not comply with the requirements specified in 18 U.S.C. § 2265(b) for a
protection order that must be accorded full faith a credit by a court of this
state or that it is not entitled to full faith and credit under 18 U.S.C. §
2265(c).
      (4)   In a prosecution for a violation of this section, it is not
necessary for the prosecution to prove that the protection order or consent
agreement was served on the defendant if the prosecution proves that the
defendant was shown the protection order or consent agreement or a copy of
either or a judge, magistrate, or law enforcement officer informed the
defendant that a protection order or consent agreement had been issued, and
proves that the defendant recklessly violated the terms of the order or
agreement.
      (5)   As used in this section, “protection order issued by a court of
another state” means an injunction or another order issued by a criminal court
of another state for the purpose of preventing violent or threatening acts or
harassment against, contact or communication with, or physical proximity to
another person including a temporary order, and means an injunction or order of
that nature issued by a civil court of another state, including a temporary
order and a final order issued in an independent action or as a pendente lite
order in a proceeding for other relief, if the court issued it in response to a
complaint, petition or motion filed by or on behalf of a person seeking
protection. The term does not include an order for support or for custody of a
child issued pursuant to the divorce and child custody laws of another state,
except to the extent that the order for support or for custody of a child is
entitled to full faith and credit under the laws of the United States.
(R.C. § 2919.27)
(Prior Code, § 636.045)
§ 636.07 MENACING.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the
offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other
person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s immediate
family. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that the
offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other
person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s immediate
family, the other person’s belief may be based on words or conduct of the
offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association, or other
organization that employs the other person or to which the other person
belongs.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly place or attempt to place another in
reasonable fear of physical harm or death by displaying a deadly weapon,
regardless of whether the deadly weapon displayed is operable or inoperable, if
either of the following applies:
         A.   The other person is an emergency service responder, the person
knows or reasonably should know that the other person is an emergency service
responder, and it is the person’s specific purpose to engage in the specified
conduct against an emergency service responder.
         B.   The other person is a family or household member or co-worker of
an emergency service responder, the person knows or reasonably should know that
the other person is a family or household member or co-worker of an emergency
service responder, and it is the person’s specific purpose to engage in the
specified conduct against a family or household member or co-worker of an
emergency service responder.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of menacing. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, menacing is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If the victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a public
children services agency or a private child placing agency and the offense
relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated performance
of official responsibilities or duties or if the victim of the offense is an
emergency service responder in the performance of the responder’s official
duties, menacing is one of the following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2) of this section, a
misdemeanor of the first degree;
      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an officer or
employee of a public children services agency or private child placing agency
or an emergency service responder, and that prior offense related to the
officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated performance of official
responsibilities or duties or to the responder’s performance of the responder’s
official duties, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   A prosecution for a violation of this section does not preclude a
prosecution of a violation of any other section of the Ohio Revised Code. One
or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of behavior that can be prosecuted
under this section or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code may be
prosecuted under this section, the other section of the Ohio Revised Code, or
both sections. However, if an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of this section and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of R.C. § 2903.13, or any substantially similar municipal ordinance,
based on the same conduct involving the same victim that was the basis of the
violation of this section, the offenses are allied offenses of similar import
under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Co-worker.” Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 2903.13.
      (2)   “Emergency service responder.” Has the same meanings as in R.C. §
2903.13.
      (3)   “Family or household member.” Has the same meanings as in R.C. §
2903.13.
      (4)   “Organization.” Includes an entity that is a governmental employer.
(R.C. § 2903.22) (Prior Code, § 636.05)
§ 636.08 UNLAWFUL RESTRAINT.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly restrain
another of the other person’s liberty.
   (b)   No person, without privilege to do so and with a sexual motivation,
shall knowingly restrain another of the other person’s liberty.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful restraint, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   As used in this section, “sexual motivation” has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 2971.01.
(R.C. § 2905.03) (Prior Code, § 636.06)
§ 636.09 COERCION.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to coerce another into taking or refraining
from action concerning which the other person has a legal freedom of choice,
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Threaten to commit any offense.
      (2)   Utter or threaten any slander against any person.
      (3)   Expose or threaten to expose any matter tending to subject any
person to hatred, contempt or ridicule, or to damage any person’s personal or
business repute, or to impair any person’s credit.
      (4)   Institute or threaten criminal proceedings against any person.
      (5)   Take or withhold, or threaten to take or withhold official action,
or cause or threaten to cause official action to be taken or withheld.
   (b)   Divisions (a)(4) and (a)(5) of this section shall not be construed to
prohibit a prosecutor or court from doing any of the following in good faith
and in the interests of justice:
      (1)   Offering or agreeing to grant, or granting immunity from
prosecution pursuant to R.C. § 2945.44.
      (2)   In return for a plea of guilty to one or more offenses charged or
to one or more other or lesser offenses, or in return for the testimony of the
accused in a case to which the accused is not a party, offering or agreeing to
dismiss, or dismissing one or more charges pending against an accused, or
offering or agreeing to impose, or imposing a certain sentence or modification
of sentence.
      (3)   Imposing a community control sanction on certain conditions,
including without limitation requiring the offender to make restitution or
redress to the victim of the offense.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (a)(3), (a)(4)
or (a)(5) of this section that the actor’s conduct was a reasonable response to
the circumstances which occasioned it, and that the actor’s purpose was limited
to any of the following:
      (1)   Compelling another to refrain from misconduct or to desist from
further misconduct.
      (2)   Preventing or redressing a wrong or injustice.
      (3)   Preventing another from taking action for which the actor
reasonably believed the other person to be disqualified.
      (4)   Compelling another to take action which the actor reasonably
believed the other person to be under a duty to take.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of coercion, a misdemeanor of
the second degree.
   (e)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Community control sanction” has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2929.01.
      (2)   “Threat” includes a direct threat and a threat by innuendo.
(R.C. § 2905.12) (Prior Code, § 636.09)
§ 636.10 NONSUPPORT OF DEPENDENTS.
   (a)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide adequate support to:
      (1)   The person’s spouse, as required by law;
      (2)   The person’s child who is under age 18, or the persons’s child with
a mental or physical disability who is under age 21;
      (3)   The person’s aged or infirm parent or adoptive parent, who from
lack of ability and means is unable to provide adequately for the parent’s own
support.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide support as
established by a court order to, another person whom, by court order or decree,
the person:
         A.   Is legally obligated to support; or
         B.   Was legally obligated to support, and an amount for support:
            1.   Was due and owing prior to the date the person’s duty to pay
current support terminated; and
            2.   Remains unpaid.
      (2)   The period of limitation under R.C. § 2901.13 applicable to
division (b)(1)B. of this section shall begin to run on the date the person’s
duty to pay current support terminates.
   (c)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage or contribute to a
child or a ward of the juvenile court becoming a dependent child, as defined in
R.C. § 2151.04, or a neglected child, as defined in R.C. § 2151.04.
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of failure to provide
adequate support under division (a) of this section or a charge of failure to
provide support established by a court order under division (b) of this section
that the accused was unable to provide adequate support or the established
support, but did provide the support that was within his or her ability and
means.
   (e)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(3) of this
section that the parent abandoned the accused or failed to support the accused
as required by law, while the accused was under age 18, or had a mental or
physical disability and was under age 21.
   (f)   It is not a defense to a charge under division (b) of this section
that the person whom a court has ordered the accused to support is being
adequately supported by someone other than the accused.
   (g)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of nonsupport of dependents, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (a)(2) or (b) of this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or if the
offender has failed to provide support under division (a)(2) or (b) of this
section for a total accumulated period of 26 weeks out of 104 consecutive
weeks, whether or not the 26 weeks were consecutive, then a violation of
division (a)(2) or (b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a felony violation of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (a)(2) or
(b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the offender is guilty of nonsupport of dependents by reason of
failing to provide support to his or her child as required by a child support
order issued on or after April 15, 1985, pursuant to R.C. § 2151.23, 2151.231,
2151.232, 2151.33, 3105.21, 3109.05, 3111.13, 3113.04, 3113.31, 3115.401, or
former R.C. § 3115.31, the court, in addition to any other sentence imposed,
shall assess all court costs arising out of the charge against the person and
require the person to pay any reasonable attorney’s fees of any adverse party
other than the state, as determined by the court, that arose in relation to the
charge.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
contributing to the nonsupport of dependents, a misdemeanor of the first
degree. Each day of a violation of division (c) of this section is a separate
offense.
(R.C. § 2919.21) (Prior Code, § 636.10)
§ 636.11 ENDANGERING CHILDREN.
   (a)   No person, who is the parent, guardian, custodian, person having
custody or control, or person in loco parentis of a child under 18 years of age
or a child with a mental or physical disability under 21 years of age, shall
create a substantial risk to the health or safety of the child by violating a
duty of care, protection, or support. It is not a violation of a duty of care,
protection, or support under this division when the parent, guardian,
custodian, or person having custody or control of a child treats the physical
or mental illness or disability of the child by spiritual means through prayer
alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious body.
   (b)   No person shall do any of the following to a child under 18 years of
age or a child with a mental or physical disability under 21 years of age:
      (1)   Abuse the child.
      (2)   Torture or cruelly abuse the child.
      (3)   Administer corporal punishment or other physical disciplinary
measure, or physically restrain the child in a cruel manner or for a prolonged
period, which punishment, discipline or restraint is excessive under the
circumstances and creates a substantial risk of serious physical harm to the
child.
      (4)   Repeatedly administer unwarranted disciplinary measures to a child
when there is a substantial risk that this conduct, if continued, will
seriously impair or retard the child’s mental health or development.
      (5)   Entice, coerce, permit, encourage, compel, hire, employ, use or
allow the child to act, model or in any other way participate in, or be
photographed for, the production, presentation, dissemination or advertisement
of any material or performance that the offender knows or reasonably should
know is obscene, is sexually oriented matter or is nudity-oriented matter.
      (6)   Allow the child to be on the same parcel of real property and
within 100 feet of, or, in the case of more than one housing unit on the same
parcel of real property, in the same housing unit and within 100 feet of, any
act in violation of R.C. § 2925.04 or 2925.041 when the person knows that the
act is occurring, whether or not any person is prosecuted for or convicted of
the violation of R.C. § 2925.04 or 2925.041 that is the basis of the violation
of this division.
   (c)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle, as defined by R.C. § 4511.01,
within the municipality and in violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, when one or more children under
18 years of age are in the vehicle. Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
a person may be convicted at the same trial or proceeding of a violation of
this division and a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that constitutes the basis of the charge of the
violation of this division. For purposes of R.C. §§ 4511.191 to 4511.197 and
all related provisions of law, a person arrested for a violation of this
division shall be considered to be under arrest for operating a vehicle while
under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, a combination of them or for
operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, or urine.
      (2)   For the purpose of division (c)(1) of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
         A.   “Controlled substance.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
3719.01.
         B.   “Vehicle.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (d)   (1)   Division (b)(5) of this section does not apply to any material
or performance that is produced, presented or disseminated for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, religious, governmental, judicial or other
proper purpose, by or to a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist,
teacher, person pursuing bona fide studies for research, librarian, member of
the clergy, prosecutor, judge or other person having a proper interest in the
material or performance.
      (2)   Mistake of age is not a defense to a charge under division (b)(5)
of this section.
      (3)   In a prosecution under division (b)(5) of this section, the trier
of fact may infer that an actor, model or participant in the material or
performance involved is a juvenile if the material or performance, through its
title, text, visual representation or otherwise, represents or depicts the
actor, model or participant as a juvenile.
      (4)   For the purpose of this division and division (b)(5) of this
section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   “Material,” “performance,” “obscene” and “sexual activity.” Have
the same meanings as in R.C. § 2907.01.
         B.   “Nudity-oriented matter.” Any material or performance that shows
a minor in a state of nudity and that, taken as a whole by the average person
applying contemporary community standards, appeals to the prurient interest.
         C.   “Sexually oriented matter.” Any material or performance that
shows a minor participating or engaging in sexual activity, masturbation or
bestiality.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of endangering children.
      (1)   If the offender violates division (a) or (b)(1) of this section,
endangering children is one of the following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (e)(1)B., (e)(1)C. or
(e)(1)D., a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of an offense under
this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or
of any offense involving neglect, abandonment or contributing to the
delinquency of or physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided in
division (e)(1)C. or (e)(1)D. of this section, endangering children is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         C.   If the violation is a violation of division (a) of this section
and results in serious physical harm to the child involved, endangering
children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         D.   If the violation is a violation of division (b)(1) of this
section and results in serious physical harm to the child involved, endangering
children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the offender violates division (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(5) or
(b)(6) of this section, endangering children is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the offender violates division (c) of this section, the offender
shall be punished as follows:
         A.   Except as provided in (e)(3)B. or (e)(3)C., endangering children
in violation of division (c) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
         B.   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child or
if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section or
a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any offense
involving neglect, abandonment or contributing to the delinquency of or
physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided in division (e)(3)C. of
this section, endangering children in violation of division (c) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         C.   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child
and if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, R.C. § 2903.06, 2903.08, 2919.22(C) or former R.C. § 2903.07 as it
existed prior to March 23, 2000, or R.C. § 2903.04, in a case in which the
offender was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that
section, endangering children in violation of division (c) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         D.   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine or other sentence,
penalty or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to divisions (e)
(3)A., (e)(3)B. or (e)(3)C. of this section or pursuant to any other provision
of law and in addition to any suspension of the offender’s driver’s license or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege under
R.C. Chapter 4506, Chapter 4509, Chapter 4510 or Chapter 4511, or any other
provision of law, the court also may impose upon the offender a class seven
suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02
(A)(7).
         E.   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or other sentence,
penalty or sanction imposed upon the offender pursuant to division (e)(3)A.,
(e)(3)B., (e)(3)C. or (e)(3)D. of this section or pursuant to any other
provision of law for the violation of division (c) of this section, if as a
part of the same trial or proceeding the offender also is convicted of or
pleads guilty to a separate charge charging the violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A),
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the
charge of the violation of division (c) of this section, the offender also
shall be sentenced in accordance with R.C. § 4511.19, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, for that violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (f)   (1)   If a person violates division (c) of this section and if, at the
time of the violation, there were two or more children under 18 years of age in
the motor vehicle involved in the violation, the offender may be convicted of a
violation of division (c) of this section for each of the children, but the
court may sentence the offender for only one of the violations.
      (2)   A.   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (c) of this section but the person is not also convicted of and does
not also plead guilty to a separate charge of violating R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge
of the violation of division (c) of this section, both the following apply:
            1.   For purposes of the provisions of R.C. § 4511.19, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that set forth the penalties and
sanctions for a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the violation of
division (c) of this section shall not constitute a violation of R.C. § 4511.19
(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
            2.   For purposes of the provisions of law that refers to a
conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and that is not described in
division (f)(2)A.1. of this section, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the
violation of division (c) of this section shall constitute a conviction or plea
of guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
         B.   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (c) of this section and the person also is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a separate charge of violating R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge of the
violation of division (c) of this section, the conviction of or plea of guilty
to the violation of division (c) of this section shall not constitute, for the
purposes of any provision of law that refers to a conviction of or a plea of
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, a conviction of or a plea of guilty to a violation of R.C.
§ 4511.19(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 2919.22(A) - (E), (H)) (Prior Code, § 636.11)
Statutory reference:
   Community service, requirements, see R.C. § 2919.22(F)
   License suspension, requirements, see R.C. § 2919.22(G)
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15
§ 636.12 INTERFERENCE WITH CUSTODY.
   (a)   No person, knowing that he or she is without privilege to do so or
being reckless in that regard, shall entice, take, keep or harbor a person
identified in division (a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section from the
parent, guardian or custodian of the person identified in division (a)(1), (a)
(2) or (a)(3) of this section:
      (1)   A child under the age of 18, or a child with a mental or physical
disability under the age of 21;
      (2)   A person committed by law to an institution for delinquent, unruly,
neglected, abused or dependent children;
      (3)   A person committed by law to an institution for persons with mental
illnesses or an institution for persons with intellectual disabilities.
   (b)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause or encourage a child or a
ward of the juvenile court who has been committed to the custody of any person,
department or public or private institution to leave the custody of that
person, department or institution without legal consent.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of enticing or taking under
division (a)(1) of this section that the actor reasonably believed that his or
her conduct was necessary to preserve the child’s health or safety. It is an
affirmative defense to a charge of keeping or harboring under division (a) of
this section that the actor in good faith gave notice to law enforcement or
judicial authorities within a reasonable time after the child or committed
person came under his or her shelter, protection, or influence.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with custody.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision, a violation of
division (a)(1) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the child who is
the subject of a violation of division (a)(1) is removed from the state or if
the offender previously has been convicted of an offense under this section or
a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of
division (a)(1) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. If the child who is the subject of a violation of division (a)(1)
suffers physical harm as a result of the violation, a violation of division (a)
(1) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. Each day of a violation of division (b) is a separate offense.
(R.C. § 2919.23) (Prior Code, § 636.12)
§ 636.13 CONTRIBUTING TO THE UNRULINESS OR DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Delinquent child.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.
      (2)   “Unruly child.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.
   (b)   No person, including a parent, guardian, or other custodian of a
child, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or contribute to a child or a
ward of the juvenile court becoming an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (2)   Act in a way tending to cause a child or a ward of the juvenile
court to become an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (3)   Act in a way that contributes to an adjudication of the child as a
delinquent child based on the child’s violation of a court order adjudicating
the child an unruly child for being an habitual truant;
      (4)   If the person is the parent, guardian, or custodian of a child who
has the duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950 to register, register a new
residence address, and periodically verify a residence address, and, if
applicable, to send a notice of intent to reside, and if the child is not
emancipated, as defined in R.C. § 2919.121, fail to ensure that the child
complies with those duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of contributing to the
unruliness or delinquency of a child, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each
day of violation of this section is a separate offense.
(R.C. § 2919.24) (Prior Code, § 636.125)
§ 636.14 THREATENING OR HARASSING TELECOMMUNICATIONS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a
telecommunication, or knowingly permit a telecommunication to be made from a
telecommunications device under the person’s control, to another, if the caller
does any of the following:
      (1)   Makes the telecommunication with purpose to harass, intimidate, or
abuse any person at the premises to which the telecommunication is made,
whether or not actual communication takes place between the caller and a
recipient;
      (2)   Describes, suggests, requests or proposes that the caller, the
recipient of the telecommunication, or any other person engage in sexual
activity, and the recipient or another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made has requested, in a previous telecommunication or in
the immediate telecommunication, that the caller not make a telecommunication
to the recipient or to the premises to which the telecommunication is made;
      (3)   During the telecommunication, violates R.C. § 2903.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (4)   Knowingly states to the recipient of the telecommunication that the
caller intends to cause damage to or destroy public or private property, and
the recipient, any member of the recipient’s family or any other person who
resides at the premises to which the telecommunication is made owns, leases,
resides or works in, will at the time of the destruction or damaging be near or
in, has the responsibility of protecting, or insures the property that will be
destroyed or damaged;
      (5)   Knowingly makes the telecommunication to the recipient of the
telecommunication, to another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made, or to those premises, and the recipient or another
person at those premises previously has told the caller not to make a
telecommunication to those premises or to any persons at those premises;
      (6)   Knowingly makes any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal to
the recipient of the telecommunication that is threatening, intimidating,
menacing, coercive, or obscene with the intent to abuse, threaten, or harass
the recipient;
      (7)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly interrupts the
telecommunication service of any person;
      (8)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly transmits to any
person, regardless of whether the telecommunication is heard in its entirety,
any file, document, or other communication that prevents that person from using
the person’s telephone service or electronic communication device;
      (9)   Knowingly makes any false statement concerning the death, injury,
illness, disfigurement, reputation, indecent conduct, or criminal conduct of
the recipient of the telecommunication or family or household member of the
recipient with purpose to abuse, threaten, intimidate, or harass the recipient;
      (10)   Knowingly incites another person through a telecommunication or
other means to harass or participate in the harassment of a person;
      (11)   Knowingly alarms the recipient by making a telecommunication
without a lawful purpose at an hour or hours known to be inconvenient to the
recipient and in an offensive or repetitive manner.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall make or cause to be made a telecommunication or
permit a telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under
the person’s control, with purpose to abuse, threaten or harass another person.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly post a text or audio statement or an
image on an internet web site or web page for the purpose of abusing,
threatening, or harassing another person.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of telecommunications
harassment.
      (2)   A violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(5), (a)(6), (a)
(7), (a)(8), (a)(9), (a)(10), or (a)(11) or (b) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony on each
subsequent offense, which shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(3), a violation
of division (a)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree on a
first offense and a felony on each subsequent offense, to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If a violation of division (a)(4) of this section
results in economic harm of $1,000 or more, telecommunications harassment is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (d)   No cause of action may be asserted in any court of this municipality
against any provider of a telecommunications service, interactive computer
service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or against any
officer, employee or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, for any
injury, death or loss to person or property that allegedly arises out of the
provider’s, officer’s, employee’s or agent’s provision of information,
facilities or assistance in accordance with the terms of a court order that is
issued in relation to the investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation
of this section. A provider of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or an
officer, employee or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, is
immune from any civil or criminal liability for injury, death or loss to person
or property that allegedly arises out of the provider’s, officer’s, employee’s
or agent’s provision of information, facilities or assistance in accordance
with the terms of a court order that is issued in relation to the investigation
or prosecution of an alleged violation of this section.
   (e)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person solely because the
person provided access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control, including
having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access or
connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the
information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the
material that is the subject of the access or connection. In addition, any
person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control shall not be
liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or
transmission through its service of any information that the person believes
is, or will be sent, in violation of this section.
      (2)   Division (e)(1) of this section does not create an affirmative duty
for any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method
of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control to block
the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that it
believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this section except as otherwise
provided by law.
      (3)   Division (e)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of this section or who knowingly
advertises the availability of material of that nature.
      (4)   A provider or user of an interactive computer service, as defined
in 47 U.S.C. § 230, shall neither be treated as the publisher or speaker of any
information provided by another information content provider, as defined in 47
U.S.C. § 230, nor held civilly or criminally liable for the creation or
development of information provided by another information content provider, as
defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230. Nothing in this division shall be construed to
protect a person from liability to the extent that the person developed or
created any content in violation of this section.
   (f)   Divisions (a)(5) to (a)(11) and (b)(2) of this section do not apply to
a person who, while employed or contracted by a newspaper, magazine, press
association, news agency, news wire service, cable channel or cable operator,
or radio or television station, is gathering, processing, transmitting,
compiling, editing, or disseminating information for the general public within
the scope of the person’s employment in that capacity or the person’s
contractual authority in that capacity.
   (g)   For the purpose of divisions (a) through (d) of this section, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Cable operator.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
      (2)   “Caller.” The person described in division (a) of this section who
makes or causes to be made a telecommunication or who permits a
telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under that
person’s control.
      (3)   “Economic harm.” All direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary
harm suffered by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. The term
includes but is not limited to all of the following:
         A.   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of the
criminal conduct;
         B.   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
         C.   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is shut
down as a result of the criminal conduct;
         D.   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
      (4)   “Family or household member.” Means any of the following:
         A.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in division
(a)(9) of this section is committed:
            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse of
the recipient;
            2.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the recipient, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the recipient;
            3.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse, or
former spouse of the recipient, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
recipient.
         B.   The natural parent of any child of whom the recipient of the
telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in division (a)(9) of this
section is committed is the other natural parent or is the putative other
natural parent.
      (5)   “Person living as a spouse.” Means a person who is living or has
lived with the recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act
prohibited in division (a)(9) of this section is committed in a common law
marital relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting with the recipient, or who
otherwise has cohabited with the recipient within five years prior to the date
of the alleged commission of the act in question.
      (6)   “Sexual activity.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
      (7)   “Telecommunication” and “telecommunications device.” Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   (h)   Nothing in this section prohibits a person from making a
telecommunication to a debtor that is in compliance with the “Fair Debt
Collection Practices Act”, 15 U.S.C. § 1692, as amended, or the “Telephone
Consumer Protection Act”, 47 U.S.C. § 227, as amended.
(R.C. § 2917.21) (Prior Code, § 636.15)
§ 636.15 PLACING HARMFUL SUBSTANCE OR OBJECTS IN FOOD OR CONFECTION.
   (a)   No person shall do either of the following, knowing or having
reasonable cause to believe that any person may suffer physical harm or be
seriously inconvenienced or annoyed thereby:
      (1)   Place a pin, razor blade, glass, laxative, drug of abuse or other
harmful or hazardous object or substance in any food or confection.
      (2)   Furnish to any person any food or confection which has been
adulterated in violation of division (a)(1) of this section.
(R.C. § 3716.11)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 3716.99(C))
(Prior Code, § 636.16)
§ 636.16 DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.
   (a)   Prohibited conduct.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm
to a family or household member.
      (2)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to a family
or household member.
      (3)   No person, by threat of force, shall knowingly cause a family or
household member to believe that the offender will cause imminent physical harm
to the family or household member.
      (4)   A.   Whoever violates this section is guilty of domestic violence,
and the court shall sentence the offender as provided in divisions (a)(4)B. to
(a)(4)E. of this section.
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(4)C., (a)(4)D. or
(a)(4)E. of this section, a violation of division (a)(3) is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree and a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
         C.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(4)D. of this
section, if the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of
domestic violence, a violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or
law of this or any other state or the United States that is substantially
equivalent to domestic violence, a violation of R.C. § 2903.14, 2909.06,
2909.07, 2911.12, 2911.211 or 2919.22 if the victim of the violation was a
family or household member at the time of the violation, a violation of an
existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the
United States that is substantially equivalent to any of those sections if the
victim of the violation was a family or household member at the time of the
commission of the violation, or any offense of violence if the victim of the
offense was a family or household member at the time of the commission of the
offense, a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law, and a violation of division (a)(3) is a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
         D.   If the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been
convicted of two or more offenses of domestic violence or two or more
violations or offenses of the type described in division (a)(4)C. of this
section involving a person who was a family or household member at the time of
the violations or offenses, a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation
of division (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two or more
offenses of domestic violence or two or more violations or offenses of the type
described in division (a)(4)C. of this section involving a person who was a
family or household member at the time of the violations or offenses, and the
offender knew that the victim of the violation was pregnant at the time of the
violation, a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         E.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(4)C. or (a)(4)D. of
this section, if the offender knew that the victim of the violation was
pregnant at the time of the violation, a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2)
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a
violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
      (5)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no court or
unit of state or local government shall charge any fee, cost, deposit or money
in connection with the filing of charges against a person alleging that the
person violated this section or a municipal ordinance substantially equivalent
to this section or in connection with the prosecution of any charges so filed.
      (6)   As used in this section:
         A.   “Family or household member.” Any of the following:
            1.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
offender:
               a.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse as defined below, or
a former spouse of the offender;
               b.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the offender, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the offender;
               c.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the offender, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
offender.
            2.   The natural parent of any child of whom the offender is the
other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
         B.   “Person living as a spouse.” A person who is living or has lived
with the offender in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is
cohabiting with the offender, or who otherwise has cohabited with the offender
within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in
question.
(R.C. § 2919.25)
   (b)   Temporary protection order. Consult R.C. § 2919.26 for current
provisions regarding protection orders.
   (c)   Violating a protection order, consent agreement, anti-stalking
protection order or order issued by a court of another state. See § 636.06(c)
for current provisions.
(Prior Code, § 636.17)
§ 636.17 SAFETY OF CROWDS ATTENDING LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCES.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Concert.” A musical performance of which the primary component is
a presentation by persons singing or playing musical instruments, that is
intended by its sponsors mainly, but not necessarily exclusively, for the
listening enjoyment of the audience, and that is held in a facility. A
“concert” does not include any performance in which music is a part of the
presentation and the primary component of which is acting, dancing, a motion
picture, a demonstration of skills or talent other than singing or playing an
instrument, an athletic event, an exhibition or a speech.
      (2)   “Facility.” Any structure that has a roof or partial roof and that
has walls that wholly surround the area on all sides, including but not limited
to a stadium, hall, arena, armory, auditorium, ballroom, exhibition hall,
convention center or music hall.
      (3)   “Live entertainment performance.” Any live speech; any live musical
performance, including a concert; any live dramatic performance; any live
variety show; and any other live performance with respect to which the primary
intent of the audience can be construed to be viewing the performers. A “live
entertainment performance” does not include any form of entertainment with
respect to which the person purchasing a ticket routinely participates in
amusements as well as views performers.
      (4)   “Person.” Includes, in addition to an individual or entity
specified in R.C. § 1.59(C), any governmental entity.
      (5)   “Restricted entertainment area.” Any wholly or partially enclosed
area, whether indoors or outdoors, that has limited access through established
entrances or established turnstiles or similar devices.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or offer in return for a
donation, any ticket that is not numbered and that does not correspond to a
specific seat for admission to either of the following:
         A.   A live entertainment performance that is not exempted under
division (d) of this section, that is held in a restricted entertainment area,
and for which more than 8,000 tickets are offered to the public;
         B.   A concert that is not exempted under division (d) of this section
and for which more than 3,000 tickets are offered to the public.
      (2)   No person shall advertise any live entertainment performance as
described in division (b)(1)A. of this section or any concert as described in
division (b)(1)B. of this section, unless the advertisement contains the words
“Reserved Seats Only.”
   (c)   Unless exempted by division (d)(1) of this section, no person who owns
or operates any restricted entertainment area shall fail to open, maintain and
properly staff at least the number of entrances designated under division (e)
of this section for a minimum of 90 minutes prior to the scheduled start of any
live entertainment performance that is held in the restricted entertainment
area and for which more than 3,000 tickets are sold, offered for sale or
offered in return for a donation.
   (d)   (1)   A live entertainment performance, other than a concert, is
exempted from the provisions of divisions (b) and (c) of this section if both
of the following apply:
         A.   The restricted entertainment area in which the performance is
held has at least eight entrances or, if both entrances and separate admission
turnstiles or similar devices are used, has at least eight turnstiles or
similar devices.
         B.   The eight entrances or, if applicable, the eight turnstiles or
similar devices, are opened, maintained and properly staffed at least one hour
prior to the scheduled start of the performance.
      (2)   A.   1.   The officer responsible for public safety in the
municipality may, upon application of the sponsor of a concert covered by
division (b) of this section, exempt the concert from the provisions of that
division if the officer finds that the health, safety and welfare of the
participants and spectators would not be substantially affected by failure to
comply with the provisions of that division. In determining whether to grant an
exemption, the officer shall consider the following factors:
               a.   The size and design of the facility in which the concert is
scheduled;
               b.   The size, age and anticipated conduct of the crowd expected
to attend the concert;
               c.   The ability of the sponsor to manage and control the
expected crowd.
      2.   If the sponsor of any concert desires to obtain an exemption under
this division, the sponsor shall apply to the appropriate official on a form
prescribed by that official. The official shall issue an order that grants or
denies the exemption within five days after receipt of the application. The
sponsor may appeal any order that denies an exemption to the Court of Common
Pleas of the county in which the facility is located.
         B.   If an official grants an exemption under division (d)(2)A. of
this section, the official shall designate an on-duty law enforcement officer
to be present at the concert. The designated officer has authority to issue
orders to all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety
and welfare of the participants and spectators.
      (3)   Notwithstanding division (d)(2) of this section, in the case of a
concert held in a facility located on the campus of an educational institution
covered by R.C. § 3345.04, a state university law enforcement officer appointed
pursuant to R.C. §§ 3345.04 and 3345.21 shall do both of the following:
         A.   Exercise the authority to grant exemptions provided by division
(d)(2)A. of this section in lieu of an official designated in that division;
         B.   If the officer grants an exemption under division (d)(3)A. of
this section, designate an on-duty state university law enforcement officer to
be present at the concert. The designated officer has authority to issue orders
to all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the participants and spectators.
   (e)   (1)   Unless a live entertainment performance is exempted by division
(d)(1) of this section, the officer responsible for public safety within the
municipality shall designate, for purposes of division (c) of this section, the
minimum number of entrances required to be opened, maintained and staffed at
each live entertainment performance so as to permit crowd control and reduce
congestion at the entrances. The designation shall be based on such factors as
the size and nature of the crowd expected to attend the live entertainment
performance, the length of time prior to the live entertainment performance
that crowds are expected to congregate at the entrances and the amount of
security provided at the restricted entertainment area.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (e)(1) of this section, a state university
law enforcement officer appointed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3345.04 and 3345.21 shall
designate the number of entrances required to be opened, maintained and staffed
in the case of a live entertainment performance that is held at a restricted
entertainment area located on the campus of an educational institution covered
by R.C. § 3345.04.
   (f)   No person shall enter into any contract for a live entertainment
performance that does not permit or require compliance with this section.
   (g)   (1)   This section does not apply to a live entertainment performance
held in a restricted entertainment area if one admission ticket entitles the
holder to view or participate in three or more different games, rides,
activities or live entertainment performances occurring simultaneously at
different sites within the restricted entertainment area and if the initial
admittance entrance to the restricted entertainment area, for which the ticket
is required, is separate from the entrance to any specific live entertainment
performance and an additional ticket is not required for admission to the
particular live entertainment performance.
      (2)   This section does not apply to a symphony orchestra performance, a
ballet performance, horse races, dances or fairs.
   (h)   This section does not prohibit the Council from imposing additional
requirements, not in conflict with the section, for the promotion or holding of
live entertainment performances.
   (i)   Whoever violates division (b), (c) or (f) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If any individual suffers physical harm to
his or her person as a result of a violation of this section, the sentencing
court shall consider this factor in favor of imposing a term of imprisonment
upon the offender.
(R.C. § 2917.40) (Prior Code, § 636.18)
§ 636.18 HAZING.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Hazing.” Means doing any act or coercing another, including the
victim, to do any act of initiation into any student or other organization or
any act to continue or reinstate membership in or affiliation with any student
or other organization that causes or creates a substantial risk of causing
mental or physical harm to any person, including coercing another to consume
alcohol or a drug of abuse, as defined in R.C. § 3719.011.
      (2)   “Organization.” Includes a national or international organization
with which a fraternity or sorority is affiliated.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing of another.
      (2)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post-secondary school or any other educational institution, public or private,
shall recklessly permit the hazing of any person associated with the
organization.
   (c)   (1)   No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing of another
when the hazing includes coerced consumption of alcohol or drugs of abuse
resulting in serious physical harm to the other person.
(2)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant, alumnus,
or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or post-
secondary school or any other educational institution, public or private, shall
recklessly permit the hazing of any person associated with the organization
when the hazing includes coerced consumption of alcohol or drugs of abuse
resulting in serious physical harm to that person.
   (d)   Whoever violates divisions (b) or (c) of this section is guilty of
hazing. A violation of division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the second degree. A violation of division (c)(1) or (c)(2) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.31)
   (e)   Reckless failure to immediately report knowledge of hazing.
(1)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant, alumnus,
or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or post-
secondary school or any other public or private educational institution, who is
acting in an official and professional capacity shall recklessly fail to
immediately report the knowledge of hazing to a law enforcement agency in the
county in which the victim of hazing resides or in which the hazing is
occurring or has occurred.
(2)   A violation of division (e)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree, except that the violation is a misdemeanor of the first degree
if the hazing causes serious physical harm.
(R.C. § 2903.311(B), (C))
(Prior Code, § 636.19)
Statutory reference:
   Civil liability for hazing, see R.C. § 2307.44
§ 636.19 ILLEGAL DISTRIBUTION OF CIGARETTES, OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS, OR
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS; TRANSACTION SCANS.
   (a)   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         A.   “Age verification.” A service provided by an independent third
party (other than a manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or
retailer of cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
or papers used to roll cigarettes) that compares information available from a
commercially available database, or aggregate of databases, that regularly are
used by government and businesses for the purpose of age and identity
verification to personal information provided during an internet sale or other
remote method of sale to establish that the purchaser is 21 years of age or
older.
         B.   “Alternative nicotine product.”
            1.   Subject to division 2. of this definition, an electronic
smoking device, vapor product, or any other product or device that consists of
or contains nicotine that can be ingested into the body by any means,
including, but not limited to, chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, or
inhaling.
            2.   The phrase does not include any of the following:
               a.   Any cigarette or other tobacco product;
               b.   Any product that is a “drug” as that term is defined in 21
U.S.C. § 321(g)(1);
               c.   Any product that is a “device” as that term is defined in
21 U.S.C. § 321(h);
               d.   Any product that is a “combination product” as described in
21 U.S.C. § 353(g).
         C.   “Cigarette.” Includes clove cigarettes and hand-rolled
cigarettes.
         D.   “Distribute.” Means to furnish, give, or provide cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to the ultimate consumer of the cigarettes, other tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes.
         E.   “Electronic smoking device.” Means any device that can be used to
deliver aerosolized or vaporized nicotine or any other substance to the person
inhaling from the device including an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic hookah, vaping pen, or electronic pipe. The phrase includes any
component, part, or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately,
and includes any substance intended to be aerosolized or vaporized during the
use of the device. The phrase does not include any product that is a drug,
device, or combination product, as those terms are defined or described in 21
U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g).
         F.   “Proof of age.” Means a driver’s license, a commercial driver’s
license, a military identification card, a passport, or an identification card
issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows that a person is 18 years of
age or older.
         G.   “Tobacco product.” Means any product that is made or derived from
tobacco or that contains any form of nicotine, if it is intended for human
consumption or is likely to be consumed, whether smoked, heated, chewed,
absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, or ingested by any other means, including, but
not limited to, a cigarette, an electronic smoking device, a cigar, pipe
tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff, or snus. The phrase also means any component
or accessory used in the consumption of a tobacco product, such as filters,
rolling papers, pipes, blunt or hemp wraps, and liquids used in electronic
smoking devices, whether or not they contain nicotine. The phrase does not
include any product that is a drug, device, or combination product, as those
terms are defined or described in 21 U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g).
         H.   “Vapor product.” Means a product, other than a cigarette or other
tobacco product as defined in R.C. Chapter 5743, that contains or is made or
derived from nicotine and that is intended and marketed for human consumption,
including by smoking, inhaling, snorting, or sniffing. The phrase includes any
component, part, or additive that is intended for use in an electronic smoking
device, a mechanical heating element, battery, or electronic circuit and is
used to deliver the product. The phrase does not include any product that is a
drug, device, or combination product, as those terms are defined or described
in 21 U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g). The phrase includes any product containing
nicotine, regardless of concentration.
         I.   “Vending machine.” Has the same meaning as “coin machine” in R.C.
§ 2913.01.
      (2)   No manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes, no agent, employee, or representative of a
manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes, and no other person shall do any of the following:
         A.   Give, sell, or otherwise distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to
any person under 21 years of age;
         B.   Give away, sell, or distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes in
any place that does not have posted in a conspicuous place a legibly printed
sign in letters at least one-half inch high stating that giving, selling, or
otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to a person under 21 years of age
is prohibited by law;
         C.   Knowingly furnish any false information regarding the name, age,
or other identification of any person under 21 years of age with purpose to
obtain cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or
papers used to roll cigarettes for that person;
         D.   Manufacture, sell, or distribute in this state any pack or other
container of cigarettes containing fewer than 20 cigarettes or any package of
roll-your-own tobacco containing less than six-tenths of one ounce of tobacco;
         E.   Sell cigarettes or alternative nicotine products in a smaller
quantity than that placed in the pack or other container by the manufacturer;
         F.   Give, sell, or otherwise distribute alternative nicotine
products, papers used to roll cigarettes, or tobacco products other than
cigarettes over the internet or through another remote method without age
verification.
      (3)   No person shall sell or offer to sell cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products by or from a vending machine, except
in the following locations:
         A.   An area within a factory, business, office, or other place not
open to the general public;
         B.   An area to which persons under 21 years of age are not generally
permitted access;
         C.   Any other place not identified in division (a)(3)A. or (a)(3)B.
of this section, upon all of the following conditions:
            1.   The vending machine is located within the immediate vicinity,
plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place, or an
employee of that person, so that all cigarettes, other tobacco product, and
alternative nicotine product purchases from the vending machine will be readily
observed by the person who owns or operates the place or an employee of that
person. For the purpose of this section, a vending machine located in any
unmonitored area, including an unmonitored coatroom, restroom, hallway, or
outer waiting area, shall not be considered located within the immediate
vicinity, plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place,
or an employee of that person.
            2.   The vending machine is inaccessible to the public when the
place is closed.
            3.   A clearly visible notice is posted in the area where the
vending machine is located that states the following in letters that are
legibly printed and at least one-half inch high: “It is illegal for any person
under the age of 21 to purchase tobacco or alternative nicotine products.”
      (4)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under division
(a)(2)A. of this section:
         A.   The person under 21 years of age was accompanied by a parent,
spouse who is 21 years of age or older, or legal guardian of the person under
21 years of age.
         B.   The person who gave, sold, or distributed cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to a person under 21 years of age under division (a)(2)A. of this
section is a parent, spouse who is 21 years of age or older, or legal guardian
of the person under 21 years of age.
      (5)   It is not a violation of division (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this
section for a person to give or otherwise distribute to a person under 21 years
of age cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or
papers used to roll cigarettes while the person under 21 years of age is
participating in a research protocol if all of the following apply:
         A.   The parent, guardian, or legal custodian of the person under 21
years of age has consented in writing to the person under 21 years of age
participating in the research protocol.
         B.   An institutional human subjects protection review board, or an
equivalent entity, has approved the research protocol.
         C.   The person under 21 years of age is participating in the research
protocol at the facility or location specified in the research protocol.
      (6)   A.   Whoever violates division (a)(2)A., (a)(2)B., (a)(2)D., (a)
(2)E., or (a)(2)F. or (a)(3) of this section is guilty of illegal distribution
of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, illegal distribution of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of division (a)(2)A., (a)(2)B., (a)(2)D., (a)(2)E., or (a)(2)F. or (a)(3) of
this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
         B.   Whoever violates division (a)(2)C. of this section is guilty of
permitting a person under 21 years of age to use cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, permitting a person under 21 years of age to use cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of division (a)(2)C. of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, permitting a person under 21 years of age to use
cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (7)   Any cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes that are given, sold, or otherwise
distributed to a person under 21 years of age in violation of this section and
that are used, possessed, purchased, or received by a person under 21 years of
age in violation of R.C. § 2151.87 are subject to seizure and forfeiture as
contraband under R.C. Chapter 2981.
      (8)   A.   Notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2), if an offender is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (a)(2)A. of this
section, the court shall impose a fine in the following amount:
            1.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (a)(8)A.2., (a)
(8)A.3., (a)(8)A.4., and (a)(8)A.5. of this section, not more than $250;
            2.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (a)(8)A.3., (a)
(8)A.4., and (a)(8)A.5. of this section, if an offender has previously been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (a)(2)A. of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, not
more than $500;
            3.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (a)(8)A.4. and (a)
(8)A.5. of this section, if an offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (a)(2)A. of this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, $500;
            4.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(8)A.5. of this
section, if an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
three or more violations of division (a)(2)A. of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, $1,000;
            5.   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to four or more violations of division (a)(2)A. of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, $1,500.
         B.   The financial sanctions required by division (a)(8)A. of this
section are in lieu of the financial sanctions described in R.C. § 2929.28(A)
(2), but are in addition to any other sanctions or penalties that may apply to
the offender, including other financial sanctions under that section or a jail
term under R.C. § 2929.24.
      (9)   Whoever violates division (a)(2)C. of this section is guilty of
permitting a person under 21 years of age to use cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, permitting a person under 21 years of age to use cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of division (a)(2)C. of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, permitting a person under 21 years of age to use
cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (10)   Any cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes that are given, sold, or otherwise
distributed to a person under 21 years of age in violation of this section and
that are used, possessed, purchased, or received by a person under 21 years of
age in violation of R.C. § 2151.87 are subject to seizure and forfeiture as
contraband under R.C. Chapter 2981.
(R.C. § 2927.02)
   (b)   Transaction scan.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division and division (c) of this section,
the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
         A.   “Card holder.” Any person who presents a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent or employee
of a seller, to purchase or receive cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products from a seller, agent or employee.
         B.   “Identification card.” An identification card issued under R.C.
§§ 4507.50 to 4507.52.
         C.   “Seller.” A seller of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products and includes any person whose gift of or other
distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products is subject to the prohibitions of division (a) of this section.
         D.   “Transaction scan.” The process by which a seller or an agent or
employee of a seller checks, by means of a transaction scan device, the
validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card
that is presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products.
         E.   “Transaction scan device.” Any commercial device or combination
of devices used at a point of sale that is capable of deciphering in an
electronically readable format the information encoded on the magnetic strip or
bar code of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification
card.
      (2)   A.   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a
card holder as a condition for selling, giving away or otherwise distributing
to the card holder cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products.
         B.   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (b)(2)A. of this section fails to match the information printed
on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information
so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee
of the seller shall sell, give away or otherwise distribute any cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products to the card holder.
         C.   Division (b)(2)A. of this section does not preclude a seller or
an agent or employee of a seller from using a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card, if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip
that may be scanned by the device, as a condition for selling, giving away or
otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products to the person presenting the document.
      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. §
4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this
division (b) and division (c) of this section.
      (4)   A.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except for the following:
            1.   The name and date of birth of the person listed on the
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the
card holder;
            2.   The expiration date and identification number of the driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the card
holder.
         B.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the
information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be
recorded and maintained under division (b)(4)A. of this section, except for
purposes of division (c) of this section.
         C.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a
transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified in
division (c)(2)A. of this section.
         D.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or
otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including but not limited to selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by division (c) of this section
or another section of this code of ordinances or the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (b) or division (c) of this section
relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any responsibility to
comply with any other applicable local, state or federal laws or rules
governing the sale, giving away or other distribution of cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (b)(2)B. or (b)(4) of this section is
guilty of engaging in an illegal tobacco product or alternative nicotine
product transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender a civil
penalty of up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court shall pay
each collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into the
County Treasury.
(R.C. § 2927.021)
   (c)   Affirmative defenses.
      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found
guilty of a charge of a violation of division (a) of this section in which the
age of the purchaser or other recipient of cigarettes, other tobacco products,
or alternative nicotine products is an element of the alleged violation, if the
seller, agent or employee raises and proves as an affirmative defense that all
of the following occurred:
         A.   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products presented a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or an identification card.
         B.   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that the
license or card was valid.
         C.   The cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products were sold, given away or otherwise distributed to the card holder in
reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and the completed
transaction scan.
      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller
has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (c)(1) of this section,
the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of division (a) of
this section shall consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and
implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of division (a) of this
section. For purposes of division (c)(1)C. of this section, the trier of fact
shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and
the completed transaction scan may require a seller or an agent or employee of
a seller to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a
transaction scan device does not excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a
seller from exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following:
         A.   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a
seller sells, gives away or otherwise distributes cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products is 21 years of age or older;
         B.   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by
division (c)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a
Deputy Registrar who issued an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to
4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of that
issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with the
Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.
(R.C. § 2927.022)
   (d)   Shipment of tobacco products.
      (1)   As used in this division (d):
         A.   “Authorized recipient of tobacco products” means a person who is:
            1.   Licensed as a cigarette wholesale dealer under R.C. § 5743.15;
            2.   Licensed as a retail dealer as long as the person purchases
cigarettes with the appropriate tax stamp affixed;
            3.   An export warehouse proprietor as defined in § 5702 of the
Internal Revenue Code;
            4.   An operator of a customs bonded warehouse under 19 U.S.C. §
1311 or 19 U.S.C. § 1555;
            5.   An officer, employee, or agent of the federal government or of
this state acting in the person’s official capacity;
            6.   A department, agency, instrumentality, or political
subdivision of the federal government or of this state;
            7.   A person having a consent for consumer shipment issued by the
Tax Commissioner under R.C. § 5743.71.
         B.   “Motor carrier.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4923.01.
      (2)   The purpose of this division (d) is to prevent the sale of
cigarettes to minors and to ensure compliance with the Master Settlement
Agreement, as defined in R.C. § 1346.01.
      (3)   A.   No person shall cause to be shipped any cigarettes to any
person in this municipality other than an authorized recipient of tobacco
products.
         B.   No motor carrier or other person shall knowingly transport
cigarettes to any person in this municipality that the carrier or other person
reasonably believes is not an authorized recipient of tobacco products. If
cigarettes are transported to a home or residence, it shall be presumed that
the motor carrier or other person knew that the person to whom the cigarettes
were delivered was not an authorized recipient of tobacco products.
      (4)   No person engaged in the business of selling cigarettes who ships
or causes to be shipped cigarettes to any person in this municipality in any
container or wrapping other than the original container or wrapping of the
cigarettes shall fail to plainly and visibly mark the exterior of the container
or wrapping in which the cigarettes are shipped with the words “cigarettes.”
      (5)   A court shall impose a fine of up to $1,000 for each violation of
division (d)(3)A., (d)(3)B. or (d)(4) of this section.
(R.C. § 2927.023)
   (e)   Furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products.
      (1)   No person who is 18 years of age or older but younger than 21 years
of age shall knowingly furnish false information concerning that person’s name,
age, or other identification for the purpose of obtaining tobacco products.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (e)(1) of this section is guilty of
furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products. Except as otherwise
provided in this division, furnishing false information to obtain tobacco
products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (e)(1) of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
(R.C. § 2927.024)
(Prior Code, § 636.20)
§ 636.20 MINORS’ CURFEW.
   (a)   Hours; exceptions.
      (1)   Unless exempted under division (d) of this section, no minor under
the age indicated in this division (a) shall loiter, idle, wander, stroll, play
or be present in or upon public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks,
playgrounds or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places
of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots, other lots or parcels of land not
such minor’s place of residence, or other unsupervised places within the city,
between the hours indicated:
 
Age 12 and under           10:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. the following day
Age 13, 14 and 15          11:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. the following day
Age 16 to and including 17 1:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. the same day
 
      (2)   The times set forth in division (a)(1) of this section shall be
Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Savings Time, whichever is the
official city time.
      (3)   This division (a) does not apply to a minor accompanied by his or
her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the
minor, or where the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business
directed by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care
and custody of the minor.
   (b)   Responsibility of parents. No parent, guardian or other adult person
having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 18 years shall
knowingly permit such minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, play or be present
in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or
other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement
and entertainment, vacant lots, other lots or parcels of land not such minor’s
place of residence, or other unsupervised places, between the hours set forth
in division (a) of this section. However, this division does not apply when the
minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person
having the care and custody of the minor, or where the minor is upon an
emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his or her parent, guardian
or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, unless exempted
under division (d) of this section.
   (c)   Penalty.
      (1)   Any minor who violates or fails to comply with division (a) of this
section shall be dealt with as appropriate, in accordance with R.C. Chapter
2151.
      (2)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with division (b) of this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Such penalty shall not be imposed
until the violator has had a previous warning therefor from the police. An
habitual offender (one who has violated this section more than twice) is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Punishment shall be as provided in §
698.02.
   (d)   Exemptions. It is an exemption to a violation under this section that
the person engaged in the prohibited conduct while:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
Police Department about the minor’s presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization,
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed
in accordance with state law.
(Prior Code, § 636.21) (Ord. 140-78, passed 7-10-1978)
§ 636.21 WRONGFUL INFLUENCE ON MINORS.
   (a)   No person shall aid, abet, influence or encourage any child under the
age of 18 years to:
      (1)   Violate §
636.20;
      (2)   Be truant from home when such child has been reported as being
truant from home to the police or juvenile authorities; or
      (3)   Be truant from school when the laws of the state require such
child’s attendance in school.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree and shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Prior Code, § 636.22) (Ord. 140-78, passed 7-10-1978)
§ 636.22 ETHNIC INTIMIDATION.
   (a)   No person shall violate R.C. § 2903.21, 2903.22, 2909.06 or 2909.07,
or 2917.21(A)(3), (A)(4) or (A)(5), or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance to any of these sections, by reason of the race, color, religion or
national origin of another person or group of persons.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of ethnic intimidation. Ethnic
intimidation is an offense of the next higher degree than the offense the
commission of which is a necessary element of ethnic intimidation. In the case
of an offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree, ethnic intimidation is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.12) (Prior Code, § 636.23)
§ 636.23 INTIMIDATION IN CONNECTION WITH HOUSING.
   (a)   No person, whether or not acting under color of law, shall by force or
threat of force willfully injure, intimidate or interfere with, or attempt to
injure, intimidate or interfere with any of the following:
      (1)   Any person because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status,
as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin, military status as defined in
that section, disability as defined in that section, or ancestry and because
that person is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying,
contracting or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or
occupation of any housing accommodations, or applying for or participating in
any service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or
renting housing accommodations.
      (2)   Any person because that person is or has been doing, or in order to
intimidate that person or any other person or any class of persons from doing
either of the following:
         A.   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status, as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin,
military status as defined in that section, disability as defined in that
section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations, or
facilities described in division (a)(1) of this section;
         B.   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate.
      (3)   Any person because that person is or has been, or in order to
discourage that person or any other person from, lawfully aiding or encouraging
other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin,
military status as defined in that section, disability as defined in that
section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations or
facilities described in division (a)(1) of this section, or participating
lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity
to so participate.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2927.03) (Prior Code, § 636.24)
§ 636.24 FAILING TO PROVIDE FOR A PERSON WITH A FUNCTIONAL IMPAIRMENT.
   (a)   No caretaker shall knowingly fail to provide a person with a
functional impairment under the caretaker’s care with any treatment, care,
goods, or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the
person with a functional impairment when this failure results in physical harm
or serious physical harm to the person with a functional impairment.
   (b)   No caretaker shall recklessly fail to provide a person with a
functional impairment under the caretaker’s care with any treatment, care,
goods, or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the
person with a functional impairment when this failure results in serious
physical harm to the person with a functional impairment.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
knowingly failing to provide for a person with a functional impairment, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the person with a functional impairment
under the offender’s care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the
violation of this section, a violation of division (a) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
recklessly failing to provide for a person with a functional impairment, a
misdemeanor of the second degree. If the person with a functional impairment
under the offender’s care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the
violation of this section, a violation of division (b) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.16)
   (d)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Caretaker.” A person who assumes the duty to provide for the care
and protection of a person with a functional impairment on a voluntary basis,
by contract, through receipt of payment for care and protection, as a result of
a family relationship, or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. The
term does not include a person who owns, operates, or administers, or who is an
agent or employee of, a care facility, as defined in R.C. § 2903.33.
      (2)   “Person with a functional impairment.” Any person who has a
physical or mental impairment that prevents the person from providing for the
person’s own care or protection or whose infirmities caused by aging prevent
the person from providing for the person’s own care or protection.
(R.C. § 2903.10) (Prior Code, § 636.25)
§ 636.25 UNLAWFUL COLLECTION OF BODILY SUBSTANCES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly collect any blood, urine, tissue, or other
bodily substance of another person without privilege or consent to do so.
   (b)   (1)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
         A.   The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a law
enforcement officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice
of a law enforcement officer, for purposes of a chemical test or tests of the
substance under R.C. § 1547.111(A)(1) or 4511.191(A)(2) to determine the
alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the bodily substance;
         B.   The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a peace
officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice of a peace
officer, for purposes of a test or tests of the substance as provided in R.C. §
4506.17(A) to determine the person’s alcohol concentration or the presence of
any controlled substance or metabolite of a controlled substance.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section shall not be construed as implying
that the persons identified in divisions (b)(1)A. and B. of this section do not
have privilege to collect the bodily substance of another person as described
in those divisions or as limiting the definition of “privilege” set forth in
R.C. § 2901.01.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of unlawful
collection of a bodily substance. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, unlawful collection of a bodily substance is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (a) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, unlawful collection of a bodily
substance is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.15) (Prior Code, § 636.26)
§ 636.26 ILLEGAL USE OF A TRACKING DEVICE OR APPLICATION.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Business entity." Means any form of corporation, partnership,
association, cooperative, joint venture, business trust, or sole proprietorship
that conducts business in this state.
      (2)   "Business of private investigation." Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 4749.01.
      (3)   "Disabled adult." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (4)   "Elderly person." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (5)   "Electronic monitoring." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      (6)   "Electronic monitoring device." Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2929.01.
      (7)   "Law enforcement agency." Means any organization or unit comprised
of law enforcement officers, and also includes any federal or military law
enforcement agency.
      (8)   "Ohio protection order." Means a protection order filed or issued
or a consent agreement approved pursuant to R.C. § 2919.26 or 3113.31, a
protection order filed or issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213, or
2903.214, or a no contact order issued as any of the following:
         A.   As part of a person's sentence under a community control sanction
imposed under R.C. § 2929.16, 2929.17, 2929.26, or 2929.27;
         B.   As a term or condition of a person's release under R.C. §
2929.20;
         C.   As a post-release control sanction imposed as a condition of a
person's post-release control under R.C. § 2967.28;
         D.   As a term of supervision for a person transferred to transitional
control under R.C. § 2967.26;
         E.   As a term or condition of the intervention plan of a person
granted intervention in lieu of conviction under R.C. § 2951.041.
      (9)   "Person." Means an individual, but does not include a business
entity.
      (10)   "Private investigator." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4749.01.
      (11)   "Protection order issued by a court of another state." Has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 2919.27.
      (12)   "Tracking application." Means any software program that permits a
person to remotely determine or track the position or movement of another
person or another person's property.
      (13)   "Tracking device." Means an electronic or mechanical device that
permits a person to remotely determine or track the position or movement of
another person or another person's property, including an electronic monitoring
device.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in division (d) of this section, no
person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Install a tracking device or tracking application on another
person's property without the other person's consent or cause a tracking device
or tracking application to track the position or movement of another person or
another person's property without the other person's consent;
      (2)   If the person installed a tracking device or tracking application
on another's property with the other person's consent and the other person
subsequently revokes that consent, fail to remove or ensure the removal of the
device or application after the other person revokes the consent.
   (c)   (1)   For purposes of this section, if a person has given consent for
another to install a tracking device or tracking application on the consenting
person's property, it is presumed that the consenting person has revoked that
consent if any of the following applies:
         A.   The consenting person and the person to whom consent was given
are lawfully married and one of them files a complaint for divorce or a
petition for dissolution of marriage from the other. Not later than 72 hours
after being served with a complaint for divorce or a petition for dissolution
of marriage, the person to whom consent was given shall lawfully uninstall or
discontinue use of the tracking device or tracking application. If the person
to whom consent was given cannot lawfully uninstall or discontinue use of the
tracking device or tracking application, the person to whom consent was given
shall notify the court in which the complaint for divorce or the petition for
dissolution of marriage was filed in writing.
         B.   The consenting person or the person to whom consent was given
files an Ohio protection order against the other person or an Ohio protection
order is issued against the other person, and the person to be protected under
the order is the consenting person. Not later than 72 hours after being served
with the Ohio protection order, the person to whom consent was given shall
lawfully uninstall or discontinue use of the tracking device or tracking
application. If the person to whom consent was given cannot lawfully uninstall
or discontinue use of the tracking device or tracking application, the person
to whom consent was given shall notify the court that issued the Ohio
protection order in writing that the person to whom consent was given has
installed or is using a tracking device or tracking application on the
previously consenting person's person or the person's property and cannot
uninstall or discontinue its use without violating the Ohio protection order.
      (2)   Revocation of consent under this division is effective upon the
service of the petition or motion or an Ohio protection order.
   (d)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A law enforcement officer, or any law enforcement agency, that
installs a tracking device or tracking application on another person's property
or causes a tracking device or tracking application to track the position or
movement of another person or another person's property as part of a criminal
investigation, or a probation officer, parole officer, or employee of the
department of rehabilitation and correction, a halfway house, or a community-
based correctional facility when engaged in the lawful performance of the
officer's or employee's official duties;
      (2)   A parent or legal guardian of a minor child who installs or uses a
tracking device or tracking application to track the minor child if any of the
following applies:
         A.   The parents or legal guardians of the child are lawfully married
to each other and are not separated or otherwise living apart, and either of
those parents or legal guardians consents to the installation of the tracking
device or tracking application;
         B.   The parent or legal guardian of the child is the sole surviving
parent or legal guardian of the child;
         C.   The parent or legal guardian of the child has sole custody of the
child;
         D.   The parents or legal guardians of the child are divorced,
separated, or otherwise living apart and neither parent has sole custody of the
child, and both consent to the installation of the tracking device or tracking
application;
         E.   The parents or legal guardians of the child are divorced,
separated, or otherwise living apart, neither parent has sole custody of the
child, and either only one parent consents to the installation of the tracking
device or tracking application or one parent revokes consent, if the consenting
parent only uses the tracking device or tracking application during that
parent's parenting or custodial time and disables or removes the tracking
device or application during the nonconsenting parent's parenting or custodial
time.
      (3)   A caregiver of an elderly person or disabled adult, if the elderly
person's or disabled adult's treating physician certifies that the installation
of a tracking device or tracking application onto the elderly person's or
disabled adult's property is necessary to ensure the safety of the elderly
person or disabled adult;
      (4)   A person acting in good faith on behalf of a business entity for a
legitimate business purpose, provided that this division does not apply to a
private investigator engaged in the business of private investigation on behalf
of another person;
      (5)   A.   A private investigator or other person licensed under R.C. §
4749.03, who is acting in the normal course of the investigator's business of
private investigation on behalf of another person and who has the consent of
the owner of the property upon which the tracking device or tracking
application is installed, for the purpose of obtaining information with
reference to any of the following:
            1.   Criminal offenses committed, threatened, or suspected against
the United States, a territory of the United States, a state, or any person or
legal entity;
            2.   Locating an individual known to be a fugitive from justice;
            3.   Locating lost or stolen property or other assets that have
been awarded by the court;
            4.   Investigating claims related to workers' compensation.
         B.   This division does not apply if the person on whose behalf the
private investigator is working is the subject of an Ohio protection order or a
protection order issued by a court of another state or if the private
investigator knows or reasonably should know that the person on whose behalf
the private investigator is working seeks the investigator's services to aid in
the commission of a crime.
      (6)   An owner or lessee of a motor vehicle who installs, or directs the
installation of, a tracking device or tracking application on the vehicle
during the period of ownership or lease, if any of the following applies:
         A.   The tracking device or tracking application is removed before the
vehicle's title is transferred or the vehicle's lease expires;
         B.   The new owner of the vehicle, in the case of a sale, or the
lessor of the vehicle, in the case of an expired lease, consents in writing to
the non-removal of the tracking device or tracking application;
         C.   The owner of the vehicle at the time of the installation of the
tracking device or tracking application was the original manufacturer of the
vehicle.
      (7)   A person who installs a tracking device or application on property
in which the person has an ownership or contractual interest, unless the person
is the subject of a protective order and the property is likely to be used by
the person who obtained the protective order;
      (8)   A person or business entity that installs a tracking device or
tracking application on any fixed wing aircraft or rotorcraft operated or
managed by the person or business entity pursuant to 14 C.F.R. part 91 or part
135 to track the position or movement of the fixed wing aircraft or rotorcraft;
      (9)   A surety bail bond agent, or any employee or contractor of a surety
bail bond agent, that installs a tracking device or tracking application on
another person's property or causes a tracking device or tracking application
to track the position or movement of another person or another person's
property as part of the surety bail bond agent's, employee's, or contractor's
official responsibilities or duties.
   (e)   For purposes of division (d)(1) of this section, a probation officer,
parole officer, or employee of the department of rehabilitation and correction,
a halfway house, or a community-based correctional facility is engaged in the
lawful performance of the officer's or employee's duties if both of the
following apply:
      (1)   The court or the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction
imposes electronic monitoring on a person.
      (2)   The officer or employee installs or uses an electronic monitoring
device on that person in accordance with the court's or department's imposition
of electronic monitoring of that person.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal use of a tracking
device or application.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (f)(2) of this section,
illegal use of a tracking device or application is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   Illegal use of a tracking device or application is a felony to be
prosecuted under state law if any of the following applies:
         A.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of this section, R.C. § 2903.216, or R.C. § 2903.211 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
         B.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
the subject of a protection order issued under R.C. § 2903.213 or 2903.214,
regardless of whether the person to be protected under the order is the victim
of the offense or another person.
         C.   Prior to committing the offense, the offender had been determined
to represent a substantial risk of physical harm to others as manifested by
evidence of then-recent homicidal or other violent behavior, evidence of then-
recent threats that placed another in reasonable fear of violent behavior and
serious physical harm, or other evidence of then-present dangerousness.
         D.   The offender has a history of violence toward the victim or a
history of other violent acts towards the victim.
            (R.C. § 2903.216)
CHAPTER 642: OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY
Section
642.01 Definitions
642.02 Theft
642.03 Degree of offense when certain property involved
642.04 Evidence of theft of rented property
642.05 Unauthorized use of a vehicle; vehicle trespass
642.06 Unauthorized use of property
642.07 Injuring vines, bushes, trees or crops
642.08 Desecration
642.09 Assaulting police dog or horse or assistance dog
642.10 Arson
642.11 Criminal damaging or endangering; vehicular vandalism
642.12 Criminal mischief
642.13 Criminal trespass
642.14 Aggravated trespass
642.15 Tampering with coin machines
642.16 Passing bad checks
642.17 Forging or selling forged identification cards
642.18 Criminal simulation
642.19 Misuse of credit cards
642.20 Recording credit card, telephone or Social Security numbers
642.21 Making or using slugs
642.22 Prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud
642.23 Tampering with records
642.24 Securing writings by deception
642.25 Personating an officer
642.26 Diminishing or interfering with forfeitable property
642.27 Defrauding creditors
642.28 Receiving stolen property
642.29 Possession of municipal property
642.30 Determining property value in theft offense
642.31 Determining property value in arson
642.32 Prosecutions for theft of utilities
642.33 Insurance fraud
642.34 Misconduct involving a public transportation system
642.35 Workers’ compensation fraud
642.36 Medicaid fraud
642.37 Motion picture piracy
642.38 Railroad vandalism; criminal trespass; interference with operation of
train; grade crossing device vandalism
§ 642.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTIVE DUTY SERVICE MEMBER. Any member of the armed forces of the United
States performing active duty under Title 10 of the United States Code.
   ANHYDROUS AMMONIA. A compound formed by the combination of two gaseous
elements, nitrogen and hydrogen, in the manner described below. ANHYDROUS
AMMONIA is one part nitrogen to three parts hydrogen (NH3). ANHYDROUS AMMONIA
by weight is 14 parts nitrogen to three parts hydrogen, which is approximately
82% nitrogen to 18% hydrogen.
   ASSISTANCE DOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
   CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE. Any services provided by or through the facilities
of any cable television system or other similar closed circuit coaxial cable
communications system, or any microwave or similar transmission service used in
connection with any cable television system or other similar closed circuit
coaxial cable communications system.
   COIN MACHINE. Any mechanical or electronic device designed to do both of the
following:
      (1)   Receive a coin or bill, or token made for that purpose;
      (2)   In return for the insertion or deposit of a coin, bill or token,
automatically dispense property, provide a service or grant a license.
   COMPUTER. An electronic device that performs logical, arithmetic and memory
functions by the manipulation of electronic or magnetic impulses. COMPUTER
includes but is not limited to all input, output, processing, storage, computer
program or communication facilities that are connected, or related, in a
computer system or network to an electronic device of that nature.
   COMPUTER CONTAMINANT. A computer program that is designed to modify, damage,
destroy, disable, deny or degrade access to, allow unauthorized access to,
functionally impair, record or transmit information within a computer, computer
system, or computer network without the express or implied consent of the owner
or other person authorized to give consent and that is of a type or kind
described in divisions (1) through (4) of this definition or of a type or kind
similar to a type or kind described in divisions (1) through (4) of this
definition:
      (1)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “viruses” and
“worms” that are self- replicating or self-propagating and that are designed to
contaminate other computer programs, compromise computer security, consume
computer resources, modify, destroy, record or transmit data, or disrupt the
normal operation of the computer, computer system or computer network;
      (2)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “Trojans” or “Trojan
horses” that are not self-replicating or self-propagating and that are designed
to compromise computer security, consume computer resources, modify, destroy,
record or transmit data, or disrupt the normal operation of the computer,
computer system or computer network;
      (3)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “zombies” that are
designed to use a computer without the knowledge and consent of the owner, or
other person authorized to give consent, and that are designed to send large
quantities of data to a targeted computer network for the purpose of degrading
the targeted computer’s or network’s performance, or denying access through the
network to the targeted computer or network, resulting in what is commonly
known as “denial of service” or “distributed denial of service” attacks;
      (4)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “trap doors”, “back
doors”, or “root kits” that are designed to bypass standard authentication
software and that are designed to allow access or use of a computer without the
knowledge or consent of the owner, or other person authorized to give consent.
   COMPUTER HACKING.
      (1)   COMPUTER HACKING means any of the following:
         A.   Gaining access or attempting to gain access to all or part of a
computer, computer system or a computer network without express or implied
authorization with the intent to defraud or with intent to commit a crime;
         B.   Misusing computer or network services, including but not limited
to mail transfer programs, file transfer programs, proxy servers and web
servers, by performing functions not authorized by the owner of the computer,
computer system, or computer network or other person authorized to give
consent. As used in this division, “misuse of computer and network services”
includes but is not limited to the unauthorized use of any of the following:
            1.   Mail transfer programs to send mail to persons other than the
authorized users of that computer or computer network;
            2.   File transfer program services or proxy servers to access
other computers, computer systems or computer networks;
            3.   Web servers to redirect users to other web pages or web
servers.
         C.   1.   Subject to division (1)C.2. of this definition, using a
group of computer programs commonly known as “port scanners” or “probes” to
intentionally access any computer, computer system or computer network without
the permission of the owner of the computer, computer system or computer
network or other person authorized to give consent. The group of computer
programs referred to in this division includes but is not limited to those
computer programs that use a computer network to access a computer, computer
system or another computer network to determine any of the following: the
presence or types of computers or computer systems on a network; the computer
network’s facilities and capabilities; the availability of computer or network
services; the presence or versions of computer software including but not
limited to operating systems, computer services or computer contaminants; the
presence of a known computer software deficiency that can be used to gain
unauthorized access to a computer, computer system or computer network; or any
other information about a computer, computer system or computer network not
necessary for the normal and lawful operation of the computer initiating the
access.
            2.   The group of computer programs referred to in division (1)C.1.
of this definition does not include standard computer software used for the
normal operation, administration, management and test of a computer, computer
system or computer network, including but not limited to domain name services,
mail transfer services and other operating system services, computer programs
commonly called “ping”, “tcpdump”, and “traceroute” and other network
monitoring and management computer software, and computer programs commonly
knows as “nslookup” and “whois” and other systems administration computer
software.
         D.   The intentional use of a computer, computer system or a computer
network in a manner that exceeds any right or permission granted by the owner
of the computer, computer system or computer network or other person authorized
to give consent.
      (2)   COMPUTER HACKING does not include the introduction of a computer
contaminant, as defined in this section, into a computer, computer system,
computer program or computer network.
   COMPUTER NETWORK. A set of related and remotely-connected computers and
communication facilities that includes more than one computer system that has
the capability to transmit among the connected computers and communication
facilities through the use of computer facilities.
   COMPUTER PROGRAM. An ordered set of data representing coded instructions or
statements that, when executed by a computer, causes the computer to process
data.
   COMPUTER SERVICES. Includes but is not limited to the use of a computer
system, computer network, computer program, data that is prepared for computer
use, or data that is contained within a computer system or computer network.
   COMPUTER SOFTWARE. Computer programs, procedures and other documentation
associated with the operation of a computer system.
   COMPUTER SYSTEM. A computer and related devices, whether connected or
unconnected, including but not limited to data input, output and storage
devices, data communications links, and computer programs and data that make
the system capable of performing specified special purpose data processing
tasks.
   COUNTERFEIT TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. A telecommunications device that,
alone or with another telecommunications device, has been altered, constructed,
manufactured or programmed to acquire, intercept, receive or otherwise
facilitate the use of a telecommunications service or information service
without the authority or consent of the provider of the telecommunications
service or information service. The phrase includes but is not limited to a
clone telephone, clone microchip, tumbler telephone or tumbler microchip; a
wireless scanning device capable of acquiring, intercepting, receiving or
otherwise facilitating the use of telecommunications service or information
service without immediate detection; or a device, equipment, hardware or
software designed for, or capable of, altering or changing the electronic
serial number in a wireless telephone.
   CREATE A SUBSTANTIAL RISK OF SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO ANY PERSON. Includes
the creation of a substantial risk of serious physical harm to any emergency
personnel.
   CREDIT CARD. Includes but is not limited to a card, code, device or other
means of access to a customer’s account for the purpose of obtaining money,
property, labor or services on credit, or for initiating an electronic fund
transfer at a point-of-sale terminal, an automated teller machine, or a cash
dispensing machine. It also includes a county procurement card issued under
R.C. § 301.29.
   DANGEROUS DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   DATA. A representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts or
instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner and
that are intended for use in a computer, computer system or computer network.
   DECEPTION. To knowingly deceive another or cause another to be deceived by
any false or misleading representation, by withholding information, by
preventing another from acquiring information, or by any other conduct, act or
omission that creates, confirms or perpetuates a false impression in another,
including a false impression as to law, value, state of mind or other objective
or subjective fact.
   DEFRAUD. To knowingly obtain, by deception, some benefit for oneself or
another, or to knowingly cause, by deception, some detriment to another.
   DEPRIVE. To do any of the following:
      (1)   To withhold property of another permanently, or for a period that
appropriates a substantial portion of its value or use, or with purpose to
restore it only upon payment of a reward or other consideration;
      (2)   To dispose of property so as to make it unlikely that the owner
will recover it;
      (3)   To accept, use or appropriate money, property or services, with
purpose not to give proper consideration in return for the money, property or
services, and without reasonable justification or excuse for not giving proper
consideration.
   DISABLED ADULT. A person who is 18 years of age or older and has some
impairment of body or mind that makes the person unable to work at any
substantially remunerative employment that the person otherwise would be able
to perform and that will, with reasonable probability, continue for a period of
at least 12 months without any present indication of recovery from the
impairment, or who is 18 years of age or older and has been certified as
permanently and totally disabled by an agency of this state or the United
States that has the function of so classifying persons.
   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
   ELDERLY PERSON. A person who is 65 years of age or older.
   ELECTRONIC FUND TRANSFER. Has the same meaning as in 92 Stat. 3728, 15
U.S.C. § 1693a, as amended.
   EMERGENCY PERSONNEL. Any of the following persons:
      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 2935.01;
      (2)   A member of a fire department or other firefighting agency of a
municipal corporation, township, township fire district, joint fire district,
other political subdivision or combination of political subdivisions;
      (3)   A member of a private fire company, as defined in R.C. § 9.60, or a
volunteer firefighter;
      (4)   A member of a joint ambulance district or joint emergency medical
services district;
      (5)   An emergency medical technician-basic, emergency medical
technician-intermediate, emergency medical technician-paramedic, ambulance
operator or other member of an emergency medical service that is owned of
operated by a political subdivision or a private entity;
      (6)   The State Fire Marshal, the Chief Deputy State Fire Marshal or an
assistant state fire marshal;
      (7)   A fire prevention officer of a political subdivision or an arson,
fire or similar investigator of a political subdivision.
   FEDERALLY-LICENSED FIREARMS DEALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5502.63.
   FIREARM and DANGEROUS ORDNANCE. Have the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.
   FORGE. To fabricate or create, in whole or in part and by any means, any
spurious writing, or to make, execute, alter, complete, reproduce or otherwise
purport to authenticate any writing, when the writing in fact is not
authenticated by that conduct.
   GAIN ACCESS. To approach, instruct, communicate with, store data in,
retrieve data from or otherwise make use of any resources of a computer,
computer system or computer network, or any cable service or cable system both
as defined in R.C. § 2913.04.
   INFORMATION SERVICE.
      (1)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, the offering of a
capability for generating, acquiring, storing, transforming, processing,
retrieving, utilizing or making available information via telecommunications,
including but not limited to electronic publishing.
      (2)   “Information service” does not include any use of a capability of a
type described in division (1) of this definition for the management, control
or operation of a telecommunications system or the management of a
telecommunications service.
   INTERNET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 341.42.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   OCCUPIED STRUCTURE. Any house, building, outbuilding, watercraft, aircraft,
railroad car, truck, trailer, tent or other structure, vehicle or shelter, or
any portion thereof, to which any of the following applies:
      (1)   It is maintained as a permanent or temporary dwelling, even though
it is temporarily unoccupied and whether or not any person is actually present;
      (2)   At the time, it is occupied as the permanent or temporary
habitation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;
      (3)   At the time, it is specially adapted for the overnight
accommodation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;
      (4)   At the time, any person is present or likely to be present in it.
   OWNER. Unless the context requires a different meaning, any person, other
than the actor, who is the owner of, who has possession or control of, or who
has any license or interest in property or services, even though the ownership,
possession, control, license or interest is unlawful.
   POLICE DOG OR HORSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.321.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.
   RENTED PROPERTY. Personal property in which the right of possession and use
of the property is for a short and possibly indeterminate term in return for
consideration; the rentee generally controls the duration of possession of the
property within any applicable minimum or maximum term; and the amount of
consideration is generally determined by the duration of possession of the
property.
   SERVICES. Includes labor, personal services, professional services, rental
services, public utility services including wireless service as defined in R.C.
§ 128.01(F)(1), common carrier services, and food, drink, transportation,
entertainment and cable television services and, for purposes of R.C. § 2913.04
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, includes cable services as
defined in that section.
   SLUG. An object that, by virtue of its size, shape, composition or other
quality, is capable of being inserted or deposited in a coin machine as an
improper substitute for a genuine coin, bill or token made for that purpose.
   STATE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.
   TELECOMMUNICATION. The origination, emission, dissemination, transmission or
reception of data, images, signals, sounds or other intelligence or equivalence
or intelligence of any nature over any communications system by any method,
including but not limited to a fiber optic, electronic, magnetic, optical,
digital or analog method.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Any instrument, equipment, machine or other
device that facilitates telecommunication, including but not limited to a
computer, computer network, computer chip, computer circuit, scanner,
telephone, cellular telephone, pager, personal communications device,
transponder, receiver, radio, modem or device that enables the use of a modem.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. The providing, allowing, facilitating or
generating of any form of telecommunication through the use of a
telecommunications device over a telecommunications system.
   THEFT OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12, 2911.13,
2911.31, 2911.32, 2913.02, 2913.03, 2913.04, 2913.041, 2913.08, 2913.11,
2913.21, 2913.31, 2913.32, 2913.33, 2913.34, 2913.40, 2913.42, 2913.43,
2913.44, 2913.45, 2913.47, 2913.48, former R.C. § 2913.47 or 2913.48, or R.C. §
2913.51, 2915.05, or 2921.41;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
section listed in division (1) of this definition, or a violation of R.C. §
2913.41, 2913.81 or 2915.06 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or the United States involving robbery, burglary,
breaking and entering, theft, embezzlement, wrongful conversion, forgery,
counterfeiting, deceit or fraud;
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing any offense under division (1), (2) or (3) of this definition.
   UTTER. To issue, publish, transfer, use, put or send into circulation,
deliver or display.
   WRITING. Any computer software, document, letter, memorandum, note, paper,
plate, data, film or other thing having in or upon it any written, type-written
or printed matter, and any token, stamp, seal, credit card, badge, trademark,
label or other symbol of value, right, privilege, license or identification.
(R.C. §§ 2909.01, 2913.01)
§ 642.02 THEFT.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to deprive the owner of property or services,
shall knowingly obtain or exert control over either the property or services in
any of the following ways:
      (1)   Without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give
consent;
      (2)   Beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the owner or
person authorized to give consent;
      (3)   By deception;
      (4)   By threat;
      (5)   By intimidation.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of theft. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, a violation of this section is misdemeanor
theft, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the elements set forth in R.C. §
2913.02(B) for felony theft, grand theft, or aggravated theft are met, then a
violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (2)   In addition to the penalties described in division (b)(1) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by causing a motor vehicle to
leave the premises of an establishment at which gasoline is offered for retail
sale without the offender making full payment for gasoline that was dispensed
into the fuel tank of the motor vehicle or into another container, the court
may do one of the following:
         A.   Unless division (b)(2)B. of this section applies, suspend for not
more than six months the offenders driver's license, probationary driver's
license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or
nonresident operating privilege;
         B.   If the offender's driver's license, probationary driver's
license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or
nonresident operating privilege has previously been suspended pursuant to
division (b)(2)A. of this section, or any other substantially equivalent state
or local law, impose a class seven suspension of the offender's license,
permit, or privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7), provided
that the suspension shall be at least six months;
         C.   The court, in lieu of suspending the offender's driver's or
commercial driver's license, probationary driver's license, temporary
instruction permit, or nonresident operating privilege pursuant to division (b)
(2)A. or (b)(2)B of this section, instead may require the offender to perform
community service for a number of hours determined by the court.
      (3)   In addition to the penalties described in division (b)(1) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by stealing rented property or
rental services, the court may order that the offender make restitution
pursuant to R.C. § 2929.18 or R.C. § 2929.28. Restitution may include, but is
not limited to, the cost of repairing or replacing the stolen property, or the
cost of repairing the stolen property and any loss of revenue resulting from
deprivation of the property due to theft of rental services that is less than
or equal to the actual value of the property at the time it was rented.
Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental services shall
be determined pursuant to the provisions of R.C. § 2913.72.
   (c)   The sentencing court that suspends an offender's license, permit, or
nonresident operating privilege under division (b)(2) of this section may grant
the offender limited driving privileges during the period of the suspension in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 4510.
(R.C. § 2913.02)
Statutory reference:
   Felony theft provisions, see R.C. § 2913.02(B)
§ 642.03 DEGREE OF OFFENSE WHEN CERTAIN PROPERTY INVOLVED.
   Regardless of the value of the property involved, and regardless of whether
the offender previously has been convicted of a theft offense, a violation of §
642.02 or
642.28 is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the property
involved is any of the following:
   (a)   A credit card;
   (b)   A printed form for a check or other negotiable instrument, that on its
face identifies the drawer or maker for whose use it is designed or identifies
the account on which it is to be drawn, and that has not been executed by the
drawer or maker or on which the amount is blank;
   (c)   A motor vehicle identification license plate as prescribed by R.C. §
4503.22, a temporary motor vehicle license registration as prescribed by R.C. §
4503.182, or any comparable temporary motor vehicle license registration as
prescribed by the applicable law of another state or the United States;
   (d)   A blank form for a certificate of title or a manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate to a motor vehicle, as prescribed by R.C. § 4505.07;
   (e)   A blank form for any license listed in R.C. § 4507.01.
(R.C. § 2913.71)
§ 642.04 EVIDENCE OF THEFT OF RENTED PROPERTY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Rentee.” A person who pays consideration to a renter for the use
of rented property.
      (2)   “Renter.” A person who owns rented property.
   (b)   Each of the following shall be considered evidence of intent to commit
theft of rented property or rental services:
      (1)   At the time of entering into the rental contract, the rentee
presented the renter with identification that was materially false, fictitious
or not current with respect to name, address, place of employment or other
relevant information.
      (2)   After receiving a notice demanding the return of the rented
property as provided in division (c) of this section, the rentee neither
returned the rented property nor made arrangements acceptable with the renter
to return the rented property.
   (c)   To establish that a rentee has an intent to commit theft of rented
property or rental services under division (b)(2) above, a renter may issue a
notice to a rentee demanding the return of the rented property. The renter
shall mail the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
rentee at the address the rentee gave when the rental contract was executed, or
to the rentee at the last address the rentee or the rentee’s agent furnished in
writing to the renter.
   (d)   A demand for the return of the rented property is not a prerequisite
for the prosecution of a rentee for theft of rented property or rental
services. The evidence specified in division (b) above does not constitute the
only evidence that may be considered as evidence of intent to commit theft of
rented property or rental services.
(R.C. § 2913.72) (Prior Code, § 642.035)
§ 642.05 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF A VEHICLE; VEHICLE TRESPASS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorcycle, motorboat or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of
the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorboat or other motor- propelled vehicle without the consent of the owner or
person authorized to give consent, and either remove it from this state or keep
possession of it for more than 48 hours.
   (c)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section:
      (1)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor, though mistaken,
reasonably believed that he or she was authorized to use or operate the
property.
      (2)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor reasonably believed
that the owner or person empowered to give consent would authorize the actor to
use or operate the property.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unauthorized use of a
vehicle.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (d)(1), a violation
of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled adult and if the victim
incurs a loss as a result of the violation, a violation of division (a) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (b) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.03) (Prior Code, § 642.04)
Statutory reference:
   Theft offense involving motor vehicle, offender to pay towing and storage
fees, see R.C. § 2913.82
§ 642.06 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly use or operate the property of another
without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (b)   No person, in any manner and by any means, including but not limited
to computer hacking, shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to,
or cause access to be gained to any computer, computer system, computer
network, cable service, cable system, telecommunications device,
telecommunications service or information service without the consent of, or
beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the owner of the
computer, computer system, computer network, cable service, cable system,
telecommunications device, telecommunications service or information service or
other person authorized to give consent.
   (c)   Except as permitted under R.C. § 5503.101, no person shall knowingly
gain access to, attempt to gain access to, cause access to be granted to, or
disseminate information gained from access to the law enforcement automated
database system created pursuant to R.C. § 5503.10 without the consent of, or
beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the chair of the Law
Enforcement Automated Data System Steering Committee.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to,
cause access to be granted to, or disseminate information gained from access to
the Ohio law enforcement gateway established and operated pursuant to R.C. §
109.57(C)(1) without the consent of, or beyond the scope of the express or
implied consent of, the Superintendent of the Bureau of Criminal Identification
and Investigation.
   (e)   The affirmative defenses contained in R.C. § 2913.03(C) are
affirmative defenses to a charge under this section.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of property. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
unauthorized use of property is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (1)   If unauthorized use of property is committed for the purpose of
devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to obtain property or services,
unauthorized use of property is whichever of the following is applicable:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided below, unauthorized use of property
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   If the value of the property or services or the loss to the
victim is $1,000 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (2)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, unauthorized use of property is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of computer, cable or telecommunication property, a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (h)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the law enforcement automated database system, a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (i)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the Ohio law enforcement gateway, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
   (j)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Cable operator.” Any person or group of persons that does either
of the following:
         A.   Provides cable service over a cable system and directly through
one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that cable system;
         B.   Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of a cable system.
      (2)   “Cable service.” Any of the following:
         A.   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
of information that a cable operator makes available to all subscribers
generally;
         B.   Subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the
selection or use of video programming or of information that a cable operator
makes available to all subscribers generally, both as described in division (f)
(2)A. above;
         C.   Any cable television service.
      (3)   “Cable system.” Any facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video
programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community.
“Cable system” does not include any of the following:
         A.   Any facility that serves only to retransmit the television
signals of one or more television broadcast stations;
         B.   Any facility that serves subscribers without using any public
right-of-way;
         C.   Any facility of a common carrier that, under 47 U.S.C. § 522(7)
(c), is excluded from the term “cable system” as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7);
         D.   Any open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. § 573;
         E.   Any facility of any electric utility used solely for operating
its electric utility system.
(R.C. § 2913.04) (Prior Code, § 642.05)
Statutory reference:
   Telecommunications: fraud and unlawful use of a device, felony offenses, see
R.C. §§ 2913.05 and 2913.06
§ 642.07 INJURING VINES, BUSHES, TREES OR CROPS.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly cut down,
destroy, girdle or otherwise injure a vine, bush, shrub, sapling, tree or crop
standing or growing on the land of another or upon public land.
   (b)   In addition to the penalty provided in division (c) of this section,
whoever violates this section is liable in treble damages for the injury
caused.
(R.C. § 901.51)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 901.99(A))
(Prior Code, § 642.06)
§ 642.08 DESECRATION.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall purposely deface, damage,
pollute or otherwise physically mistreat any of the following:
      (1)   Any public monument;
      (2)   Any historical or commemorative marker, or any structure, Indian
mound or earthwork, cemetery, thing or site of great historical or
archeological interest;
      (3)   A place of worship, its furnishings or religious artifacts or
sacred texts within the place of worship or within the grounds upon which the
place of worship is located;
      (4)   A work of art or museum piece;
      (5)   Any other object of reverence or sacred devotion.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of desecration. A violation of
division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(4) or (a)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the second degree. A violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   As used in this section, “cemetery” means any place of burial and
includes burial sites that contain American Indian burial objects placed with
or containing American Indian human remains.
(R.C. § 2927.11) (Prior Code, § 642.07)
§ 642.09 ASSAULTING POLICE DOG OR HORSE OR ASSISTANCE DOG.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
a police dog or horse in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in
the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the physical harm
is caused or attempted.
      (2)   The police dog or horse is not assisting a law enforcement officer
in the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the physical
harm is caused or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that the dog
or horse is a police dog or horse.
   (b)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment or strike a police dog or horse;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at a police dog or horse;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct a police dog or horse, or interfere with
or obstruct a law enforcement officer who is being assisted by a police dog or
horse, in a manner that does any of the following:
         A.   Inhibits or restricts the law enforcement officer’s control of
the police dog or horse;
         B.   Deprives the law enforcement officer of control of the police dog
or horse;
         C.   Releases the police dog or horse from its area of control;
         D.   Enters the area of control of the police dog or horse without the
consent of the law enforcement officer, including placing food or any other
object or substance into that area;
         E.   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the police dog or horse to
assist a law enforcement officer.
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to a police dog or horse;
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger a police dog or horse that at the time of the conduct, the
police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance
of the officer’s duties or that the person knows is a police dog or horse.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
an assistance dog in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The dog, at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, is
assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment.
      (2)   The dog, at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, is
not assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment, but the offender has actual knowledge that
the dog is an assistance dog.
   (d)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment or strike an assistance dog;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at an assistance dog;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct an assistance dog, or interfere with or
obstruct a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a person with a
mobility impairment who is being assisted or served by an assistance dog, in a
manner that does any of the following:
         A.   Inhibits or restricts the assisted or served person’s control of
the dog;
         B.   Deprives the assisted or served person of control of the dog;
         C.   Releases the dog from its area of control;
         D.   Enters the area of control of the dog without the consent of the
assisted or served person, including placing food or any other object or
substance into that area;
         E.   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the dog to assist the
assisted or served person;
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to an assistance dog;
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger an assistance dog that at the time of the conduct is
assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment or that the person knows is an assistance
dog.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
assaulting a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, assaulting a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. If the violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse
other than death or serious physical harm, assaulting a police dog or horse is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical
harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death, assaulting a police
dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
harassing a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided this division,
harassing a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse but does not
result in its death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing a police dog
or horse is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in
serous physical harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death,
harassing a police dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
assaulting an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog other than death or
serious physical harm, assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the violation results in serious physical harm to the
assistance dog or results in its death, assaulting an assistance dog is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of
harassing an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
harassing an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog but does not result in
the death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing an assistance dog is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical
harm to the assistance dog or results in its death, harassing an assistance dog
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   In addition to any other sanctions or penalty imposed for the
offense under this section, R.C. Chapter 2929 or any other provision of the
Revised Code or this code, whoever violates division (a), (b), (c) or (d) of
this section is responsible for the payment of all of the following:
         A.   Any veterinary bill or bill for medication incurred as a result
of the violation by the police department regarding a violation of division (a)
or (b) of this section or by the person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired
or the person with a mobility impairment assisted or served by the assistance
dog regarding a violation of division (c) or (d) of this section;
         B.   The cost of any damaged equipment that results from the
violation;
         C.   If the violation did not result in the death of the police dog or
horse or the assistance dog that was the subject of the violation and if, as a
result of that dog or horse being the subject of the violation, the dog or
horse needs further training or retraining to be able to continue in the
capacity of a police dog or horse or an assistance dog, the cost of any further
training or retraining of that dog or horse by a law enforcement officer or by
the person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or the person with a
mobility impairment assisted or served by the assistance dog;
         D.   If the violation resulted in the death of the assistance dog that
was the subject of the violation or resulted in serious physical harm to the
police dog or horse or the assistance dog or horse that was the subject of the
violation to the extent that the dog or horse needs to be replaced on either a
temporary or a permanent basis, the cost of replacing that dog or horse and of
any further training of a new police dog or horse or a new assistance dog by a
law enforcement officer or by the person who is blind, deaf, or hearing
impaired or the person with a mobility impairment assisted or served by the
assistance dog, which replacement or training is required because of the death
of or the serious physical harm to the dog or horse that was the subject of the
violation.
   (f)   This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian whose conduct
is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4741.
   (g)   This section only applies to an offender who knows or should know at
the time of the violation that the police dog or horse or assistance dog that
is the subject of a violation under this section is a police dog or horse or an
assistance dog.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Assistance dog.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
      (2)   “Blind.” Had the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
      (3)   “Person with a mobility impairment.” Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 955.011.
      (4)   “Physical harm.” Any injury, illness or other psychological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
      (5)   “Police dog or horse.” A dog or horse that has been trained and may
be used to assist law enforcement officers in the performance of their official
duties.
      (6)   “Serious physical harm.” Any of the following:
         A.   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death.
         B.   Any physical harm that causes permanent maiming or that involves
some temporary, substantial maiming.
         C.   Any physical harm that causes acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering.
(R.C. § 2921.321) (Prior Code, § 642.08)
§ 642.10 ARSON.
   (a)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do any of
the following:
      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
property of another without the other person’s consent;
      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
property of the offender or another, with purpose to defraud;
      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to the
statehouse or a courthouse, school building, or other building or structure
that is owned or controlled by the state, any political subdivision, or any
department, agency, or instrumentality of the state or a political subdivision,
and that is used for public purposes;
      (4)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm, through the
offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other consideration, to any
property of another without the other person’s consent or to any property of
the offender or another with purpose to defraud;
      (5)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any park,
preserve, wildlands, brush- covered land, cut-over land, forest, timberland,
greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or controlled by
another person, the state, or a political subdivision without the consent of
the other person, the state, or the political subdivision;
      (6)   With purpose to defraud, cause, or create a substantial risk of,
physical harm to any park, preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over
land, forest, timberland, greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is
owned or controlled by the offender, another person, the state, or a political
subdivision.
   (b)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do any of
the following:
      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
structure of another that is not an occupied structure;
      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm, through the
offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other consideration, to any
structure of another that is not an occupied structure;
      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
structure that is not an occupied structure and that is in or on any park,
preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over land, forest, timberland,
greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or controlled by
another person, the state, or a political subdivision.
   (c)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b)(1)
or (b)(2) of this section that the defendant acted with the consent of the
other person.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b)(3) of
this section that the defendant acted with the consent of the other person, the
state, or the political subdivision.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of arson.
      (2)   A violation of division (a)(1) or (b)(1) of this section is one of
the following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (d)(2)B. of this
section, a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         B.   If the value of the property or the amount of the physical harm
involved is $1,000 or more, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (3)   A violation of division (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), (a)(5), (a)(6), (b)
(2) or (b)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2909.03) (Prior Code, § 642.09)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated arson, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2909.02
   Convicted arsonist to make restitution to public agency, see R.C. § 2929.28
§ 642.11 CRIMINAL DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING; VEHICULAR VANDALISM.
   (a)   Criminal damaging or endangering.
      (1)   No person shall cause or create a substantial risk of physical harm
to any property of another without the other person’s consent:
         A.   Knowingly, by any means; or
         B.   Recklessly, by means of fire, explosion, flood, poison gas,
poison, radioactive material, caustic or corrosive material, or other
inherently dangerous agency or substance.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (a) is guilty of criminal damaging
or endangering, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If violation of this
division (a) creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging
or endangering is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the property involved
in a violation of this division (a) is an aircraft, an aircraft engine,
propeller, appliance, spare part or any other equipment or implement used or
intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the violation
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging or endangering
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the property
involved in a violation of this division (a) is an aircraft, an aircraft
engine, propeller, appliance, spare part or any other equipment or implement
used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the
violation creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or if the
property involved in a violation of this division (a) is an occupied aircraft,
criminal damaging or endangering is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2909.06)
   (b)   Vehicular vandalism.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (b), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         A.   “Alley,” “street,” and “vehicle.” Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 4511.01.
         B.   “Highway.” Any highway as defined in R.C. § 4511.01 or any lane,
road, street, alley, bridge or overpass.
         C.   “Vessel” and “waters in this state.” Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 1546.01.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any
object at, onto or in the path of any of the following:
         A.   Any vehicle on a highway;
         B.   Any boat or vessel on any of the waters in this state.
      (3)   Whoever violates this division (b) is guilty of vehicular
vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this division (b)(3), vehicular
vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of this
division (b) creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or the
violation of this division (b) causes serious physical harm to property,
vehicular vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
If the violation of this division (b) causes physical harm to any person or
serious physical harm to any person, vehicular vandalism is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.09)
(Prior Code, § 642.10)
Statutory reference:
   Disrupting public services, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.04
   Vandalism, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.05
§ 642.12 CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
   (a)   No person shall:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with the either of the following:
         A.   The property of another;
         B.   One’s own residential real property with the purpose to decrease
the value of or enjoyment of the residential real property, if both of the
following apply:
            1.   The residential real property is subject to a mortgage.
            2.   The person has been served with a summons and complaint in a
pending residential mortgage loan foreclosure action relating to that real
property. As used in this division, “pending” includes the time between
judgment entry and confirmation of sale.
      (2)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of property of
another, employ a tear gas device, stink bomb, smoke generator or other device
releasing a substance that is harmful or offensive to persons exposed, or that
tends to cause public alarm;
      (3)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy
or otherwise improperly tamper with a bench mark, triangulation station,
boundary marker or other survey station, monument or marker;
      (4)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy
or otherwise improperly tamper with any safety device, the property of another,
or the property of the offender when required or placed for the safety of
others, so as to destroy or diminish its effectiveness or availability for its
intended purpose;
      (5)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of the property
of another, set a fire on the land of another or place personal property that
has been set on fire on the land of another, which fire or personal property is
outside and apart from any building, other structure, or personal property that
is on that land;
      (6)   Without privilege to do so, and with intent to impair the
functioning of any computer, computer system, computer network, computer
software or computer program, knowingly do any of the following:
         A.   In any manner or by any means, including but not limited to
computer hacking, alter, damage, destroy or modify a computer, computer system,
computer network, computer software, or computer program or data contained in a
computer, computer system, computer network, computer software or computer
program;
         B.   Introduce a computer contaminant into a computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software or computer program.
      (7)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly destroy or improperly tamper
with a critical infrastructure facility.
   (b)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Critical infrastructure facility.” Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2911.21.
      (2)   “Improperly tamper.” Means to change the physical location or the
physical condition of the property.
      (3)   “Safety device.” Means any fire extinguisher, fire hose, or fire
axe, or any fire escape, emergency exit, or emergency escape equipment, or any
life line, life-saving ring, life preserver, or life boat or raft, or any
alarm, light, flare, signal, sign, or notice intended to warn of danger or
emergency, or intended for other safety purposes, or any guard railing or
safety barricade, or any traffic sign or signal, or any railroad grade crossing
sign, signal, or gate, or any first aid or survival equipment, or any other
device, apparatus, or equipment intended for protecting or preserving the
safety of persons or property.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal mischief,
and shall be punished as provided in division (c)(2), (c)(3), or (c)(4) of this
section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), or (a)(5) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree. Except as otherwise provided
in this division, if the violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4),
or (a)(5) of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person,
criminal mischief committed in violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3),
(a)(4), or (a)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
property involved in the violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4),
or (a)(5) of this section is an aircraft, an aircraft engine, propeller,
appliance, spare part, fuel, lubricant, hydraulic fluid, any other equipment,
implement, or material used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft, or any cargo carried or intended to be carried in an aircraft and if
the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or if the
aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief committed in
violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), or (a)(5) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (a)(6) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the value of the computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software, computer program, or data involved in the violation
of division (a)(6) of this section or the loss to the victim resulting from the
violation is $1,000 or more, or if the computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software, computer program, or data involved in the violation
of division (a)(6) is used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft and the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or
if the aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (a)(6) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Criminal mischief committed in violation of division (a)(7) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.07) (Prior Code, § 642.11)
§ 642.13 CRIMINAL TRESPASS.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another;
      (2)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, the
use of which is lawfully restricted to certain persons, purposes, modes or
hours, when the offender knows the offender is in violation of any such
restriction or is reckless in that regard;
      (3)   Recklessly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, as
to which notice against unauthorized access or presence is given by actual
communication to the offender, or in a manner prescribed by law, or by posting
in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential
intruders, or by fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to restrict
access;
      (4)   Being on the land or premises of another, negligently fail or
refuse to leave upon being notified by signage posted in a conspicuous place or
otherwise being notified to do so by the owner or occupant, or the agent or
servant of either;
      (5)   Knowingly enter or remain on a critical infrastructure facility.
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the land or
premises involved was owned, controlled, or in custody of a public agency.
   (c)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the offender was
authorized to enter or remain on the land or premises involved, when the
authorization was secured by deception.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal trespass.
Criminal trespass in violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), or (a)(4) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Criminal trespass in
violation of division (a)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28, if the person, in committing the
violation of this section, used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle, the court shall impose a fine of two times the usual amount
imposed for the violation.
      (3)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 2911.21 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and the offender, in committing each violation,
used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all- purpose vehicle, the court,
in addition to or independent of all other penalties imposed for the violation,
may impound the certificate of registration of that snowmobile or off-highway
motorcycle or the certificate of registration and license plate of that all-
purpose vehicle for not less than 60 days. In such a case, R.C. § 4519.47
applies.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, if the
offender, in committing the violation of this section, used an all-purpose
vehicle, the Clerk of the Court shall pay the fine imposed pursuant to this
section to the State Recreational Vehicle Fund created by R.C. § 4519.11.
   (f)   As used in divisions (a) through (e) of this section:
      (1)   “All-purpose vehicle”, “off-highway motorcycle”, and “snowmobile”.
Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4519.01.
      (2)   “Critical infrastructure facility.” Means:
         A.   One of the following, if completely enclosed by a fence or other
physical barrier that is obviously designed to exclude intruders, or if clearly
marked with signs that are reasonably likely to come to the attention of
potential intruders and that indicate entry is forbidden without site
authorization:
            1.   A petroleum or alumina refinery;
            2.   An electric generating facility, substation, switching
station, electrical control center, or electric transmission and distribution
lines and associated equipment;
            3.   A chemical, polymer, or rubber manufacturing facility;
            4.   A water intake structure, water treatment facility, waste
water facility, drainage facility, water management facility, or any similar
water or sewage treatment system and its water and sewage piping;
            5.   A natural gas company facility or interstate natural gas
pipeline, including a pipeline interconnection, a natural gas compressor
station and associated facilities, city gate or town border station, metering
station, above-ground piping, regulator station, valve site, delivery station,
fabricated assembly, or any other part of a natural gas storage facility
involved in the gathering, storage, transmission, or distribution of gas;
            6.   A telecommunications central switching office or remote
switching facility or an equivalent network facility that serves a similar
purpose;
            7.   Wireline or wireless telecommunications infrastructure,
including telecommunications towers and telephone poles and lines, including
fiber optic lines;
            8.   A port, trucking terminal, or other freight transportation
facility;
            9.   A gas processing plant, including a plant used in the
processing, treatment, or fractionation of natural gas or natural gas liquids;
            10.   A transmission facility used by a federally licensed radio or
television station;
            11.   A steel-making facility that uses an electric arc furnace to
make steel;
            12.   A facility identified and regulated by the United States
Department of Homeland Security’s Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards
Program under 6 C.F.R. part 27;
            13.   A dam that is regulated by the state or federal government;
            14.   A crude oil or refined products storage and distribution
facility, including valve sites, pipeline interconnections, pump station,
metering station, below- or above- ground pipeline, or piping and truck loading
or off-loading facility;
            15.   A video service network and broadband infrastructure,
including associated buildings and facilities, video service headends, towers,
utility poles, and utility lines such as fiber optic lines. As used in this
division, “video service network” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
            16.   Any above-ground portion of an oil, gas, hazardous liquid or
chemical pipeline, tank, or other storage facility;
            17.   Any above-ground portion of a well, well pad, or production
operation;
            18.   A laydown area or construction site for pipe and other
equipment intended for use on an interstate or intrastate natural gas or crude
oil pipeline;
            19.   Any mining operation, including any processing equipment,
batching operation, or support facility for that mining operation.
         B.   With respect to a video service network or broadband or wireless
telecommunications infrastructure, the above-ground portion of a facility
installed in a public right-of-way on a utility pole or in a conduit;
         C.   Any railroad property;
         D.   An electronic asset of any of the following:
            1.   An electric light company that is a public utility under R.C.
§ 4905.02;
            2.   An electric cooperative, as defined in R.C. § 4928.01;
            3.   A municipal electric utility, as defined in R.C. § 4928.01;
            4.   A natural gas company that is a public utility under R.C. §
4905.02;
            5.   A telephone company that is a public utility under R.C. §
4905.02;
            6.   A video service provider, including a cable operator, as those
terms are defined in R.C. § 1332.21.
      (3)   “Electronic asset.” Includes, but is not limited to, the hardware,
software, and data of a programmable electronic device; all communications,
operations, and customer data networks; and the contents of those data
networks.
      (4)   “Land” or “premises.” Includes any land, building, structure, or
place belonging to, controlled by, or in custody of another, and any separate
enclosure or room, or portion thereof.
      (5)   “Production operation”, “well,” and “well pad.” Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 1509.01.
(R.C. § 2911.21)
   (g)   Criminal trespass on a place of public amusement.
      (1)   As used in this division (g), “place of public amusement” means a
stadium, theater or other facility, whether licensed or not, at which a live
performance, sporting event or other activity takes place for entertainment of
the public and to which access is made available to the public, regardless of
whether admission is charged.
      (2)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly enter or
remain on any restricted portion of a place of public amusement and, as a
result of that conduct, interrupt or cause the delay of the live performance,
sporting event, or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement
after a printed written notice has been given as provided in division (g)(4)A.
of this section that the general public is restricted from access to that
restricted portion of the place of public amusement. A restricted portion of a
place of public amusement may include but is not limited to a playing field, an
athletic surface or a stage located at the place of public amusement.
      (3)   An owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an agent of the
owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a place of public amusement
may use reasonable force to restrain and remove a person from a restricted
portion of the place of public amusement if the person enters or remains on the
restricted portion of the place of public amusement and, as a result of that
conduct, interrupts or causes the delay of the live performance, sporting event
or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement. This division
does not provide immunity from criminal liability for any use of force beyond
reasonable force by an owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an agent
of either the owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a place of
public amusement.
      (4)   A.   Notice has been given that the general public is restricted
from access to a portion of a place of public amusement if a printed written
notice of the restricted access has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at
the entrance to that portion of the place of public amusement. If a printed
written notice is posted or exhibited as described in this division regarding a
portion of a place of public amusement, in addition to that posting or
exhibition, notice that the general public is restricted from access to that
portion of the place of public amusement also may be given, but is not required
to be given, by either of the following means:
            1.   By notifying the person personally, either orally or in
writing, that access to that portion of the place of public amusement is
restricted;
            2.   By broadcasting over the public address system of the place of
public amusement an oral warning that access to that portion of the place of
public amusement is restricted.
         B.   If notice that the general public is restricted from access to a
portion of a place of public amusement is provided by the posting or exhibition
of a printed written notice as described in division (g)(4)A. of this section,
the municipality, in a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (g)(2)
of this section, is not required to prove that the defendant received actual
notice that the general public is restricted from access to a portion of a
place of public amusement.
      (5)   A.   Whoever violates division (g)(2) of this section is guilty of
criminal trespass on a place of public amusement, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
         B.   In addition to any jail term, fine or other sentence, penalty or
sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to division (g)(5)A. of this
section, a court may require an offender who violates this section to perform
not less than 30 and not more than 120 hours of supervised community service
work.
(R.C. § 2911.23)
(Prior Code, § 642.12)
§ 642.14 AGGRAVATED TRESPASS.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall enter or remain on the land or premises of
another with purpose to commit on that land or those premises a misdemeanor,
the elements of which involve causing physical harm to another person or
causing another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to
that person.
      (2)   No person shall enter or remain on a critical infrastructure
facility with purpose to destroy or tamper with the facility.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated trespass.
Aggravated trespass in violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Aggravated trespass in violation of division
(a)(2) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
   (c)   As used in this section, CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2911.21.
(R.C. § 2911.211) (Prior Code, § 642.125)
§ 642.15 TAMPERING WITH COIN MACHINES.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to commit theft or to defraud, shall knowingly
enter, force an entrance into, tamper with or insert any part of an instrument
into any coin machine.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with coin
machines, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of this section or of any theft offense as
defined in R.C. § 2913.01, tampering with coin machines is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2911.32) (Prior Code, § 642.13)
§ 642.16 PASSING BAD CHECKS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Check.” Includes any form of debit from a demand deposit account,
including but not limited to any of the following:
         A.   A check, bill of exchange, draft, order of withdrawal, or similar
negotiable or non- negotiable instrument;
         B.   An electronic check, electronic transaction, debit card
transaction, check card transaction, substitute check, web check or any form of
automated clearing house transaction.
      (2)   “Issue a check.” Causing any form of debit from a demand deposit
account.
   (b)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall issue or transfer or cause
to be issued or transferred a check or other negotiable instrument, knowing
that it will be dishonored or knowing that a person has ordered or will order
stop payment on the check or other negotiable instrument.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers a check
or other negotiable instrument is presumed to know that it will be dishonored
if either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The drawer has no account with the drawee at the time of issue or
the stated date, whichever is later.
      (2)   The check or other negotiable instrument was properly refused
payment for insufficient funds upon presentment within 30 days after issue or
the stated date, whichever is later, and the liability of the drawer, indorser,
or any party who may be liable thereon is not discharged by payment or
satisfaction within ten days after receiving notice of dishonor.
   (d)   In determining the value of the payment for purposes of division (e)
of this section, the court may aggregate all checks and other negotiable
instruments that the offender issued or transferred or caused to be issued or
transferred in violation of division (b) of this section within a period of 180
consecutive days.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of passing bad checks. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, passing bad checks is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the check or checks or other negotiable instrument or
instruments are issued or transferred to a single vendor or single other person
for the payment of $1,000 or more, or if the check or checks or other
negotiable instrument or instruments are issued or transferred to multiple
vendors or persons for the payment of $1,500 or more, passing bad checks is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.11) (Prior Code, § 642.14)
§ 642.17 FORGING OR SELLING FORGED IDENTIFICATION CARDS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Forge an identification card.
      (2)   Sell or otherwise distribute a card that purports to be an
identification card, knowing it was forged.
   (b)   As used in this section, “identification card” means a card that
includes personal information or characteristics of an individual, a purpose of
which is to establish the identity of the bearer described on the card, whether
the words “identity”, “identification”, “identification card” or other similar
words appear on the card.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of forging
identification cards or selling or distributing forged identification cards.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, forging identification cards or
selling or distributing forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
division (a) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, forging identification cards or selling or distributing
forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the first degree and, in
addition, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine not less than $250.
      (2)   If the victim of a violation of this section is an elderly person,
R.C. § 2913.31(C)(2)(b) applies and the offense shall be prosecuted under R.C.
§ 2913.31.
(R.C. § 2913.31(B), (C)(2)) (Prior Code, § 642.145)
Statutory reference:
   Forgery, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2913.31(A), (C)(1)
   Forgery of originating address or other routing information in connection
with the transmission of an electronic mail advertisement, felony provisions,
see R.C. § 2307.64
§ 642.18 CRIMINAL SIMULATION.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud, or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Make or alter any object so that it appears to have value because
of antiquity, rarity, curiosity, source or authorship, which it does not in
fact possess.
      (2)   Practice deception in making, retouching, editing or reproducing
any photograph, movie film, video tape, phonograph record or recording tape.
      (3)   Falsely or fraudulently make, simulate, forge, alter or counterfeit
any wrapper, label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control
Commission under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, falsely or fraudulently cause to
be made, simulated, forged, altered or counterfeited any wrapper, label, stamp,
cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under R.C. Chapters
4301 and 4303, or use more than once any wrapper, label, stamp, cork or cap
prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303.
      (4)   Offer, or possess with the purpose to offer, any object that the
person knows to have been simulated as provided in divisions (a)(1), (a)(2) or
(a)(3) of this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal simulation. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, criminal simulation is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the loss to the victim is $1,000 or more, criminal
simulation is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.32) (Prior Code, § 642.146)
§ 642.19 MISUSE OF CREDIT CARDS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Practice deception for the purpose of procuring the issuance of a
credit card, when a credit card is issued in actual reliance thereon;
      (2)   Knowingly buy or sell a credit card from or to a person other than
the issuer;
      (3)   As an officer, employee, or appointee of a political subdivision or
as a public servant as defined under R.C. § 2921.01, knowingly misuse a credit
card account held by a political subdivision.
   (b)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Obtain control over a credit card as security for a debt;
      (2)   Obtain property or services by the use of a credit card, in one or
more transactions, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the card
has expired or been revoked, or was obtained, is retained or is being used in
violation of law;
      (3)   Furnish property or services upon presentation of a credit card,
knowing that the card is being used in violation of law;
      (4)   Represent or cause to be represented to the issuer of a credit card
that property or services have been furnished, knowing that the representation
is false.
   (c)   No person, with purpose to violate this section, shall receive,
possess, control or dispose of a credit card.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misuse of credit cards.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (d)(3) of this section, a
violation of division (a), (b)(1) or (c) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division or division (d)(3) of
this section, a violation of division (b)(2), (b)(3) or (b)(4) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the cumulative retail value of the
property and services involved in one or more violations of division (b)(2),
(b)(3) or (b)(4) of this section which violations involve one or more credit
card accounts and occur within a period of 90 consecutive days commencing on
the date of the first violation, is $1,000 or more, misuse of credit cards is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, and if the offense involves a violation of division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of
this section, misuse of credit cards is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.21) (Prior Code, § 642.15)
§ 642.20 RECORDING CREDIT CARD, TELEPHONE OR SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS.
   (a)   No person shall record or cause to be recorded either of the
following:
      (1)   A credit card account number of the other party to a transaction,
when a check, bill of exchange or other draft is presented for payment; or
      (2)   The telephone number or Social Security account number of the other
party to a transaction, when payment is made by credit card charge agreement,
check, bill of exchange or other draft.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a transaction, if all
of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The credit card account number, Social Security account number or
telephone number is recorded for a legitimate business purpose, including
collection purposes.
      (2)   The other party to the transaction consents to the recording of the
credit card account number, Social Security account number or telephone number.
      (3)   The credit card account number, Social Security account number or
telephone number that is recorded during the course of the transaction is not
disclosed to any third party for any purposes other than collection purposes
and is not used to market goods or services unrelated to the goods or services
purchased in the transaction.
   (c)   Nothing in this section prohibits the recording of the number of a
credit card account when given in lieu of a deposit to secure payment in the
event of default, loss, damage or other occurrence, or requires a person to
accept a check presented for payment, if the other party to the transaction
refuses to consent to the recording of the number of the party’s Social
Security account or license to operate a motor vehicle. (R.C. § 1349.17)
   (d)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1349.99(A))
(Prior Code, § 642.155)
§ 642.21 MAKING OR USING SLUGS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Insert or deposit a slug in a coin machine, with purpose to
defraud;
      (2)   Make, possess or dispose of a slug, with purpose of enabling
another to defraud by inserting or depositing it in a coin machine.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or using slugs, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2913.33) (Prior Code, § 642.16)
§ 642.22 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF PURPOSE TO DEFRAUD.
   In a prosecution of a person for a theft offense that alleges that the
person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she was facilitating a
fraud, hired or rented an aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy or other property or equipment, kept or
operated any of the same that has been hired or rented, or engaged
accommodations at a hotel, motel, inn, campground or other hostelry, it is
prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud if the person did any of the
following:
   (a)   Used deception to induce the rental agency to furnish the person with
the aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, sailboat, camper, trailer,
horse, buggy or other property or equipment, or used deception to induce the
hostelry to furnish the person with accommodations;
   (b)   Hired or rented any aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy or other property or equipment, or
engaged accommodations, knowing that he or she is without sufficient means to
pay the hire or rental;
   (c)   Absconded without paying the hire or rental;
   (d)   Knowingly failed to pay the hire or rental as required by the contract
of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure;
   (e)   Knowingly failed to return hired or rented property as required by the
contract of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure.
(R.C. § 2913.41) (Prior Code, § 642.17)
§ 642.23 TAMPERING WITH RECORDS.
   (a)   No person, knowing that he or she has no privilege to do so, and with
purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is facilitating a fraud, shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Falsify, destroy, remove, conceal, alter, deface or mutilate any
writing, computer software, data or record;
      (2)   Utter any writing or record, knowing it to have been tampered with
as provided in division (a)(1) of this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with records.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(3) of this section, if the
offense does not involve data or computer software, tampering with records is
whichever of the following is applicable:
         A.   If division (b)(1)B. of this section does not apply, it is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   If the writing or record is a will unrevoked at the time of the
offense, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (b)(3) of this section, if the
offense involves a violation of division (a) of this section involving data or
computer software, tampering with records is whichever of the following is
applicable:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2)B. of this
section, it is a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         B.   If the value of the data or computer software involved in the
offense or the loss to the victim is $1,000 or more or if the offense is
committed for the purpose of devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to
obtain property or services and the value of the property or services or the
loss to the victim is $7,500 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the writing, data, computer software or record is kept by or
belongs to a local, state or federal governmental entity, it is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.42) (Prior Code, § 642.18)
§ 642.24 SECURING WRITINGS BY DECEPTION.
   (a)   No person, by deception, shall cause another to execute any writing
that disposes of or encumbers property, or by which a pecuniary obligation is
incurred.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of securing writings by
deception. Except as otherwise provided in this division, securing writings by
deception is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property or
the obligation involved is $1,000 or more, securing writings by deception is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate to state law. If the victim of the
offense is an elderly person, disabled adult, active duty service member, or
spouse of an active duty service member, securing writings by deception is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.43) (Prior Code, § 642.19)
§ 642.25 PERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is
facilitating a fraud, or with purpose to induce another to purchase property or
services, shall personate a law enforcement officer, or an inspector,
investigator or agent of any governmental agency.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of personating an officer, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2913.44) (Prior Code, § 642.20)
§ 642.26 DIMINISHING OR INTERFERING WITH FORFEITABLE PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall destroy, damage, remove or transfer property that is
subject to forfeiture or otherwise take any action in regard to property that
is subject to forfeiture with purpose to do any of the following:
      (1)   Prevent or impair the state’s or political subdivision’s lawful
authority to take the property into its custody or control under R.C. Chapter
2981 or to continue holding the property under its lawful custody or control;
      (2)   Impair or defeat the court’s continuing jurisdiction over the
person and property;
      (3)   Devalue property that the person knows, or has reasonable cause to
believe, is subject to forfeiture proceedings under R.C. Chapter 2981.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with or
diminishing forfeitable property. Except as otherwise provided in this division
(b), interference with or diminishing forfeitable property is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the value of the property is $1,000 or more, interference
with or diminishing forfeitable property is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2981.07) (Prior Code, § 642.205)
§ 642.27 DEFRAUDING CREDITORS.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud one or more of his or her
creditors, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Remove, conceal, destroy, encumber, convey or otherwise deal with
any of his or her property;
      (2)   Misrepresent or refuse to disclose to a fiduciary appointed to
administer or manage his or her affairs or estate, the existence, amount or
location of any of his or her property, or any other information regarding the
property which he or she is legally required to furnish to the fiduciary.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of defrauding creditors.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, defrauding creditors is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property involved is
$1,000 or more, defrauding creditors is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.45) (Prior Code, § 642.21)
§ 642.28 RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall receive, retain or dispose of property of another
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the property has been
obtained through commission of a theft offense.
   (b)   It is not a defense to a charge of receiving stolen property in
violation of this section that the property was obtained by means other than
through the commission of a theft offense if the property was explicitly
represented to the accused person as being obtained through the commission of a
theft offense.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of receiving stolen property.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, receiving stolen property is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If any of the following criteria are met, then
a violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law:
      (1)   The value of the property involved is $1,000 or more;
      (2)   The property involved is any of the property listed in R.C. §
2913.71;
      (3)   The property involved is a firearm or dangerous ordnance, as
defined in R.C. § 2923.11;
      (4)   The property involved is a motor vehicle as defined in R.C. §
4501.01;
      (5)   The property involved is any dangerous drug, as defined in R.C. §
4729.01; or
      (6)   The property involved in violation of this section is a special
purchase article as defined in R.C. § 4737.04 or a bulk merchandise container
as defined in R.C. § 4737.012.
(R.C. § 2913.51) (Prior Code, § 642.22)
§ 642.29 POSSESSION OF MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall, without being authorized, have in his or her control
or possession any equipment, tools, implements or other property belonging to
the municipality.
(R.C. § 5589.12)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 5589.99(B))
(Prior Code, § 642.23)
§ 642.30 DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE IN THEFT OFFENSE.
   (a)   If more than one item of property or services is involved in a theft
offense or in a violation of R.C. § 1716.14(A) involving a victim who is an
elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the value of the property or services involved for the purpose of
determining the value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value
of all property or services involved in the offense.
   (b)   (1)   When a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02, or a series of
violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or
complicity in violations of R.C. § 1716.14(A), 2913.02, 2913.03 or 2913.04,
2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2), or 2913.31 or 2913.43 involving a victim who is an
elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance to any of these offenses, is committed by the offender in the
offender’s same employment, capacity or relationship to another, all of those
offenses shall be tried as a single offense. When a series of offenses under
R.C. § 2913.02, or a series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation
of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of R.C. § 2913.02 or
2913.43 involving a victim who is an active duty service member or spouse of an
active duty service member, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance
to any of these offenses, is committed by the offender in the offender’s same
employment, capacity, or relationship to another, all of those offenses shall
be tried as a single offense. The value of the property or services involved in
the series of offenses for the purpose of determining the value as required by
R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property and services involved
in all offenses in the series.
      (2)   If an offender commits a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02
that involves a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims, all of
the offenses may be tried as a single offense. If an offender is being tried
for the commission of a series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation
of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of R.C. § 1716.14(A),
2913.02, 2913.03 or 2913.04, 2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2), or 2913.31 or 2913.43,
whether committed against one victim or more than one victim, involving a
victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, pursuant to a scheme
or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried as a single offense.
If an offender is being tried for the commission of a series of violations of,
attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in
violations of R.C. § 2913.02 or 2913.43, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, whether committed against one
victim or more than one victim, involving a victim who is an active duty
service member or spouse of an active duty service member pursuant to a scheme
or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried as a single offense.
If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the value of the property or
services involved for the purpose of determining the value as required by R.C.
§ 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property and services involved in
all of the offenses in the course of conduct.
      (3)   When a series of two or more offenses under R.C. § 2913.40,
2913.48, or 2921.41 is committed by the offender in the offender’s same
employment, capacity or relationship to another, all of those offenses may be
tried as a single offense. If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the
value of the property or services involved for the purpose of determining the
value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property
and services involved in all of the offenses in the series of two or more
offenses.
      (4)   In prosecuting a single offense under division (b)(1), (b)(2) or
(b)(3) of this section, it is not necessary to separately allege and prove each
offense in the series. Rather, it is sufficient to allege and prove that the
offender, within a given span of time, committed one or more theft offenses or
violations of R.C. § 2913.40, 2913.48, or 2921.41 in the offender’s same
employment, capacity, or relationship to another as described in division (b)
(1) or (b)(3) of this section, or committed one or more theft offenses that
involve a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims or a scheme or
course of conduct as described in division (b)(2) of this section. While it is
not necessary to separately allege and prove each offense in the series in
order to prosecute a single offense under division (b)(1), (b)(2), or (b)(3) of
this section, it remains necessary in prosecuting them as a single offense to
prove the aggregate value of the property or services in order to meet the
requisite statutory offense level sought by the prosecution.
   (c)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   The value of an heirloom, memento, collector’s item, antique,
museum piece, manuscript, document, record or other thing that has intrinsic
worth to its owner and that either is irreplaceable or is replaceable only on
the expenditure of substantial time, effort or money, is the amount which would
compensate the owner for its loss.
      (2)   The value of personal effects and household goods, and of
materials, supplies, equipment and fixtures used in the profession, business,
trade, occupation, or avocation of its owner, which property is not covered
under division (c)(1) of this section, and which retains substantial utility
for its purpose regardless of its age or condition, is the cost of replacing
the property with new property of like kind and quality.
      (3)   The value of any real or personal property that is not covered
under division (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section, and the value of services, is
the fair market value of the property or services. As used in this section,
“fair market value” is the money consideration which a buyer would give and a
seller would accept for property or services, assuming that the buyer is
willing to buy and the seller is willing to sell, that both are fully informed
as to all facts material to the transaction, and that neither is under any
compulsion to act.
   (d)   Without limitation on the evidence which may be used to establish the
value of property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   When the property involved is personal property held for sale at
wholesale or retail, the price at which the property was held for sale is prima
facie evidence of its value.
      (2)   When the property involved is a security or commodity traded on an
exchange, the closing price or, if there is no closing price, the asked price,
given in the latest marked quotation prior to the offense, is prima facie
evidence of the value of the security or commodity.
      (3)   When the property involved is livestock, poultry or raw
agricultural products for which a local market price is available, the latest
local market price prior to the offense is prima facie evidence of the value of
the livestock, poultry or products.
      (4)   When the property involved is a negotiable instrument, the face
value is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (5)   When the property involved is a warehouse receipt, bill of lading,
pawn ticket, claim check or other instrument entitling the holder or bearer to
receive property, the face value or, if there is no face value, the value of
the property covered by the instrument less any payment necessary to receive
the property, is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (6)   When the property involved is a ticket of admission, ticket for
transportation, coupon, token or other instrument entitling the holder or
bearer to receive property or services, the face value or, if there is no face
value, the value of the property or services which may be received by the
instrument is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (7)   When the services involved are gas, electricity, water, telephone,
transportation, shipping or other services for which the rate is established by
law, the duly established rate is prima facie evidence of the value of the
services.
      (8)   When the services involved are services for which the rate is not
established by law, and the offender has been notified prior to the offense of
the rate for the services, either in writing or orally, or by posting in a
manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential offenders,
the rate contained in the notice is prima facie evidence of the value of the
services.
(R.C. § 2913.61(B) - (E)) (Prior Code, § 642.24)
§ 642.31 DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE IN ARSON.
   (a)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or amount of physical harm involved in a violation of §
642.06(a)(1) or (b)(1):
      (1)   If the property is an heirloom, memento, collector’s item, antique,
museum piece, manuscript, document, record or other thing that is either
irreplaceable or is replaceable only on the expenditure of substantial time,
effort, or money, the value of the property or the amount of physical harm
involved is the amount that would compensate the owner for its loss.
      (2)   If the property is not covered under division (a)(1) of this
section, and the physical harm is such that the property can be restored
substantially to its former condition, the amount of physical harm involved is
the reasonable cost of restoring the property.
      (3)   If the property is not covered under division (a)(1) of this
section, and the physical harm is such that the property cannot be restored
substantially to its former condition, the value of the property, in the case
of personal property, is the cost of replacing the property with new property
of like kind and quality, and in the case of real property or real property
fixtures, is the difference in the fair market value of the property
immediately before and immediately after the offense.
   (b)   As used in this section, “fair market value” has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 2913.61.
   (c)   Prima facie evidence of the value of property, as provided in R.C. §
2913.61(D), may be used to establish the value of property pursuant to this
section.
(R.C. § 2909.11(B) - (D)) (Prior Code, § 642.25)
§ 642.32 PROSECUTIONS FOR THEFT OF UTILITIES.
   (a)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in R.C. § 2913.01,
that involves alleged tampering with a gas, electric, steam or water meter,
conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the utility,
proof that a meter, conduit or attachment of a utility has been tampered with
is prima facie evidence that the person who is obligated to pay for the service
rendered through the meter, conduit or attachment, and who is in possession or
control of the meter, conduit or attachment at the time the tampering occurred
has caused the tampering with intent to commit a theft offense.
   (b)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in R.C. § 2913.01,
that involves the alleged reconnection of a gas, electric, steam or water
meter, conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the
utility, proof that a meter, conduit or attachment disconnected by a utility
has been reconnected without the consent of the utility is prima facie evidence
that the person in possession or control of the meter, conduit or attachment at
the time of the reconnection has reconnected the meter, conduit or attachment
with intent to commit a theft offense.
   (c)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Tamper.” To interfere with, damage or bypass a utility meter,
conduit or attachment with the intent to impede the correct registration of a
meter or the proper functions of a conduit or attachment so as to reduce the
amount of utility service that is registered on the meter.
      (2)   “Utility.” Any electric light company, gas company, natural gas
company, pipe-line company, water-works company or heating or cooling company,
as defined in R.C. § 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G), or (H), its lessees,
trustees or receivers, or any similar utility owned or operated by a political
subdivision.
(R.C. § 4933.18)
   (d)   Each electric light company, gas company, natural gas company,
pipeline company, waterworks company or heating or cooling company, as defined
by R.C. § 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G), or (H), or its lessees, trustees or
receivers, and each similar utility owned or operated by a political
subdivision, shall notify its customers, on an annual basis, that tampering
with or bypassing a meter constitutes a theft offense that could result in the
imposition of criminal sanctions.
(R.C. § 4933.19)
(Prior Code, § 642.26)
§ 642.33 INSURANCE FRAUD.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Data.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01 and additionally
includes any other representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts or
instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner.
      (2)   “Deceptive.” A statement, in whole or in part, would cause another
to be deceived because it contains a misleading representation, withholds
information, prevents the acquisition of information, or by any other conduct,
act or omission creates, confirms or perpetuates a false impression, including
but not limited to a false impression as to law, value, state of mind or other
objective or subjective fact.
      (3)   “Insurer.” Any person that is authorized to engage in the business
of insurance in this state under R.C. Title 39, the Ohio Fair Plan Underwriting
Association created under R.C. § 3929.43, any health insuring corporation, and
any legal entity that is self-insured and provides benefits to its employees or
members.
      (4)   “Policy.” A policy, certificate, contract or plan that is issued by
an insurer.
      (5)   “Statement.” Includes but is not limited to any notice, letter, or
memorandum; proof of loss; bill of lading; receipt for payment; invoice,
account or other financial statement; estimate of property damage; bill for
services; diagnosis or prognosis; prescription; hospital, medical or dental
chart or other record; x-ray, photograph, videotape or movie film; test result;
other evidence of loss, injury or expense; computer-generated document; and
data in any form.
   (b)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Present to, or cause to be presented to, an insurer any written or
oral statement that is part of, or in support of, an application for insurance,
a claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other benefit
pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement,
is false or deceptive;
      (2)   Assist, aid, abet, solicit, procure or conspire with another to
prepare or make any written or oral statement that is intended to be presented
to an insurer as part of, or in support of, an application for insurance, a
claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other benefit
pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement,
is false or deceptive.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of insurance fraud. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, insurance fraud is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the amount of the claim that is false or deceptive is $1,000
or more, insurance fraud is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
   (d)   This section shall not be construed to abrogate, waive or modify R.C.
§ 2317.02(A).
(R.C. § 2913.47) (Prior Code, § 642.28)
§ 642.34 MISCONDUCT INVOLVING A PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM.
   (a)   As used in this section, “public transportation system” means a county
transit system operated in accordance with R.C. §§ 306.01 to 306.13, a regional
transit authority operated in accordance with R.C. §§ 306. 30to 306.71, or a
regional transit commission operated in accordance with R.C. §§ 306.80 to
306.90.
   (b)   No person shall evade the payment of the known fares of a public
transportation system.
   (c)   No person shall alter any transfer, pass, ticket or token of a public
transportation system with the purpose of evading the payment of fares or of
defrauding the system.
   (d)   No person shall do any of the following while in any facility or on
any vehicle of a public transportation system:
      (1)   Play sound equipment without the proper use of a private earphone;
      (2)   Smoke, eat or drink in any area where the activity is clearly
marked as being prohibited; or
      (3)   Expectorate upon a person, facility or vehicle.
   (e)   No person shall write, deface, draw or otherwise mark on any facility
or vehicle of a public transportation system.
   (f)   No person shall fail to comply with a lawful order of a public
transportation system police officer, and no person shall resist, obstruct or
abuse a public transportation police officer in the performance of the
officer’s duties.
   (g)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of
misconduct involving a public transportation system.
      (1)   A violation of division (b), (c) or (f) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   A violation of division (d) of this section is a minor misdemeanor
on a first offense. If a person previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of any division of this section or of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any division of this section, a
violation of division (d) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (e) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
   (h)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 75% of each fine paid to
satisfy a sentence imposed for a violation of any of the provisions of this
section shall be deposited into the Treasury of the county and 25% shall be
deposited with the county transit board, regional transit authority or regional
transit commission that operates the public transportation system involved in
the violation, unless the Board of County Commissioners operates the public
transportation system, in which case 100% of each fine shall be deposited into
the Treasury of the county.
(R.C. § 2917.41) (Prior Code, § 642.30)
§ 642.35 WORKERS’ COMPENSATION FRAUD.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Receive workers’ compensation benefits to which the person is not
entitled;
      (2)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false or
misleading statement with the purpose to secure payment for goods or services
rendered under R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127 or 4131 or to secure workers’
compensation benefits;
      (3)   Alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any record or document
that is necessary to fully establish the validity of any claim filed with, or
necessary to establish the nature and validity of all goods and services for
which reimbursement or payment was received or is requested from the Bureau of
Workers’ Compensation, or a self-insuring employer under R.C. Chapter 4121,
4123, 4127 or 4131;
      (4)   Enter into an agreement or conspiracy to defraud the Bureau of
Workers’ Compensation or a self-insuring employer by making or presenting or
causing to be made or presented a false claim for workers’ compensation
benefits;
      (5)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false statement
concerning manual codes, classification or employees, payroll, paid
compensation or number of personnel, when information of that nature is
necessary to determine the actual workers’ compensation premium or assessment
owed to the Bureau by an employer;
      (6)   Alter, forge or create a workers’ compensation certificate or
falsely show current or correct workers’ compensation coverage;
      (7)   Fail to secure or maintain workers’ compensation coverage as
required by R.C. Chapter 4123 with the intent to defraud the Bureau of Workers’
Compensation.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of workers’ compensation
fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division, workers’ compensation
fraud is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of premiums and
assessments unpaid pursuant to actions described in division (a)(5), (a)(6) or
(a)(7) of this section, or goods, services, property or money stolen is $1,000
or more, workers’ compensation fraud is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (c)   Upon application of the governmental body that conducted the
investigation and prosecution of a violation of this section, the court shall
order the person who is convicted of the violation to pay the governmental body
its costs of investigating and prosecuting the case. These costs are in
addition to any other costs or penalty provided under federal, state or local
law.
   (d)   The remedies and penalties provided in this section are not exclusive
remedies and penalties and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or
civil remedy or penalty for any act that is in violation of this section.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Claim.” Any attempt to cause the Bureau of Workers’ Compensation,
an independent third party with whom the administrator or an employer contracts
under R.C. § 4121.44, or a self- insuring employer to make payment or
reimbursement for workers’ compensation benefits.
      (2)   “Employer,” “employee,” and “self-insuring employer.” Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 4123.01.
      (3)   “Employment.” Participating in any trade, occupation, business,
service or profession for substantial gainful remuneration.
      (4)   “False.” Wholly or partially untrue or deceptive.
      (5)   “Goods.” Includes but is not limited to medical supplies,
appliances, rehabilitative equipment and any other apparatus or furnishing
provided or used in the care, treatment or rehabilitation of a claimant for
workers’ compensation benefits.
      (6)   “Records.” Any medical, professional, financial or business record
relating to the treatment or care of any person, to goods or services provided
to any person, or to rates paid for goods or services provided to any person,
or any record that the administrator of workers’ compensation requires pursuant
to rule.
      (7)   “Remuneration.” Includes but is not limited to wages, commissions,
rebates and any other reward or consideration.
      (8)   “Services.” Includes but is not limited to any service provided by
any health care provider to a claimant for workers’ compensation benefits and
any and all services provided by the Bureau as part of workers’ compensation
insurance coverage.
      (9)   “Statement.” Includes but is not limited to any oral, written,
electronic, electronic impulse or magnetic communication notice, letter,
memorandum, receipt for payment, invoice, account, financial statement or bill
for services; a diagnosis, prognosis, prescription, hospital, medical or dental
chart or other record; and a computer generated document.
      (10)   “Workers’ compensation benefits.” Any compensation or benefits
payable under R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127 or 4131.
(R.C. § 2913.48) (Prior Code, § 642.31)
§ 642.36 MEDICAID FRAUD.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Provider.” Any person who has signed a provider agreement with the
Department of Medicaid to provide goods or services pursuant to the Medicaid
program or any person who has signed an agreement with a party to such a
provider agreement under which the person agrees to provide goods or services
that are reimbursable under the Medicaid program.
      (2)   “Provider agreement.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
      (3)   “Recipient.” Any individual who receives goods or services from a
provider under the Medicaid program.
      (4)   “Records.” Any medical, professional, financial or business records
relating to the treatment or care of any recipient, to goods or services
provided to any recipient, or to rates paid for goods or services provided to
any recipient, and any records that are required by the rules of the Medicaid
Director to be kept for the Medicaid program.
      (5)   “Statement or representation.” Any oral, written, electronic,
electronic impulse or magnetic communication that is used to identify an item
of goods or a service for which reimbursement may be made under the Medicaid
program or that states income and expense and is or may be used to determine a
rate of reimbursement under the Medicaid program.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a false or
misleading statement or representation for use in obtaining reimbursement from
the Medicaid program.
   (c)   No person, with purpose to commit fraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Contrary to the terms of the person’s provider agreement, charge,
solicit, accept or receive for goods or services that the person provides under
the Medicaid program any property, money or other consideration in addition to
the amount of reimbursement under the Medicaid program and the person’s
provider agreement for the goods or services and any cost-sharing expenses
authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted by the Medicaid Director
regarding the Medicaid program.
      (2)   Solicit, offer or receive any remuneration, other than any cost-
sharing expenses authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted by the Medicaid
Director regarding the Medicaid program, in cash or in kind, including but not
limited to a kickback or rebate, in connection with the furnishing of goods or
services for which whole or partial reimbursement is or may be made under the
Medicaid program.
   (d)   No person, having submitted a claim for or provided goods or services
under the Medicaid program, shall do either of the following for a period of at
least six years after a reimbursement pursuant to that claim, or a
reimbursement for those goods or services, is received under the Medicaid
program:
      (1)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records
that are necessary to fully disclose the nature of all goods or services for
which the claim was submitted, or for which reimbursement was received, by the
person; or
      (2)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records
that are necessary to disclose fully all income and expenditures upon which
rates of reimbursements were based for the person.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of Medicaid fraud. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, Medicaid fraud is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the value of the property, services or funds obtained in
violation of this section is $1,000 or more, Medicaid fraud is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (f)   Upon application of the governmental agency, office or other entity
that conducted the investigation and prosecution in a case under this section,
the court shall order any person who is convicted of a violation of this
section for receiving any reimbursement for furnishing goods or services under
the Medicaid program to which the person is not entitled to pay to the
applicant its cost of investigating and prosecuting the case. The costs of
investigation and prosecution that a defendant is ordered to pay pursuant to
this division shall be in addition to any other penalties for the receipt of
that reimbursement that are provided in this section, R.C. § 2913.40 or
5164.35, or any other provision of law.
   (g)   The provisions of this section are not intended to be exclusive
remedies and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for
any act that is in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 2913.40)
   (h)   Medicaid eligibility fraud.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following in an application
for enrollment in the Medicaid program or in a document that requires a
disclosure of assets for the purpose of determining eligibility for the
Medicaid program:
         A.   Make or cause to be made a false or misleading statement;
         B.   Conceal an interest in property;
         C.   1.   Except as provided in division (h)(1)C.2. of this section,
fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during the period
beginning 36 months before submission of the application or document and ending
on the date the application or document was submitted;
            2.   Fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during
the period beginning 60 months before submission of the application or document
and ending on the date the application or document was submitted and that was
made to an irrevocable trust a portion of which is not distributable to the
applicant for or recipient of Medicaid or to a revocable trust.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates this division (h) is guilty of Medicaid
eligibility fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation
of this division (h) is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the
Medicaid services paid as a result of the violation is $1,000 or more, a
violation of this division (h) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
         B.   In addition to imposing a sentence under division (h)(2)A. of
this section, the court shall order that a person who is guilty of Medicaid
eligibility fraud make restitution in the full amount of any Medicaid services
paid on behalf of an applicant for or recipient of Medicaid for which the
applicant or recipient was not eligible, plus interest at the rate applicable
to judgments on unreimbursed amounts from the date on which the Medicaid
services were paid to the date on which restitution is made.
         C.   The remedies and penalties provided in this division (h) are not
exclusive and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for
any act that is in violation of this division (h).
      (3)   This division (h) does not apply to a person who fully disclosed in
an application for Medicaid or in a document that requires a disclosure of
assets for the purpose of determining eligibility for Medicaid all of the
interests in property of the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid, all
transfers of property by the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid, and the
circumstances of all those transfers.
      (4)   Any amounts of Medicaid services recovered as restitution under
this division (h) and any interest on those amounts shall be credited to the
General Revenue Fund, and any applicable federal share shall be returned to the
appropriate agency or department of the United States.
      (5)   For the purpose of this division (h), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         A.   “Medicaid services.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
         B.   “Property.”Any real or personal property or other asset in which
a person has any legal title or interest.
(R.C. § 2913.401)
(Prior Code, § 642.32)
§ 642.37 MOTION PICTURE PIRACY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Audiovisual recording function” means the capability of a device
to record or transmit a motion picture or any part of a motion picture by means
of any technology existing on, or developed after, March 9, 2004.
      (2)   “Facility” means a movie theater.
   (b)   No person, without the written consent of the owner or lessee of the
facility and of the licensor of the motion picture, shall knowingly operate an
audiovisual recording function of a device in a facility in which the motion
picture is being shown.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of motion
picture piracy, a misdemeanor of the first degree on the first offense and a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
   (d)   This section does not prohibit or restrict a lawfully authorized
investigative, law enforcement, protective or intelligence gathering employee
or agent of the government of this state or a political subdivision of this
state, or of the federal government, when acting in an official capacity, from
operating an audiovisual recording function of a device in any facility in
which a motion picture is being shown.
   (e)   Division (b) of this section does not limit or affect the application
of any other prohibition in this code or the Ohio Revised Code. Any act that is
a violation of both division (b) of this section and another provision of this
code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, under the
other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code, or under both this
section and the other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code.
(R.C. § 2913.07) (Prior Code, § 642.33)
§ 642.38 RAILROAD VANDALISM; CRIMINAL TRESPASS; INTERFERENCE WITH OPERATION OF
TRAIN; GRADE CROSSING DEVICE VANDALISM.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any object
at, onto, or in the path of, any railroad rail, railroad track, locomotive,
engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company while such vehicle
is on a railroad track.
   (b)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall climb upon or into any
locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company when
it is on a railroad track.
   (c)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall disrupt, delay, or
prevent the operation of any train or other vehicle of a railroad company while
such vehicle is on a railroad track.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of railroad
vandalism. Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of criminal
trespass on a locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other railroad vehicle.
Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of interference with
the operation of a train. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
railroad vandalism; criminal trespass on a locomotive, engine, railroad car, or
other railroad vehicle; and interference with the operation of a train each is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of division (a), (b), or
(c) of this section causes serious physical harm to property or creates a
substantial risk of physical harm to any person, causes physical harm to any
person, or causes serious physical harm to any person, the violation is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.10)
   (e)   No person shall knowingly deface, damage, obstruct, remove, or
otherwise impair the operation of any railroad grade crossing warning signal or
other protective device, including any gate, bell, light, crossbuck, stop sign,
yield sign, advance warning sign, or advance pavement marking.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (e) of this section is guilty of railroad
grade crossing device vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
railroad grade crossing device vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the violation of division (e) of this section causes serious physical harm
to property or creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person,
causes physical harm to any person, or causes serious physical harm to any
person, railroad grade crossing device vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.101)
CHAPTER 648: PEACE DISTURBANCES
Section
648.01 Riot
648.02 Failure to disperse
648.03 Justifiable use of force to suppress riot
648.04 Disorderly conduct
648.05 Disturbing a lawful meeting
648.06 Misconduct at an emergency
648.07 Inducing panic
648.08 Making false alarms
648.09 Disturbing the peace
648.10 Inciting to violence
648.11 Impeding public passage of an emergency service responder
§ 648.01 RIOT.
   (a)   No person shall participate with four or more others in a course of
disorderly conduct in violation of R.C. § 2917.11 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance:
      (1)   With purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a
misdemeanor, other than disorderly conduct;
      (2)   With purpose to intimidate a public official or employee into
taking or refraining from official action, or with purpose to hinder, impede or
obstruct a function of government;
      (3)   With purpose to hinder, impede or obstruct the orderly process of
administration or instruction at an educational institution, or to interfere
with or disrupt lawful activities carried on at the institution.
   (b)   No person shall participate with four or more others with purpose to
do an act with unlawful force or violence, even though the act might otherwise
be lawful.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of riot, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 2917.03)
   (d)   For the purposes of prosecuting violations of this section, the
prosecution is not required to allege or prove that the offender expressly
agreed with four or more others to commit any act that constitutes a violation
this section prior to or while committing those acts.
(R.C. § 2917.031)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated riot, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2917.02
§ 648.02 FAILURE TO DISPERSE.
   (a)   Where five or more persons are participating in a course of disorderly
conduct in violation of R.C. § 2917.11 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, and there are other persons in the vicinity whose presence creates
the likelihood of physical harm to persons or property or of serious public
inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, a law enforcement officer or other public
official may order the participants and the other persons to disperse. No
person shall knowingly fail to obey the order.
   (b)   Nothing in this section requires persons to disperse who are peaceably
assembled for a lawful purpose.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to disperse.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(3) of this section,
failure to disperse is a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   Failure to disperse is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the
failure to obey the order described in division (a) of this section creates the
likelihood of physical harm to persons or is committed at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind.
(R.C. § 2917.04)
§ 648.03 JUSTIFIABLE USE OF FORCE TO SUPPRESS RIOT.
   A law enforcement officer or firefighter engaged in suppressing a riot or in
protecting persons or property during a riot:
   (a)   Is justified in using force, other than deadly force, when and to the
extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary to
disperse or apprehend rioters;
   (b)   Is justified in using force, including deadly force, when and to the
extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary to
disperse or apprehend rioters whose conduct is creating a substantial risk of
serious physical harm to persons.
(R.C. § 2917.05)
§ 648.04 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (a)   No person shall recklessly cause inconvenience, annoyance or alarm to
another, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Engaging in fighting, in threatening harm to persons or property,
or in violent or turbulent behavior;
      (2)   Making unreasonable noise or an offensively coarse utterance,
gesture or display, or communicating unwarranted and grossly abusive language
to any person;
      (3)   Insulting, taunting or challenging another, under circumstances in
which that conduct is likely to provoke a violent response;
      (4)   Hindering or preventing the movement of persons on a public street,
road, highway or right- of-way, or to, from, within or upon public or private
property, so as to interfere with the rights of others, and by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender;
      (5)   Creating a condition that is physically offensive to persons or
that presents a risk of physical harm to persons or property, by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender.
   (b)   No person while voluntarily intoxicated shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   In a public place or in the presence of two or more persons, engage
in conduct likely to be offensive or to cause inconvenience, annoyance or alarm
to persons of ordinary sensibilities, which conduct the offender, if he or she
were not intoxicated, should know is likely to have that effect on others;
      (2)   Engage in conduct or create a condition that presents a risk of
physical harm to himself, herself or another, or to the property of another.
   (c)   Violation of any statute or ordinance of which an element is operating
a motor vehicle, locomotive, watercraft, aircraft or other vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse is not a violation of division
(b) of this section.
   (d)   If a person appears to an ordinary observer to be intoxicated, it is
probable cause to believe that the person is voluntarily intoxicated for
purposes of division (b) of this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disorderly conduct.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (e)(2) and (e)(3) of this
section, disorderly conduct is a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Disorderly conduct is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if any of
the following applies:
         A.   The offender persists in disorderly conduct after reasonable
warning or request to desist.
         B.   The offense is committed in the vicinity of a school or in a
school safety zone.
         C.   The offense is committed in the presence of any law enforcement
officer, firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services
person or other authorized person who is engaged in the person’s duties at the
scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind.
         D.   The offense is committed in the presence of any emergency
facility person who is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility.
      (3)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to three or more violations of division (b) of this section, R.C. § 2917.11(B),
or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation
of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (f)   For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Committed in the vicinity of a school.” Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2925.01.
      (2)   “Emergency facility.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.04.
      (3)   “Emergency facility person.” The singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
      (4)   “Emergency medical services person.” The singular of “emergency
medical services personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
(R.C. § 2917.11)
§ 648.05 DISTURBING A LAWFUL MEETING.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting,
procession or gathering, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Do any act which obstructs or interferes with the due conduct of
the meeting, procession or gathering.
      (2)   Make any utterance, gesture or display which outrages the
sensibilities of the group.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disturbing a lawful
meeting. Except as otherwise provided in this division, disturbing a lawful
meeting is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Disturbing a lawful meeting is a
misdemeanor of the first degree if either of the following applies:
      (1)   The violation is committed with the intent to disturb or disquiet
any assemblage of people met for religious worship at a tax-exempt place of
worship, regardless of whether the conduct is within the place at which the
assemblage is held or is on the property on which that place is located and
disturbs the order and solemnity of the assemblage.
      (2)   The violation is committed with the intent to prevent, disrupt, or
interfere with a virtual meeting or gathering of people for religious worship,
through use of a computer, computer system, telecommunications device, or other
electronic device or system, or in any other manner.
   (c)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Computer.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (2)   “Computer system.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (3)   “Telecommunications device.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2913.01.
      (4)   “Virtual meeting or gathering.” A meeting or gathering by
interactive video conference or teleconference, or by a combination thereof.
(R.C. § 2917.12)
§ 648.06 MISCONDUCT AT AN EMERGENCY.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Hamper the lawful operations of any law enforcement officer,
firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services person or
other authorized person engaged in the person’s duties at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind;
      (2)   Hamper the lawful activities of any emergency facility person who
is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility;
      (3)   Fail to obey the lawful order of any law enforcement officer
engaged in the law enforcement officer’s duties at the scene of or in
connection with a fire, accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind.
   (b)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit access or deny
information to any news media representative in the lawful exercise of the news
media representative’s duties.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misconduct at an emergency.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, misconduct at an emergency is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If violation of this section creates a risk
of physical harm to persons or property, misconduct at an emergency is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Emergency facility.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.04.
      (2)   “Emergency facility person.” The singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
      (3)   “Emergency medical services person.” The singular of “emergency
medical services personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
(R.C. § 2917.13)
§ 648.07 INDUCING PANIC.
   (a)   No person shall cause the evacuation of any public place, or otherwise
cause serious public inconvenience or alarm, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Initiating or circulating a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false.
      (2)   Threatening to commit any offense of violence.
      (3)   Committing any offense, with reckless disregard of the likelihood
that its commission will cause serious public inconvenience or alarm.
   (b)   Division (a)(1) of this section does not apply to any person
conducting an authorized fire or emergency drill.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inducing panic.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(3), inducing panic is
a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If a violation of this section results in physical harm to any
person, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law. If a violation of this section results in economic harm of $1,000 or more,
inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the
public place involved in a violation of division (a)(1) is a school or an
institution of higher education, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law. If a violation of this section pertains to a
purported, threatened or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction, inducing
panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (d)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or this code of ordinances may be prosecuted under
this section, the other section, or both sections.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Biological agent.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2917.33.
      (2)   “Economic harm.” Any of the following:
         A.   All direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary harm suffered
by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. “Economic harm” as described
in this division includes but is not limited to all of the following:
            1.   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            2.   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            3.   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is
shut down as a result of the criminal conduct;
            4.   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
         B.   All costs incurred by the state or any political subdivision as a
result of, or in making any response to, the criminal conduct that constituted
the violation of this section or R.C. § 2917.32, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, including but not limited to all costs so
incurred by any law enforcement officers, firefighters, rescue personnel or
emergency medical services personnel of the state or the political subdivision.
      (3)   “Emergency medical services personnel.” Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2133.21.
      (4)   “Institution of higher education.” Any of the following:
         A.   A state university or college as defined in R.C. § 3345.12(A)(1),
community college, state community college, university branch or technical
college;
         B.   A private, nonprofit college, university or other post-secondary
institution located in this state that possesses a certificate of authorization
issued by the Ohio Board of Regents pursuant to R.C. Chapter 1713;
         C.   A post-secondary institution with a certificate of registration
issued by the State Board of Career Colleges and Schools pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 3332.
      (5)   “School.” Any school operated by a board of education or any school
for which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under R.C.
§ 3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities or
training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a violation of
this section is committed.
      (6)   “Weapon of mass destruction.” Any of the following:
         A.   Any weapon that is designed or intended to cause death or serious
physical harm through the release, dissemination or impact of toxic or
poisonous chemicals, or other precursors;
         B.   Any weapon involving a disease organism or biological agent;
         C.   Any weapon that is designed to release radiation or radioactivity
at a level dangerous to human life;
         D.   Any of the following, except to the extent that the item or
device in question is expressly excepted from the definition of “destructive
device” pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(4) and regulations issued under that
section:
            1.   Any explosive, incendiary or poison gas bomb, grenade, rocket
having a propellant charge of more than four ounces, missile having an
explosive or incendiary charge of more than one-quarter ounce, mine or similar
device;
            2.   Any combination of parts either designed or intended for use
in converting any item or device into any item or device described in division
D.1. of this definition and from which an item or device described in that
division may be readily assembled.
(R.C. § 2917.31)
§ 648.08 MAKING FALSE ALARMS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false and likely to cause public inconvenience or alarm.
      (2)   Knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be
transmitted to or within any organization, public or private, for dealing with
emergencies involving a risk of physical harm to persons or property.
      (3)   Report to any law enforcement agency an alleged offense or other
incident within its concern, knowing that the offense did not occur;
      (4)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false and likely to impede the operation of a critical
infrastructure facility.
   (b)   This section does not apply to any person conducting an authorized
fire or emergency drill.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making false alarms. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, making false alarms is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If a violation of this section results in economic harm of
$1,000 or more, making false alarms is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If a violation of this section pertains to a purported,
threatened, or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction, making false alarms
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (d)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or this code of ordinances may be prosecuted under
this section, the other section, or both sections.
   (e)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Critical infrastructure facility.” Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2911.21.
      (2)   “Economic harm” and “weapon of mass destruction.” Have the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2917.31.
(R.C. § 2917.32)
§ 648.09 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   (a)   No person shall disturb the good order and quiet of the municipality
by clamors or noises, intoxication, drunkenness, fighting, quarreling,
wrangling, committing assault or assault and battery, using obscene or profane
language in the streets and other public places to the annoyance of the
residents, or otherwise violate the public peace by indecent and disorderly
conduct or by lewd and lascivious behavior.
   (b)   Radios, sound-producing devices. No person shall play any radio, music
player such as a “boom box”, tape cassette, disc player, television, audio
system, musical instrument or any other type of sound device upon any public
road, street, highway or private property within the city in a manner or at a
volume as to disturb the peace, quiet, comfort or repose of other persons,
except where such playing is done as part of a city or school-sponsored or
permitted activity or event.
   (c)   Construction. The following acts, and the causing or permitting
thereof, are hereby declared to be violations of this section, but such
enumerations are neither deemed to be exclusive nor limited to: operating or
permitting the operation of any tools (other than domestic power tools or
equipment) used in construction, drilling or demolition work, between the hours
of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day, such that the sound creates a
noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary, except for
emergency work of public service utilities or by a special permit by the city.
   (d)   As used in the section, “noise” refers to any sound which:
      (1)   Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensibilities;
      (2)   Endangers or injures the safety or health of persons or animals; or
      (3)   Endangers or injures personal or real property.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 217-73, passed 12-28-1973; Ord. 132-08, passed 9-22-2008)
§ 648.10 INCITING TO VIOLENCE.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly engage in conduct designed to urge or incite
another to commit any offense of violence when either of the following apply:
      (1)   The conduct takes place under circumstances that create a clear and
present danger that any offense of violence will be committed.
      (2)   The conduct proximately results in the commission of any offense of
violence.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inciting to violence. If
the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or incited to
commit is a misdemeanor, inciting to violence is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or
incited to commit is a felony, inciting to violence is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2917.01)
§ 648.11 IMPEDING PUBLIC PASSAGE OF AN EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly obstruct any
highway, street, sidewalk, or any other public passage in such a manner as to
render the highway, street, sidewalk, or passage impassable without
unreasonable inconvenience or hazard if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The obstruction prevents an emergency vehicle from accessing a
highway or street, prevents an emergency service responder from responding to
an emergency, or prevents an emergency vehicle or an emergency service
responder from having access to an exit from an emergency.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a request or order from an emergency service
responder to remove or cease the obstruction, the person refuses to remove or
cease the obstruction.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not limit or affect the application
of R.C. § 2921.31 or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code. Any conduct
that is a violation of division (a) of this section and that also is a
violation of R.C. § 2921.31 or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code may
be prosecuted under this section, the other section of the Ohio Revised Code,
or both sections.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawfully impeding public
passage of an emergency service responder, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   As used in this section, “emergency service responder” has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2921.01.
(R.C. § 2917.14)
CHAPTER 660: SAFETY, SANITATION AND HEALTH
Section
660.01 Venting of heaters and burners
660.02 Spreading contagion
660.03 Littering
660.04 Noxious odors; filthy accumulations; polluting and diverting
watercourses
660.05 Duty to keep sidewalks in repair and clean
660.06 Abandoned refrigerators and airtight containers
660.07 Storage of junk vehicles
660.08 Open burning
660.09 Dangerous conditions; barricades and warning lights
660.10 Fire hydrants
660.11 Notice to fill lots, remove putrid substances
660.12 Transportation of noxious substances
660.13 Smoking in places of public assembly
660.14 Environmental emergencies
§ 660.01 VENTING OF HEATERS AND BURNERS.
   (a)   The use of a brazier, salamander, space heater, room heater, furnace,
water heater, or other burner or heater, using wood, coal, coke, fuel oil,
kerosene, gasoline, natural gas, liquid petroleum gas or similar fuel, and
tending to give off carbon monoxide or other harmful gases, must comply with
the following provisions;
      (1)   When used in living quarters, or in any enclosed building or space
in which persons are usually present, shall be used with a flue or vent so
designed, installed and maintained as to vent the products of combustion
outdoors; except in storage, factory or industrial buildings which are provided
with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide poisoning.
      (2)   When used as a portable or temporary burner or heater at a
construction site, or in a warehouse, shed or structure in which persons are
temporarily present, shall be vented as provided in division (a)(1) or used
with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide poisoning.
   (b)   This section does not apply to domestic ranges, laundry stoves, gas
logs installed in a fireplace with an adequate flue, or hot plates, unless the
same are used as space or room heaters.
   (c)   No person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in charge
or occupant of premises, negligently permit the use of a burner or heater in
violation of the standards for venting and ventilation provided in this
section.
   (d)   Division (a) above does not apply to any kerosene-fired space or room
heater that is equipped with an automatic extinguishing tip-over device, or to
any natural gas-fired or liquid petroleum gas-fired space or room heater that
is equipped with an oxygen depletion safety shut-off system, and that has its
fuel piped from a source outside the building in which it is located, that are
approved by an authoritative source recognized by the State Fire Marshal in the
State Fire Code adopted by him or her under R.C. § 3737.82.
   (e)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules to ensure the safe use of
unvented kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum gas heaters exempted from
division (a) above when used in assembly buildings, business buildings, high
hazard buildings, institutional buildings, mercantile buildings and type R-
1 and R-2 residential buildings, as these groups of buildings are defined in
rules adopted by the Board of Building Standards under R.C. § 3781.10. No
person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in charge or occupant
of premises, negligently permit the use of a heater in violation of any rules
adopted under this division.
   (f)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules prescribing standards for
written instructions containing ventilation requirements and warning of any
potential fire hazards that may occur in using a kerosene, natural gas or
liquid petroleum gas heater. No person shall sell or offer for sale any
kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum gas heater unless the manufacturer
provides with the heater written instructions that comply with any rules
adopted under this division.
   (g)   No product labeled as a fuel additive for kerosene heaters and having
a flash point below 100°F or 37.8°C shall be sold, offered for sale or used in
any kerosene space heater.
   (h)   No device that prohibits any safety feature on a kerosene, natural gas
or liquid petroleum gas space heater from operating shall be sold, offered for
sale or used in connection with any kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum
gas space heater.
   (i)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any kerosene-fired, natural gas
or liquid petroleum gas-fired heater that is not exempt from division (a)
above, unless it is marked conspicuously by the manufacturer on the container
with the phrase “Not Approved For Home Use.”
   (j)   No person shall use a cabinet-type, liquid petroleum gas-fired heater
having a fuel source within the heater, inside any building, except as
permitted by the State Fire Marshal in the State Fire Code adopted by him or
her under R.C. § 3737.82.
(R.C. § 3701.82)
   (k)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 3701.99(B))
§ 660.02 SPREADING CONTAGION.
   (a)   No person, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the
person has a dangerous, contagious disease, shall knowingly fail to take
reasonable measures to prevent exposing self to other persons, except when
seeking medical aid.
   (b)   No person, having charge or care of a person whom the person having
charge or care knows or has reasonable cause to believe has a dangerous,
contagious disease, shall recklessly fail to take reasonable measures to
protect others from exposure to the contagion, and to inform health authorities
of the existence of the contagion.
   (c)   No person, having charge of a public conveyance or place of public
accommodation, amusement, resort or trade, and knowing or having reasonable
cause to believe that persons using the conveyance or place have been or are
being exposed to a dangerous, contagious disease, shall negligently fail to
take reasonable measures to protect the public from exposure to the contagion,
and to inform health authorities of the existence of the contagion.
(R.C. § 3701.81)
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
(R.C. § 3701.99(C))
§ 660.03 LITTERING.
   (a)   No person shall place or dispose of in any manner any garbage, waste,
rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, furniture, glass, oil or anything
else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature, upon any lot or land in the city,
except upon land designated by ordinance, nor shall the same be placed or
disposed of along or near any public street or highway within the city. The
owner, lessee or manager of any premises shall have 15 days, after being
notified by the Police Department, to dispose of such garbage, refuse or junk.
Such notice by the Department and the 15-day grace period following thereafter
are not necessary in the case of a repeat or habitual offender under this
division.
   (b)   No person shall, regardless of intent, without lawful authority, place
or dispose of in any manner, or cause to be placed or disposed of in any
manner, upon any public real property or upon the real property of another, any
paper, trash, garbage, waste, rubbish, refuse, junk, animal excrement or any
substance or material which is or may become noxious, offensive, injurious or
dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare.
   (c)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree for a first offense. For a second offense
within one year after the first offense, such person is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the third degree. For a third offense within one year after the first
offense, such person is guilty of the misdemeanor of the second degree. The
penalty shall be as provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 78-80, passed 5-27-1980; Ord. 153-92, passed 10-12-1992; Ord. 25-2014,
passed 2-24-2014)
§ 660.04 NOXIOUS ODORS; FILTHY ACCUMULATIONS; POLLUTING AND DIVERTING
WATERCOURSES.
   (a)   No person shall erect, continue to use, or maintain a building,
structure or place for the exercise of a trade, employment, or business or for
keeping or feeding an animal which, by occasioning noxious exhalations or
noisome or offensive smells, becomes injurious to the health, comfort or
property of individuals or of the public.
   (b)   No person shall cause or allow offal, filth or noisome substances to
be collected or remain in any place to the damage or prejudice of others or of
the public.
   (c)   No person shall unlawfully obstruct or impede the passage of a
navigable river, harbor or collection of water, or corrupt or render
unwholesome or impure a watercourse, stream of water, or unlawfully divert such
watercourse from its natural course or state to the injury or prejudice of
others.
   (d)   Persons who are engaged in agriculture-related activities, as
“agriculture” is defined in R.C. §519.01, and who are conducting those
activities outside the municipality, in accordance with generally accepted
agricultural practices, and in such a manner so as not to have a substantial,
adverse effect on the public health, safety or welfare, are exempt from
divisions (a) and (b) above and from any ordinances, resolutions, rules, or
other enactments of the municipality that prohibit excessive noise.
(R.C. § 3767.13)
   (e)   For purposes of this section, “person” means a natural person,
corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other entity.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 3767.99(C))
(Ord. 25-2014, passed 2-24-2014)
§ 660.05 DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS IN REPAIR AND CLEAN.
   (a)   Cleaning and repairing sidewalks.
      (1)   No owner of any lot or land abutting upon any street or highway
shall refuse, fail or neglect to repair or keep in repair the sidewalk in front
of such lot or land after due notice ordering the repair of such sidewalk.
      (2)   If the owner or person having charge of such land fails to comply
with such notice, Council shall cause the sidewalk to be repaired. All expenses
and labor costs incurred shall, when approved by Council, be paid out of
municipal funds not otherwise appropriated. Council shall make a written return
to the County Auditor of its action, with a statement of the charges for the
services, the amount paid for labor, the fees of the officers serving such
notices and a proper description of the premises. Such amounts, when allowed,
shall be entered upon the tax duplicate and be a lien upon such lands from and
after the date of the entry and be collected as other taxes and returned to the
municipality with the General Fund.
   (b)   Encumbrances on streets and sidewalks. No person shall encumber any
street or sidewalk or, being the owner, occupant or person having care of any
building or lot of land bordering on any street or sidewalk, permit the same to
be encumbered with barrels, boxes, cans, articles or substances of any kind, so
as to interfere with the free and unobstructed use thereof.
   (c)   Injurious materials on sidewalks and playgrounds. No person shall
place or knowingly drop upon any part of a sidewalk or playground any tacks,
bottles, wire, glass, nails or other articles which may damage property of
another or injure any person or animal traveling along or upon such sidewalk or
playground.
   (d)   Protecting sidewalks. In the transportation of any goods, materials or
equipment across any sidewalk in the municipality, efficient temporary planking
shall be used to protect such sidewalks from breakage and such temporary
planking shall be removed at the close of each working day and the surface of
the sidewalk immediately cleaned and left in a passable condition.
   (e)   Defacing sidewalk pavement. No person shall walk on, or allow any
animal upon, or injure or deface in any way, any soft or newly laid sidewalk
pavement.
   (f)   Sidewalk sales or displays. No person shall use any street or sidewalk
area, including the lateral strip area between the street and sidewalk, for the
display or sale of merchandise or for any advertising display.
   (g)   Sidewalk openings. No person shall allow any cellar or trap door, coal
chute or elevator or lift opening in any sidewalk to remain open without
providing suitable safeguards to protect and warn pedestrian traffic of the
dangerous condition.
   (h)   Obstructions; nuisances. No owner of any lot or land abutting upon a
sidewalk located within a city street or roadway right-of-way shall fail to
keep such sidewalk free from snow, any nuisance or any obstruction.
   (i)   Penalty. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. The penalty shall
be as provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 239-87, passed 11-9-1987)
§ 660.06 ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS AND AIRTIGHT CONTAINERS.
   (a)   No person shall abandon, discard or knowingly permit to remain on
premises under the person’s control, in a place accessible to children, any
abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-airtight
container which has a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more and an
opening of 50 square inches or more and which has a door or lid equipped with a
hinge, latch or other fastening device capable of securing the door or lid,
without rendering the equipment harmless to human life by removing the hinges,
latches or other hardware which may cause a person to be confined therein. This
section shall not apply to an icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-
airtight container located in that part of a building occupied by a dealer,
warehouse or repairer.
(R.C. § 3767.29)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 3767.99(B))
§ 660.07 STORAGE OF JUNK VEHICLES.
   (a)   No person shall place, maintain or store, or permit to be placed,
maintained or stored, for more than 15 days, any motor vehicle, chassis or part
or remains of a motor vehicle, in a disabled condition, upon any lot or land in
the city, unless the same is within a completely enclosed building or garage.
As used in this section, “disabled” means a condition in which the vehicle
cannot be operated on public streets under its own power in compliance with
statutory or ordinance requirements. The 15-day grace period allowed in this
section shall not be granted in the case of a repeat or habitual offender under
this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for a
first offense, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree for a second offense and a
misdemeanor of the third degree for any subsequent offense. The penalty shall
be as provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 102-77, passed 8-22-1977)
§ 660.08 OPEN BURNING.
   (a)   (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         A.   “Agricultural waste.” Any waste material generated by crop,
horticultural, or livestock production practices, and includes such items as
woody debris and plant matter from stream flooding, bags, cartons, structural
materials, and landscape wastes that are generated in agricultural activities,
but does not include land clearing waste; buildings (including dismantled/
fallen barns); garbage; dead animals; animal waste; motor vehicles and parts
thereof; nor economic poisons and containers thereof, unless the manufacturer
has identified open burning as a safe disposal procedure.
         B.   “Air curtain burner.” An engineered apparatus consisting of a
motorized high-velocity fan and an air distribution system designed to aid in
the efficient combustion of materials placed in a manufactured steel structure
and for which a permit-to-install has been obtained as required in O.A.C.
Chapter 3745-31 and a permit-to-operate has been obtained as required in O.A.C.
Chapter 3745-77.
         C.   “Air curtain destructor.” An engineered apparatus consisting of a
motorized high- velocity fan and an air distribution system designed to aid in
the efficient combustion of materials placed in an adjacent pit. An air curtain
burner may be used in place of an air curtain destructor, but an air curtain
destructor may not be used in place of an air curtain burner.
         D.   “Building materials.” Those materials resulting from the
alteration, construction, destruction, rehabilitation, or repair of any human-
made physical structure, including, without limitation, houses, buildings,
industrial or commercial facilities, or roadways.
         E.   “Economic poisons.” Include but are not restricted to pesticides
such as insecticides, fungicides, rodenticides, miticides, nematocides and
fumigants; herbicides; seed disinfectants; and defoliants.
         F.   “Emergency burning.” The burning of clean wood waste or deceased
animals caused by a natural disaster or an uncontrolled event such as the
following:
            1.   A tornado.
            2.   High winds.
            3.   An earthquake.
            4.   An explosion.
            5.   A flood.
            6.   A hail storm, a rain storm, or an ice storm.
         G.   “Garbage.” Any waste material resulting from the handling,
processing, preparation, cooking and consumption of food or food products.
         H.   “Inhabited building.” Any inhabited private dwelling house and
any public structure which may be used as a place of resort, assembly,
education, entertainment, lodging, trade, manufacture, repair, storage,
traffic, or occupancy by the public. Examples would include, but are not
limited to, highway rest stops, restaurants, motels, hotels and gas stations.
         I.   “Land clearing waste.” Plant waste material which is removed from
land, including plant waste material removed from stream banks during projects
involving more than one property owner, for the purpose of rendering the land
useful for residential, commercial, or industrial development. Land clearing
waste also includes the plant waste material generated during the clearing of
land for new agricultural development.
         J.   “Landscape waste.” Any plant waste material, except garbage,
including trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves, grass,
shrubbery, yard trimmings, and crop residues.
         K.   “Ohio EPA.” The Ohio Environmental Protection Agency Director or
agencies delegated authority by the Director of the Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency pursuant to R.C. § 3704.03 or the Chief of any Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency District Office.
         L.   “Open burning.” The burning of any materials wherein air
contaminants resulting from combustion are emitted directly into the ambient
air without passing through a stack or chimney. Open burning includes the
burning of any refuse or salvageable material in any device not subject to or
designed specifically to comply with the requirements of O.A.C. 3745-17-09 or
O.A.C. 3745-17-10.
         M.   “Residential waste.” Any waste material, including landscape
waste, generated on the property of a one-, two- or three-family residence as a
result of residential activities, but not including garbage, rubber, grease,
asphalt, liquid petroleum products, or plastics.
         N.   “Restricted area.” The area within the boundary of the
municipality, plus a zone extending 1,000 feet beyond the boundaries of a
municipality having a population of 1,000 to 10,000 persons and a zone
extending one mile beyond any municipality having a population of 10,000
persons or more according to the latest federal census.
         O.   “Unrestricted area.” All areas outside the boundaries of a
restricted area as defined in this section.
      (2)   Referenced materials. This section includes references to certain
matter or materials. The text of the referenced materials is not included in
the legislation contained in this section. Information on the availability of
the referenced materials as well as the date of, and/or the particular edition
or version of the material is included in this section. For materials subject
to change, only the specific versions specified in this section are referenced.
Material is referenced as it exists on the effective date of this section.
Except for subsequent annual publication of existing (unmodified) Code of
Federal Regulation compilations, any amendment or revision to a referenced
document is not applicable unless and until this section has been amended to
specify the new dates.
         A.   Availability. The referenced materials are available as follows:
            1.   Clean Air Act. Information and copies may be obtained by
writing to: Superintendent of Documents, Attn: New Orders, PO Box 371954,
Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. The full text of the act as amended in 1990 is also
available in electronic format at www.epa.gov/oar/caa/. A copy of the act is
also available for inspection and use at most public libraries and the State
Library of Ohio.
            2.   Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.). Information and copies
may be obtained by writing to: Superintendent of Documents, Attn: New Orders,
PO Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. The full text of the C.F.R. is also
available in electronic format at http://www.ecfr.gov. The C.F.R. compilations
are also available for inspection and use at most public libraries and the
State Library of Ohio.
            3.   National Fire Protection Association. Information on the
National Fire Protection Association codes may be obtained by contacting the
Association at 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02169-7471, 617-770-
3000. Codes may be ordered at www.nfpa.org/catalog/home/index.asp. Copies of
the code exist or are available at most public libraries and the State Library
of Ohio.
         B.   Referenced materials.
            1.   40 C.F.R. § 60.2974: “Am I required to apply for and obtain a
title V operating permit for my air curtain incinerator that burns only wood
waste, clean lumber, and yard waste?” as published in the July 1, 2017 Code of
Federal Regulations.
            2.   40 C.F.R. § 60.3069: “Am I required to apply for and obtain a
title V operating permit for my air curtain incinerator that burns only wood
waste, clean lumber, and yard waste?” as published in the July 1, 2017 Code of
Federal Regulations.
            3.   NFPA publication 1403: “Standard on Live Fire Training
Evolutions, Chapter 4, Acquired Structures” published April 30, 2007.
            4.   Section 129 of the Clean Air Act, contained in 42 U.S.C. §
7429: “Solid waste combustion” published January 6, 2017 in Supplement IV of
the 2012 Edition of the United States Code.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-01)
   (b)   Relation to other laws.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any provision in O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19, no open
burning shall be conducted in an area where an air alert, warning or emergency
under O.A.C. Chapter 3745-25 is in effect.
      (2)   No provisions of O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19 permitting open burning,
and no permission to open burn granted by the Ohio EPA, shall exempt any person
from compliance with any section of the Ohio Revised Code, or any regulation of
any state department, or any local ordinance or regulation dealing with open
burning.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-02)
   (c)   Open burning in restricted areas.
      (1)   No person or property owner shall cause or allow open burning in a
restricted area except as provided in divisions (c)(2) to (c)(4) of this
section or in R.C. § 3704.11.
      (2)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes without
notification to or permission from the Ohio EPA:
         A.   Heating tar, welding, acetylene torches, highway safety flares,
heating for warmth of outdoor workers and strikers, smudge pots and similar
occupational needs.
         B.   Bonfires, campfires and outdoor fireplace equipment, whether for
cooking food for human consumption, pleasure, religious, ceremonial, warmth,
recreational or similar purposes, if the following conditions are met:
            1.   They are fueled with clean seasoned firewood, natural gas or
equivalent, or any clean burning fuel with emissions that are equivalent to or
lower than those created from the burning of seasoned firewood;
         2.   They are not used for waste disposal purposes; and
            3.   They shall have a total fuel area of three feet or less in
diameter and two feet or less in height.
         C.   Disposal of hazardous explosive materials, military munitions or
explosive devices that require immediate action to prevent endangerment of
human health, public safety, property or the environment and that are excluded
from the requirement to obtain a hazardous waste permit pursuant to O.A.C.
3745-50-45(D)(1)(d).
         D.   Recognized training in the use of fire extinguishers for
commercial or industrial fire prevention.
         E.   Fires set at the direction of federal, state, and local law
enforcement officials for the purpose of destruction of cannabis sativa
(marihuana) plant vegetation, processed marihuana material and/or other drugs
seized by federal, state, or local law enforcement officials.
         F.   Fires allowed by divisions (c)(2)A., (c)(2)B. and (c)(2)D. of
this section shall not be used for waste disposal purposes and shall be of
minimum size sufficient for their intended purpose; the fuel shall be chosen to
minimize the generation and emission of air contaminants.
      (3)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes with prior
notification to the Ohio EPA in accordance with division (d)(2) of this
section:
         A.   Prevention or control of disease or pests, with written or oral
verification to the Ohio EPA from the Ohio Department of Health or local health
department, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, cooperative
extension service, Ohio Department of Agriculture or U.S. Department of
Agriculture, that open burning is the only appropriate disposal method.
         B.   Bonfires or campfires used for ceremonial purposes that do not
meet the requirements of division (c)(2)B. of this section, provided the
following conditions are met:
            1.   They have a total fuel area no greater than five feet in
diameter by five feet in height and burn no longer than three hours;
            2.   They are not used for waste disposal purposes; and
            3.   They are fueled with clean seasoned firewood, natural gas or
equivalent, or any clean burning fuel with emissions that are equivalent to or
lower than those created from the burning of seasoned firewood.
         C.   Disposal of agricultural waste generated on the premises if the
following conditions are observed:
            1.   The fire is set only when atmospheric conditions will readily
dissipate contaminants;
            2.   The fire does not create a visibility hazard on the roadways,
railroad tracks or air fields;
            3.   The fire is located at a point on the premises no less than
1,000 feet from any inhabited building not located on the premises;
            4.   The wastes are stacked and dried to provide the best
practicable condition for efficient burning; and
            5.   No materials are burned which contain rubber, grease, asphalt,
liquid petroleum products, plastics or building materials.
         D.   Recognized horticultural, silvicultural (forestry), range
management, prairie and grassland management, invasive species management, or
wildlife management practices, if all of the following conditions are met:
            1.   The fire shall be performed within 180 days of submitting the
notification.
            2.   The fire shall be performed when it is anticipated weather
conditions will minimize the dispersion of smoke near populated areas and the
smoke does not create a visibility hazard on roadways, railroad tracks, or air
fields. Smoke dispersion conditions shall be evaluated before, during, and
after the fire and actions taken to minimize smoke impacts.
            3.   The person making the notification shall notify the local fire
department having jurisdiction over the burn area at least 24 hours before the
fire is anticipated to occur.
            4.   The person making the notification shall provide reasonable
notification to populations potentially impacted by the smoke before the fire
occurs. Populations potentially impacted shall include, at a minimum, those
within one-quarter mile of the burn site. Reasonable notification shall include
one of the following:
               a.   Posting notice of intent to burn, including contact
information for the person making the notification and the anticipated date
that the fire will occur, within open view from a public roadway adjacent to
and outside of the property on which the fire will occur.
               b.   Posting a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in
the local community in which the fire will occur. The notice shall include, at
a minimum, the address of the property at which the fire will occur, contact
information for the person making the notification and the anticipated date
that the fire will occur.
               c.   Delivering written notice directly to residences and
businesses within a minimum of one-quarter mile of the burn site. Notices shall
include, at a minimum, the address of the property at which the fire will
occur, contact information for the person making the notification and the
anticipated date that the fire will occur.
            5.   The person making the notification shall document information
on the weather, smoke conditions, any air quality concerns before, during, and
after the fire, the actual number of acres burned, the time the fire was
initially kindled, the time when active kindling ceased and the time at which
mop up activities ceased. The person making the notification shall maintain
this information for a minimum of one year from the date of the fire and shall
provide this information to the appropriate Ohio EPA district office or local
air agency within ten days upon request.
            6.   Reasonable access to the burn site shall be provided to Ohio
EPA representatives at any time during the fire.
      (4)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes upon
receipt of written permission from the Ohio EPA, in accordance with division
(d)(1) of this section, provided that any conditions specified in the
permission are followed:
         A.   Disposal of ignitable or explosive materials where the Ohio EPA
determines that there is no practical alternate method of disposal, excluding
those materials identified in division (c)(2)C. of this section;
         B.   Instruction in methods of fire fighting or for research in the
control of fires as recognized by the State Fire Marshal Division of the Ohio
Department of Commerce and the guidelines set forth in the National Fire
Protection Association’s (NFPA) publication 1403, Standard on Live Fire
Training Evolutions, Chapter 4, Acquired Structures, provided that the
application required in division (d)(1)A. of this section is submitted by the
commercial or public entity responsible for the instruction;
         C.   In emergency or other extraordinary circumstances for any purpose
determined to be necessary by the Director and performed as identified in the
appendix to O.A.C. § 3745-19-03. If deemed necessary, the open burning may be
authorized with prior oral approval by the Director followed by the issuance of
a written permission to open burn within seven working days of the oral
approval;
         D.   Fires or pyrotechnic effects, for purposes other than waste
disposal, set as part of commercial film-making or video production activities
for motion pictures and television.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-03)
   (d)   Permission to individuals and notification to the Ohio EPA.
      (1)   Permission.
         A.   An application for permission to open burn shall be submitted in
writing to Ohio EPA. The applicant shall allow Ohio EPA at least ten working
days to review the permit. Applicant may proceed with burn upon receipt of
written permission from Ohio EPA. Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays shall
not be considered working days. The application shall be in such form and
contain such information as required by the Ohio EPA.
         B.   Except as provided in divisions (d)(1)F. and (d)(1)G. of this
section, the applications shall contain, as a minimum, the following
information:
            1.   The purpose of the proposed burning;
            2.   The quantity or acreage and the nature of the materials to be
burned;
            3.   The date or dates when the burning will take place;
            4.   The location of the burning site, including a map showing
distances to residences, populated areas, roadways, air fields and other
pertinent landmarks; and
            5.   The methods or actions which will be taken to reduce the
emissions of air contaminants.
         C.   Permission to open burn shall not be granted unless the applicant
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Ohio EPA that open burning is necessary
to the public interest; will be conducted in a time, place and manner as to
minimize the emission of air contaminants, when atmospheric conditions are
appropriate; and will have no serious detrimental effect upon adjacent
properties or the occupants thereof. The Ohio EPA may impose such conditions as
may be necessary to accomplish the purpose of O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19.
         D.   Except as provided in division (d)(1)F. of this section,
permission to open burn must be obtained for each specific project. In
emergencies where public health or environmental quality will be seriously
threatened by delay while written permission is sought, the fire may be set
with oral permission of the Ohio EPA.
         E.   Violations of any of the conditions set forth by the Ohio EPA in
granting permission to open burn shall be grounds for revocation of that
permission and refusal to grant future permission, as well as for the
imposition of other sanctions provided by law.
         F.   The Ohio Department of Commerce, Division of State Fire Marshal,
may request permission to open burn on an annual basis for the purpose of
training firefighters on pre-flashover conditions using the Ohio Fire Academy’s
mobile training laboratory at either the academy or at other training sites in
Ohio. The annual application required pursuant to division (d)(1)A. of this
section shall contain information as required in division (d)(1)B. of this
section, except the information required in divisions (d)(1)B.3. and (d)(1)B.4.
of this section need not be provided unless it is available at the time of
submittal of the application. The Academy shall contact the appropriate Ohio
EPA District Office or local air agency at least five working days before each
training session of the date or dates when the training session will take place
and its location. Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays shall not be considered a
working day.
         G.   For open burning defined under division (c)(4)B. of this section
and O.A.C. 3745-19-04(C)(2), permission to open burn shall not be granted
unless the applicant provides proof of written notice of intent to demolish
received by the appropriate Ohio EPA field office in accordance with O.A.C.
3745-20-03.
      (2)   Notification.
         A.   Notification shall be submitted in writing at least ten working
days before the fire is to be set. Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays shall
not be considered a working day. It shall be in such form and contain such
information as shall be required by the Ohio EPA.
         B.   Such notification shall inform the Ohio EPA regarding the
following:
            1.   The purpose of the proposed burning;
            2.   The nature and quantities of materials to be burned;
            3.   The date or dates when the burning will take place; and
            4.   The location of the burning site.
         C.   The Ohio EPA, after receiving notification, may determine that
the open burning is not allowed under O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19 and the Ohio EPA
shall notify the applicant to this effect.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-05)
   (e)   Penalty. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. In addition, the
offender shall be required to pay the cost of proper disposal of the materials
burned. The cost of proper disposal of the materials burned shall be the amount
it would have cost to dispose of the materials in a manner that is consistent
with the air, water and solid waste laws, ordinances and regulations of the
municipality and the state.
§ 660.09 DANGEROUS CONDITIONS; BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.
   (a)   No property owner, tenant or person having control of property within
the municipality, directly or indirectly, shall create or allow dangerous
conditions to exist on his or her premises. “Dangerous conditions,” as used in
this section, means any open, unguarded or unprotected excavation or building
which, when abandoned or left open or otherwise unprotected, will likely prove
dangerous to life or limb, or an abandoned, open, uncovered or otherwise
unprotected well, cesspool, cistern or catch basin.
   (b)   No contractor or other person shall leave unprotected, unguarded or
without proper lighting any hole, excavation, pile or dirt, truck, equipment or
other material in any of the streets of the municipality.
   (c)   No person shall remove any red, amber or other lantern, any barricade
or other means placed on any public way or construction project, public or
private, as a warning or protection for the public. No person shall purposely,
knowingly, recklessly or negligently destroy or injure such lantern, barricade
or other means of warning or protection.
   (d)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 1233, passed 11-24-1958; Ord. 94-74, passed 6-10-1974)
§ 660.10 FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (a)   No person shall place or cause to be placed any building material or
other obstruction within ten feet of any fire hydrant.
   (b)   No person, unless duly authorized to do so and except in case of fire,
shall open, tamper with or use water from any hydrant.
   (c)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 1233, passed 11-24-1958; Ord. 94-74, passed 6-10-1974)
§ 660.11 NOTICE TO FILL LOTS, REMOVE PUTRID SUBSTANCES.
   (a)   No person shall fail to comply with the following requirements within
the lawful time after service or publication of the notice or resolution is
made as required by law: to fill or drain any lot or land or remove all putrid
substances therefrom, or remove all obstructions from culverts, covered drains
or natural watercourses as provided in R.C. § 715.47.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 660.12 TRANSPORTATION OF NOXIOUS SUBSTANCES.
   (a)   No person shall carry, or cause to be carried, in any vehicle, upon
the public streets, highways and alleys of the city, any substance or material
which by its nature or condition gives off noxious or offensive odors, fumes,
smoke or gases.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, “person” means a natural person,
corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other entity.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Prior Code, § 660.13) (Ord. 1233, passed 11-24-1958; Ord. 94-74, passed 6-10-
1974; Ord. 25-2014, passed 2-24-2014)
§ 660.13 SMOKING IN PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY.
   (a)   As used in this section, “place of public assembly” means:
      (1)   Enclosed theaters, except the lobby; opera houses; auditoriums;
classrooms; elevators; rooms in which persons are confined as a matter of
health care, including, but not limited to, a hospital room and a room in a
residential care facility serving as the residence of a person living in the
residential care facility.
      (2)   All buildings and other enclosed structures owned by the state, its
agencies, or political subdivisions, including, but not limited to, hospitals
and state institutions for persons with mental illnesses and persons with
intellectual disabilities; university and college buildings, except rooms
within those buildings used primarily as the residences of students or other
persons affiliated with the university or college; office buildings; libraries;
museums; and vehicles used in public transportation. That portion of a building
or other enclosed structure that is owned by the state, a state agency or a
political subdivision, and that is used primarily as a food service
establishment, is not a place of public assembly.
      (3)   Each portion of a building or enclosed structure that is not
included in division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is a place of public
assembly if it has a seating capacity of 50 or more persons and is available to
the public. Restaurants, food service establishments, dining rooms, cafes,
cafeterias or other rooms used primarily for the service of food, as well as
bowling alleys and places licensed by the Ohio Division of Liquor Control to
sell intoxicating beverages for consumption on the premises, are not places of
public assembly.
   (b)   For the purpose of separating persons who smoke from persons who do
not smoke for the comfort and health of persons not smoking, in every place of
public assembly there shall be an area where smoking is not permitted, which
shall be designated a no smoking area, provided that not more than one-half of
the rooms in any health care facility in which persons are confined as a matter
of health care may be designated as smoking areas in their entirety. The
designation shall be made before the place of public assembly is made available
to the public. In places included in division (a)(1) of this section, the local
fire authority having jurisdiction shall designate the no smoking area. In
places included in division (a)(2) of this section that are owned by the state
or its agencies, the Ohio Director of Administrative Services shall designate
the area, and if the place is owned by a political subdivision, its legislative
authority shall designate an officer who shall designate the area. In places
included in division (a)(3) of this section, the person having control of the
operations of the place of public assembly shall designate the no smoking area.
In places included in division (a)(2) of this section which are also included
in division (a)(1) of this section, the officer who has authority to designate
the area in places in division (a)(2) of this section shall designate the no
smoking area. A no smoking area may include the entire place of public
assembly. Designations shall be made by the placement of signs that are clearly
visible and that state “no smoking.” No person shall remove signs from areas
designated as no smoking areas.
   (c)   This section does not affect or modify the prohibition contained in
R.C. § 3313.751(B).
   (d)   No person shall smoke in any area designated as a no smoking area in
accordance with division (b) of this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3791.031) (Prior Code, § 660.14)
§ 660.14 ENVIRONMENTAL EMERGENCIES.
   (a)   The Fire Chief is hereby designated as the Emergency Hazardous
Material Manager.
   (b)   It shall henceforth be the practice and policy of the city, when an
emergency action is required to protect the public health or safety or the
environment, to charge any person responsible for causing or allowing an
unauthorized spill, release or discharge of material into or upon the
environment for the necessary and reasonable additional or extraordinary costs
the city incurs in investigating, mitigating, minimizing, removing or abating
the spill, release or discharge in the course of an emergency action, provided
the criteria and methods prescribed under 40 C.F.R. 300, as amended, are
utilized and adhered to.
   (c)   The city hereby adopts the cost recovery plan and training procedures
adopted by the County Emergency Management Agency and declares its intention to
implement the same.
(Prior Code, § 660.15) (Ord. 88-89, passed 5-22-1989)
CHAPTER 662: NUISANCE PROPERTIES
Section
662.01 Definition of nuisance property
662.02 Initiation of nuisance declaration process
662.03 Nuisance declaration
662.04 Appeal
662.05 Calculation of costs
662.06 Other remedies
§ 662.01 DEFINITION OF NUISANCE PROPERTY.
   (a)   The following activities occurring either on residential or commercial
property, or within 1,000 feet of the property line of residential or
commercial property, and engaged in by an owner, or the owner’s agent, or the
owner’s lessee, occupant, invitee or the person or entity in charge of such
residential or commercial property (including individual apartment and
condominium units) are hereby declared to be public nuisances and are
hereinafter referred to as “Nuisance Activities” and individually as a
“Nuisance Activity”:
      (1)   MISDEMEANOR NUISANCE ACTIVITY. Any conduct, activity, violation or
offense that is a misdemeanor under either this code of ordinances or the Ohio
Revised Code.
      (2)   FELONY NUISANCE ACTIVITY. Any conduct, activity, violation or
offense that is a felony under the Ohio Revised Code.
   (b)   For purposes of this chapter, the occurrence of a nuisance activity
means either a citation has been issued, or an arrest has been made, or a
conviction has been obtained, or a City Department or Administrator, including,
but not limited to, Police, Fire, Zoning, Building or Public Works, has
documented the activity in lieu of arrest or citation.
(Ord. 54-2015, passed 4-13-2015)
§ 662.02 INITIATION OF NUISANCE DECLARATION PROCESS.
   The Safety Director or his or her designee, upon finding that two or more
misdemeanor nuisance activities or any one felony nuisance activity have
occurred within a 12-month period, may cause a written notice (the “warning
notice”) to be served on the owner of the property. The warning notice shall
state that if a third misdemeanor nuisance activity or any additional felony
nuisance activity occurs within a 12-month period of the first nuisance
activity, such property may be declared a nuisance property. The warning notice
shall describe the nature of the nuisance activities and shall further state
that the city may assess the costs of responding to and/or abating a nuisance
activity on a property declared a nuisance property on the nuisance property.
The warning notice shall be served pursuant to the Ohio Rules of Civil
Procedure.
(Ord. 54-2015, passed 4-13-2015)
§ 662.03 NUISANCE DECLARATION.
   If a third misdemeanor nuisance activity or an additional felony nuisance
activity occurs after service of a warning notice and within 12 months after
the first nuisance activity described in the warning notice, then the Safety
Director or his or her designee may declare the property to be a “nuisance
property” under this chapter by serving notice of such declaration (the
“declaration notice”) to the owner of the nuisance property. Once a property
has been declared a nuisance property, the cost of responding to and/or abating
any additional nuisance activity may be assessed on the nuisance property. The
costs shall be calculated as set forth in §
662.05. The city shall provide notice to the owner of the nuisance property to
pay the costs of response or abatement at least 30 days before such costs are
certified to the County Auditor for assessment against the nuisance property,
and such notice shall contain a description of the nuisance activity that is
the basis for the notice of intent to assess the nuisance property, and the
costs to respond and/or abate. If the costs are not paid within 30 days of the
mailing of the notice, such amount may be certified to the County Auditor for
collection as other taxes and assessments are collected, or the city may seek
recovery of such costs by civil action. Notice shall be served pursuant to the
Ohio Rules of Civil Procedure.
(Ord. 54-2015, passed 4-13-2015)
§ 662.04 APPEAL.
   (a)   The owner of a nuisance property who receives a declaration notice may
appeal such notice by submitting to the Safety Director within 30 days of the
date of the declaration notice a written request that the declaration notice be
rescinded. The Safety Director or his or her designee shall deny the request to
rescind if he or she determines that a preponderance of the evidence shows that
each nuisance activity stated in the declaration notice has occurred, and that
the declaration of the property as a nuisance property is justified. If a
nuisance activity has been evidenced by a criminal conviction, then it shall be
per se proof that the nuisance activity has occurred.
   (b)   The declaration of the property as a nuisance property shall not be
justified if the owner demonstrates by a preponderance of evidence that:
      (1)   He or she was not the owner at the time of any nuisance activity
that is a basis of the declaration notice;
      (2)   He or she had knowledge of the nuisance activity, but has promptly
and vigorously taken all actions necessary to abate each nuisance activity
including, without limitation, compliance with the requirements of R.C. §§
5321.04(A)(9) and 5321.17(C); or
      (3)   He or she had no knowledge of the nuisance activity and could not
with reasonable care and diligence, have known of the nuisance activity; and
upon receipt of the notice of the declaration notice, he or she promptly took
all actions necessary to abate the nuisance including without limitation,
compliance with the requirements of R.C. §§ 5321.04(A)(9) and 5321.17(C).
   (c)   The failure of the Safety Director or his or her designee to rescind
the declaration notice or deny the request to rescind within 20 days after
receipt of the request to rescind shall constitute a denial of the request to
rescind the declaration notice. Any such appeal shall not stay any action by
the city to abate any nuisance activity.
(Ord. 54-2015, passed 4-13-2015)
§ 662.05 CALCULATION OF COSTS.
   Costs of response and abatement shall be the actual cost based upon expenses
and the hourly wage of any personnel involved in the response to or abatement
of the nuisance activity.
(Ord. 54-2015, passed 4-13-2015)
§ 662.06 OTHER REMEDIES.
   The declaration of a nuisance property, an order to abate a nuisance, or the
assessment of costs by the city on a nuisance property, does not affect or
limit the city’s right or authority to bring criminal prosecution or other
legal action against any person for violation of the city’s ordinances. The
remedies provided in this chapter are not in limitation of any other remedies
the city may have.
(Ord. 54-2015, passed 4-13-2015)
CHAPTER 666: SEX RELATED OFFENSES
Section
666.01 Definitions
666.02 Unlawful sexual conduct with a minor
666.03 Sexual imposition
666.04 Public indecency
666.05 Voyeurism
666.06 Polygraph examinations for victims: restrictions on use
666.07 Procuring
666.08 Soliciting
666.09 Loitering to engage in solicitation
666.10 Prostitution
666.11 Rules of evidence
666.12 Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles
666.13 Displaying matter harmful to juveniles
666.14 Deception to obtain matter harmful to juveniles
666.15 Presumptions; notice
666.16 Declaratory judgment
666.17 Injunction; abatement of nuisance
666.18 Unlawful operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct
666.19 Juveniles on the premises of adult entertainment establishments
prohibited
666.20 Sexually oriented businesses; illegal operation and activity
666.21 Unlawful advertising of massage
666.22 Nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images
666.23 Grooming
 
666.98 Prohibition of certain sexually oriented offenders from residing within
1,000 feet of schools and parks
666.99 Sentencing for sexually oriented offenses; sexual predators;
registration
§ 666.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HARMFUL TO JUVENILES. That quality of any material or performance describing
or representing nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sado-masochistic
abuse in any form to which all of the following apply:
      (1)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, appeals to
the prurient interest of juveniles in sex.
      (2)   The material or performance is patently offensive to prevailing
standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable
for juveniles.
      (3)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, lacks
serious literary, artistic, political and scientific value for juveniles.
   JUVENILE. Any unmarried person under 18 years of age.
   LICENSED MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL. Any of the following medical professionals:
      (1)   A physician assistant licensed under R.C. Chapter 4730;
      (2)   A physician authorized under R.C. Chapter 4731 to practice medicine
and surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, or podiatric medicine and
surgery;
      (3)   A massage therapist licensed under R.C. Chapter 4731.
   MATERIAL. Any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print, picture,
figure, image, description, motion picture film, video cassette, laser disc,
phonograph record, cassette tape, compact disc or other tangible thing capable
of arousing interest through sight, sound or touch and includes an image or
text appearing on a computer monitor, television screen, liquid crystal display
or similar display device or an image or text recorded on a computer hard disk,
computer floppy disk, compact disk, magnetic tape or similar data storage
device.
   MENTAL HEALTH CLIENT OR PATIENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.51.
   MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.115.
   MINOR. A person under the age of 18.
   NUDITY. The showing, representation or depiction of human male or female
genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a full, opaque covering, or of
a female breast with less than a full, opaque covering of any portion thereof
below the top of the nipple, or of covered male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state.
   OBSCENE. When considered as a whole, and judged with reference to ordinary
adults or, if it is designed for sexual deviates or other specially susceptible
group, judged with reference to that group, any material or performance is
“obscene” if any of the following apply:
      (1)   Its dominant appeal is to prurient interest.
      (2)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement or nudity in a way that tends
to represent human beings as mere objects of sexual appetite.
      (3)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
bestiality or extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty or brutality.
      (4)   Its dominant tendency is to appeal to scatological interest by
displaying or depicting human bodily functions of elimination in a way that
inspires disgust or revulsion in persons with ordinary sensibilities, without
serving any genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral or artistic
purpose.
      (5)   It contains a series of displays or descriptions of sexual
activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, nudity, bestiality, extreme or
bizarre violence, cruelty or brutality, or human bodily functions of
elimination, the cumulative effect of which is a dominant tendency to appeal to
prurient or scatological interest, when the appeal to such an interest is
primarily for its own sake or for commercial exploitation, rather than
primarily for a genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral or
artistic purpose.
   PERFORMANCE. Any motion picture, preview, trailer, play, show, skit, dance
or other exhibition performed before an audience.
   PLACE WHERE A PERSON HAS A REASONABLE EXPECTATION OF PRIVACY. A place where
a reasonable person would believe that the person could fully disrobe in
private.
   PRIVATE AREA. The genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or female breast below the
top of the areola, where nude or covered by an undergarment.
   PROSTITUTE. A male or female who promiscuously engages in sexual activity
for hire, regardless of whether the hire is paid to the prostitute or to
another.
   SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person or the
condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained.
SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Sexual conduct or sexual contact, or both.
   SEXUAL CONDUCT. Vaginal intercourse between a male and female; anal
intercourse, fellatio and cunnilingus between persons regardless of sex; and,
without privilege to do so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of the
body or any instrument, apparatus or other object into the vaginal or anal
opening of another. Penetration, however slight, is sufficient to complete
vaginal or anal intercourse.
   SEXUAL CONTACT. Any touching of an erogenous zone of another, including
without limitation the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or, if the
person is a female, a breast, for the purpose of sexually arousing or
gratifying either person.
   SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals when in a
state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   SPOUSE. A person married to an offender at the time of an alleged offense,
except that the person shall not be considered the spouse when any of the
following apply:
      (1)   When the parties have entered into a written separation agreement
pursuant to R.C. § 3103.06.
      (2)   When an action is pending between the parties for annulment,
divorce, dissolution of marriage or legal separation.
      (3)   In the case of an action for legal separation, after the effective
date of the judgment for legal separation.
(R.C. § 2907.01)
§ 666.02 UNLAWFUL SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH A MINOR.
   (a)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in sexual
conduct with another when the offender knows the other person is 13 years of
age or older but less than 16 years of age, or the offender is reckless in that
regard.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful sexual conduct
with a minor.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2), unlawful sexual
conduct with a minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(3) of this section, if
the offender is less than four years older than the other person, unlawful
sexual conduct with a minor is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03 or 2907.04, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of former R.C. § 2907.12, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, unlawful sexual conduct with a
minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.04)
§ 666.03 SEXUAL IMPOSITION.
   (a)   No person shall have sexual contact with another; cause another to
have sexual contact with the offender; or cause two or more other persons to
have sexual contact when the offender knows that the sexual contact is
offensive to the other person, or one of the other persons, or is reckless in
that regard.
   (b)   No person shall be convicted of a violation of this section solely
upon the victim’s testimony unsupported by other evidence.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of sexual imposition, a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section, R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03,
2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, former R.C. § 2907.12, or a substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section, R.C. § 2907.02,
2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, former R.C. § 2907.12, or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any combination of those
sections, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree and,
notwithstanding the range of jail terms prescribed in R.C. § 2929.24, the court
may impose on the offender a definite jail term of not more than one year.
(R.C. § 2907.06)
Statutory reference:
   Gross sexual imposition, felony, see R.C. § 2907.05
   Notice to licensing board or agency upon indictment, conviction or guilty
plea of mental health professional, see R.C. §§ 2907.17 and 2907.18
§ 666.04 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   (a)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following, under
circumstances in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and
affront others who are in the person’s physical proximity and who are not
members of the person’s household:
      (1)   Expose the person’s private parts.
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct or masturbation.
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following, under circumstances
in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and affront another
person who is in the person’s physical proximity, who is a minor, and who is
not the spouse of the offender:
      (1)   Engage in masturbation.
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct.
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation.
      (4)   Expose the person’s private parts with the purpose of personal
sexual arousal or gratification or to lure the minor into sexual activity.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public indecency and
shall be punished as provided in divisions (c)(2), (c)(3), (c)(4) and (c)(5) of
this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(2), a violation
of division (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the third degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by
the offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations
of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
a violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the
offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more
violations of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by
the offender’s conduct was a minor, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(3), a violation
of division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a violation of division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the second degree or, if any person who was likely to view
and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if any person who was
likely to view and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(4), a violation
of division (b)(1), (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
second degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law
or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (b)(1), (b)(2) or (b)(3) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (b)(1), (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(5), a violation
of division (b)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of
this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (b)(4) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (d)   (1)   If either of the following applies, the court may determine at
the time of sentencing whether to classify the offender as a tier I sex
offender/child-victim offender for a violation of division (b)(4) of this
section:
         A.   The offender is less than ten years older than the other person.
         B.   The offender is ten or more years older than the other person and
the offender has not previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any
violation of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance.
      (2)   If the offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (b)(4) of this section, is ten or more years older than the other
person, and previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation
of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the court shall issue an order at the time of sentencing that
classifies the offender as a tier I sex offender/child-victim offender subject
to registration under R.C. §§ 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05, and 2950.06.
(R.C. § 2907.09)
   (e)   A mother is entitled to breast-feed her baby in any location of a
place of public accommodation, as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, wherein the mother
otherwise is permitted.
(R.C. § 3781.55)
Statutory reference:
   Bail considerations for persons charged, see R.C. § 2907.41
§ 666.05 VOYEURISM.
   (a)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying himself
or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the
privacy of another, to spy or eavesdrop upon another.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly commit trespass or otherwise secretly or
surreptitiously videotape, film, photograph, broadcast, stream, or otherwise
record another person, in a place where a person has a reasonable expectation
of privacy, for the purpose of viewing the private areas of that person.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly commit trespass or otherwise secretly or
surreptitiously videotape, film, photograph, broadcast, stream, or otherwise
record a minor, in a place where a person has a reasonable expectation of
privacy, for the purpose of viewing the private areas of the minor.
   (d)   No person shall secretly or surreptitiously videotape, film,
photograph, or otherwise record another person above, under, or through the
clothing being worn by that other person for the purpose of viewing the body
of, or the undergarments worn by, that other person.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of voyeurism.
      (1)   A violation of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
      (2)   A violation of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
second degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (d) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (4)   A violation of division (c) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.08)
§ 666.06 POLYGRAPH EXAMINATIONS FOR VICTIMS: RESTRICTIONS ON USE.
   (a)   (1)   A peace officer, prosecutor, other public official, defendant,
defendant’s attorney, alleged juvenile offender, or alleged juvenile offender’s
attorney shall not ask or require a victim of an alleged sex offense to submit
to a polygraph examination as a condition for proceeding with the investigation
or prosecution of the alleged sex offense.
      (2)   The refusal of the victim of an alleged sex offense to submit to a
polygraph examination shall not prevent the investigation of the alleged sex
offense, the filing of criminal charges with respect to the alleged sex
offense, or the prosecution of the alleged perpetrator of the alleged sex
offense.
   (b)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      A.   “Alleged juvenile offender.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2930.01.
      B.   “Peace officer.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.51.
      C.   “Polygraph examination.” Any mechanical or electrical instrument or
device of any type used or allegedly used to examine, test or question an
individual for the purpose of determining the individual’s truthfulness.
      D.   “Prosecution.” The prosecution of criminal charges in a criminal
prosecution or the prosecution of a delinquent child complaint in a delinquency
proceeding.
      E.   “Prosecutor.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
      F.   “Public official.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 117.01.
      G.   “Sex offense.” A violation of any provision of §§
666.02 to
666.05 or R.C. §§ 2907.02 to 2907.09.
(R.C. § 2907.10)
§ 666.07 PROCURING.
   (a)   No person, knowingly and for gain, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Entice or solicit another to patronize a prostitute or brothel;
      (2)   Procure a prostitute for another to patronize, or take or direct
another at the other’s request to any place for the purpose of patronizing a
prostitute.
   (b)   No person, having authority or responsibility over the use of
premises, shall knowingly permit the premises to be used for the purpose of
engaging in sexual activity for hire.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of
procuring. Except as otherwise provided in this division, procuring is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the prostitute who is procured, patronized,
or otherwise involved in a violation of division (a)(2) of this section is
under 18 years of age at the time of the violation, regardless of whether the
offender who violates division (a)(2) of this section knows the prostitute’s
age, or if a prostitute who engages in sexual activity for hire in premises
used in violation of division (b) of this section is under 18 years of age at
the time of the violation, regardless of whether the offender who violates
division (b) of this section knows the prostitute’s age, procuring is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.23)
   (d)   No person shall recklessly induce, entice, or procure another to
engage in sexual activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything
of value to the other person.
   (e)   As used in division (d) of this section, “sexual activity for hire”
means an implicit or explicit agreement to provide sexual activity in exchange
for anything of value paid to the person engaging in such sexual activity, to
any person trafficking that person, or to any person associated with either
such person.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of engaging in
prostitution, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In sentencing the offender
under this division, the court shall require the offender to attend an
education or treatment program aimed at preventing persons from inducing,
enticing, or procuring another to engage in sexual activity for hire in
exchange for the person giving anything of value to the other person and,
notwithstanding the fine specified in R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a) for a misdemeanor
of the first degree, the court may impose upon the offender a fine of not more
than $1,500.
(R.C. § 2907.231)
§ 666.08 SOLICITING.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly solicit another to engage in sexual activity
for hire in exchange for the person receiving anything of value from the other
person.
   (b)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in conduct in violation of division (a) of this section.
   (c)   As used in division (a) of this section, “sexual activity for hire”
means an implicit or explicit agreement to provide sexual activity in exchange
for anything of value paid to the person engaging in such sexual activity, to
any person trafficking that person, or to any person associated with either
such person.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
soliciting. Soliciting is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of engaging
in solicitation after a positive HIV test, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.24)
Statutory reference:
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 666.09 LOITERING TO ENGAGE IN SOLICITATION.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to solicit another to engage in sexual
activity for hire and while in or near a public place, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Beckon to, stop or attempt to stop another;
      (2)   Engage or attempt to engage another in conversation;
      (3)   Stop or attempt to stop the operator of a vehicle or approach a
stationary vehicle;
      (4)   If the offender is the operator of or a passenger in a vehicle,
stop, attempt to stop, beckon to, attempt to beckon to, or entice another to
approach or enter the vehicle of which the offender is the operator or in which
the offender is the passenger;
      (5)   Interfere with the free passage of another.
   (b)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in conduct in violation of division (a) of this section.
   (c)   As used in division (a) of this section:
      (1)   “Public place.” Any of the following:
         A.   A street, road, highway, thoroughfare, bikeway, walkway,
sidewalk, bridge, alley, alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot or
transportation facility.
         B.   A doorway or entrance way to a building that fronts on a place
described in division (1)A. of this definition.
         C.   A place not described in division (1)A. or (1)B. of this
definition that is open to the public.
      (2)   “Vehicle.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
loitering to engage in solicitation, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
loitering to engage in solicitation after a positive HIV test, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.241) (Prior Code, § 666.085)
Statutory reference:
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 666.10 PROSTITUTION.
   (a)   No person shall engage in sexual activity for hire.
   (b)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in sexual activity for hire.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
prostitution, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of engaging
in prostitution after a positive HIV test, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.25) (Prior Code, § 666.09)
Statutory reference:
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 666.11 RULES OF EVIDENCE.
   (a)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a place is a
brothel, evidence as to the reputation of the place and as to the reputation of
the persons who inhabit or frequent it is admissible on the question of whether
the place is or is not a brothel.
   (b)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a person is a
prostitute, evidence as to the reputation of the person is admissible on the
question of whether the person is or is not a prostitute.
   (c)   In any prosecution for a violation of §§
666.07 to
666.10, proof of a prior conviction of the accused of any such offense or
substantially equivalent offense is admissible in support of the charge.
   (d)   The prohibition contained in R.C. § 2317.02(D) against testimony by a
husband or wife concerning communications between them does not apply, and the
accused’s spouse may testify concerning any such communication in any of the
following cases:
      (1)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of §
666.07 and the spouse testifying was the prostitute involved in the offense or
the person who used the offender’s premises to engage in sexual activity for
hire;
      (2)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of §
666.08 or
666.10.
(R.C. § 2907.26) (Prior Code, § 666.10)
§ 666.12 DISSEMINATING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (a)   No person, with knowledge of its character or content, shall
recklessly do any of following:
      (1)   Directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit,
rent or present to a juvenile any material or performance that is obscene or
harmful to juveniles;
      (2)   Offer or agree to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide,
exhibit, rent or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles;
      (3)   While in the physical proximity of the juvenile or law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, allow any juvenile or law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile to review or peruse any material or view any live
performance that is harmful to juveniles.
   (b)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section
that involves material or a performance that is harmful to juveniles but not
obscene:
      (1)   The defendant is the parent, guardian or spouse of the juvenile
involved.
      (2)   The juvenile involved, at the time of the conduct in question, was
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian who, with knowledge of its
character, consented to the material or performance being furnished or
presented to the juvenile.
      (3)   The juvenile exhibited to the defendant or his or her agent or
employee a draft card, driver’s license, birth record, marriage license or
other official or apparently official document purporting to show that the
juvenile was 18 years of age or over or married, and the person to whom the
document was exhibited did not otherwise have reasonable cause to believe that
the juvenile was under the age of 18 and unmarried.
   (c)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section,
involving material or a performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles,
that the material or performance was furnished or presented for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, governmental, judicial or other proper
purpose, by a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher,
librarian, clergy, prosecutor, judge or other proper person.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (b)(3) of this section, mistake of
age is not a defense to a charge under this section.
   (d)   (1)   A person directly sells, delivers, furnishes, disseminates,
provides, exhibits, rents or presents or directly offers or agrees to sell,
deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent or present material or a
performance to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section by means of an electronic method of
remotely transmitting information if the person knows or has reason to believe
that the person receiving the information is a juvenile or the group of persons
receiving the information are juveniles.
      (2)   A person remotely transmitting information by means of a method of
mass distribution does not directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate,
provide, exhibit, rent or present or directly offer or agree to sell, deliver,
furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent or present the material or
performance in question to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section if either of the following applies:
         A.   The person has inadequate information to know or have reason to
believe that a particular recipient of the information or offer is a juvenile.
         B.   The method of mass distribution does not provide the person the
ability to prevent a particular recipient from receiving the information.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disseminating matter
harmful to juveniles. If the material or performance involved is harmful to
juveniles except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the material or performance
involved is obscene, violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.31) (Prior Code, § 666.11)
§ 666.13 DISPLAYING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (a)   No person who has custody, control or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character or content of the material
involved, shall display at the establishment any material that is harmful to
juveniles and that is open to view by juveniles as part of the invited general
public.
   (b)   It is not a violation of division (a) of this section if the material
in question is displayed by placing it behind “blinder racks” or similar
devices that cover at least the lower two-thirds of the material, if the
material in question is wrapped or placed behind the counter, or if the
material in question otherwise is covered or located so that the portion that
is harmful to juveniles is not open to the view of juveniles.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of displaying matter harmful
to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day during which the
offender is in violation of this section constitutes a separate offense.
(R.C. § 2907.311) (Prior Code, § 666.115)
§ 666.14 DECEPTION TO OBTAIN MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (a)   No person, for the purpose of enabling a juvenile to obtain any
material or gain admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles,
shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is the parent, guardian or spouse
of the juvenile.
      (2)   Furnish the juvenile with any identification or document purporting
to show that the juvenile is 18 years of age or over or married.
   (b)   No juvenile, for the purpose of obtaining any material or gaining
admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles, shall do either of
the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is 18 years of age or over or
married.
      (2)   Exhibit any identification or document purporting to show that he
or she is 18 years of age or over or married.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of deception to obtain matter
harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the second degree. A juvenile who
violates division (b) of this section shall be adjudged an unruly child, with
the disposition of the case as may be appropriate under R.C. Chapter 2151.
(R.C. § 2907.33)
§ 666.15 PRESUMPTIONS; NOTICE.
   (a)   An owner or manager, or agent or employee of an owner or manager, of a
bookstore, newsstand, theater or other commercial establishment engaged in
selling material or exhibiting performances, who, in the course of business
does any of the acts prohibited by §
666.12 is presumed to have knowledge of the character of the material or
performance involved if the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner
or manager has actual notice of the nature of the material or performance,
whether or not the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner or manager
has precise knowledge of its contents.
   (b)   Without limitation on the manner in which the notice may be given,
actual notice of the character of material or a performance may be given in
writing by the chief legal officer of the municipality. This notice, regardless
of the manner in which it is given, shall identify the sender, identify the
material or performance involved, state whether it is obscene or harmful to
juveniles, and bear the date of the notice.
   (c)   Section 666.12 does not apply to a motion picture operator or
projectionist acting within the scope of employment as an employee of the owner
or manager of the theater or other place for the showing of motion pictures to
the general public, and having no managerial responsibility or financial
interest in the operator’s or projectionist’s place of employment, other than
wages.
   (d)   (1)   The provisions of §§
666.12,
666.13 and
666.14(a) do not apply to a person solely because the person provided access or
connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring information
not under that person’s control, including having provided capabilities that
are incidental to providing access or connection to or from the electronic
method of remotely transferring the information, and that do not include the
creation of the content of the material that is the subject of the access or
connection.
      (2)   Division (d)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with an entity actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of §
666.12,
666.13 or
666.14 or who knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.
      (3)   Division (d)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
provides access or connection to an electronic method of remotely transferring
information that is engaged in the violation of §
666.12,
666.13 or 666.14 and that contain content that person has selected and
introduced into the electronic method of remotely transferring information or
content over which that person exercises editorial control.
   (e)   An employer is not guilty of a violation of §
666.12,
666.13 or
666.14 based on the actions of an employee or agent of the employer unless the
employee’s or agent’s conduct is within the scope of the employee’s or agent’s
employment or agency, and the employer does either of the following:
      (1)   With knowledge of the employee’s or agent’s conduct, the employer
authorizes or ratifies the conduct.
      (2)   The employer recklessly disregards the employee’s or agent’s
conduct.
   (f)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under §
666.12 or
666.13 as the section applies to an image transmitted through the internet or
other electronic method of remotely transmitting information that the person
charged with violating the section has taken, in good faith, reasonable,
effective and appropriate actions under the circumstances to restrict or
prevent access by juveniles to material that is harmful to juveniles, including
any method that is feasible under available technology.
(R.C. § 2907.35)
§ 666.16 DECLARATORY JUDGMENT.
   (a)   Without limitation on the persons otherwise entitled to bring an
action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2721, involving the
same issue, the following persons have standing to bring a declaratory judgment
action to determine whether particular materials or performances are obscene or
harmful to juveniles:
      (1)   The chief legal officer of the municipality if and when there is
reasonable cause to believe that R.C. § 2907.31 or 2907.32, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be violated;
      (2)   Any person who, pursuant to R.C. § 2907.35(B) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, has received notice in writing from the chief
legal officer stating that particular materials or performances are obscene or
harmful to juveniles.
   (b)   Any party to an action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to division
(a) of this section is entitled, upon the party’s request, to trial on the
merits within five days after joinder of the issues, and the court shall render
judgment within five days after trial is concluded.
   (c)   An action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to division (a) of this
section shall not be brought during the pendency of any civil action or
criminal prosecution when the character of the particular materials or
performances involved is at issue in the pending case, and either of the
following applies:
      (1)   Either of the parties to the action for a declaratory judgment is a
party to the pending case;
      (2)   A judgment in the pending case will necessarily constitute res
judicata as to the character of the materials or performances involved.
   (d)   A civil action or criminal prosecution in which the character of
particular materials or performances is at issue, brought during the pendency
of an action for a declaratory judgment involving the same issue, shall be
stayed during the pendency of the action for a declaratory judgment.
   (e)   The fact that a violation of R.C. § 2907.31 or 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, occurs prior to a judicial
determination of the character of the material or performance involved in the
violation does not relieve the offender of criminal liability for the
violation, even though prosecution may be stayed pending the judicial
determination.
(R.C. § 2907.36)
§ 666.17 INJUNCTION; ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   (a)   Where it appears that R.C. § 2907.31 or 2907.32, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be violated, the chief
legal officer of the municipality may bring an action to enjoin the violation.
The defendant, upon his or her request, is entitled to trial on the merits
within five days after the joinder of the issues, and the court shall render
judgment within five days after the trial is concluded.
   (b)   Premises used or occupied for repeated violations of R.C. § 2907.31 or
2907.32, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, constitute a
nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2907.37)
§ 666.18 UNLAWFUL OPERATION OF VIEWING BOOTHS DEPICTING SEXUAL CONDUCT.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Commercial establishment.” An entity that is open to the public
and to which either of the following applies:
         A.   It has a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade
of the sale, rental or viewing of visual materials or performances depicting
sexual conduct.
         B.   It has as a principal business purpose the sale, rental or
viewing of visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct.
      (2)   “Visual materials or performances.” Films, videos, CD-ROM discs,
streaming video or other motion pictures.
   (b)   No person who has custody, control or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character of the visual material or
performance involved, shall knowingly permit the use of, or offer the use of,
viewing booths, stalls or partitioned portions of a room located in the
commercial establishment for the purpose of viewing visual materials or
performances depicting sexual conduct unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   The inside of each booth, stall or partitioned room is visible
from, and at least one side of each booth, stall or partitioned room is open
to, a continuous and contiguous main aisle or hallway that is open to the
public areas of the commercial establishment and is not obscured by any
curtain, door or other covering or enclosure.
      (2)   No booth, stall or partitioned room is designed, constructed,
pandered or allowed to be used for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating
nudity or sexual activity on the part of or between patrons or members of the
public, and no booth, stall or partitioned room has any aperture, hole or
opening for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating nudity or sexual
activity.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that
either of the following applies to the involved visual materials or
performances:
      (1)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct are
disseminated or presented for a bona fide medical, scientific, educational,
religious, governmental, judicial or other proper purpose and by or to a
physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher, person pursuing bona
fide studies or research, librarian, member of the clergy, prosecutor, judge or
other person having a proper interest in the visual materials or performances.
      (2)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct,
taken as a whole, would be found by a reasonable person to have serious
literary, artistic, political or scientific value or are presented or
disseminated in good faith for a serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific purpose and are not pandered for their prurient appeal.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting unlawful
operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 2907.38)
§ 666.19 JUVENILES ON THE PREMISES OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
PROHIBITED.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Adult arcade.” Any place to which the public is permitted or
invited in which coin-operated, slug-operated or electronically, electrically
or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or
other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five
or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and in which the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matter
exhibiting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
      (2)   “Adult bookstore,” “adult novelty store” or “adult video store.”
         A.   A commercial establishment that, for any form of consideration,
has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade in, derives a
significant or substantial portion of its revenues from, devotes a significant
or substantial portion of its interior business or advertising to, or maintains
a substantial section of its sales or display space for the sale or rental of
any of the following:
            1.   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or
other visual representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the
exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas;
            2.   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for
use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of self or others.
         B.   Includes a commercial establishment as defined in R.C. § 2907.38.
An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve
the offering for sale, rental or viewing of materials exhibiting or describing
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be
categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store.
The existence of other principal business purposes does not exempt an
establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store
or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is
offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, such materials
that exhibit or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
      (3)   “Adult cabaret.” A nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle
club or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages
are served, that regularly features any of the following:
         A.   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity;
         B.   Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities;
         C.   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      (4)   “Adult entertainment.” The sale, rental or exhibition, for any form
of consideration, of books, films, video cassettes, magazines, periodicals or
live performances that are characterized by an emphasis on the exposure or
display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activity.
      (5)   “Adult entertainment establishment.” An adult arcade, adult
bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, nude or seminude model studio or sexual
encounter establishment. An establishment in which a medical practitioner,
psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state
engages in medically approved and recognized therapy, including but not limited
to massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to R.C. § 4731.15, is not an “adult
entertainment establishment.”
      (6)   “Adult motion picture theater.” A commercial establishment where
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic
reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon
the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas are regularly shown for any form of consideration.
      (7)   “Adult theater.” A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment that, for any form of consideration, regularly
features persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity or live
performances that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
      (8)   “Distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon.” The
dominant or principal character and theme of the object described by this
phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films “that are distinguished
or characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas”, the films so
described are those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the
exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      (9)   “Nude or seminude model studio.” Any place where a person, who
regularly appears in a state of nudity or seminudity, is provided for money or
any other form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons. A modeling
class or studio is not a “nude or seminude model studio” and is not subject to
this chapter if it is operated in any of the following ways:
         A.   By a college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation;
         B.   By a private college or university that maintains and operates
educational programs, the credits for which are transferable to a college or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
         C.   In a structure that has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising indicating that a person appearing in a
state of nudity or seminudity is available for viewing, if in order to
participate in a class in the structure, a student must enroll at least three
days in advance of the class and if not more than one nude or seminude model is
on the premises at any one time.
      (10)   “Nudity,” “nude” or “state of nudity.” The showing of the human
male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with
less than a fully opaque covering; or the showing of the female breasts with
less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple.
      (11)   “Regularly features” or “regularly shown.” A consistent or
substantial course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited
constitute a substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part
of the ongoing business of the adult entertainment establishment.
      (12)   “Seminude” or “state of seminudity.” A state of dress in which
opaque clothing covers not more than the genitals, pubic region and nipple of
the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps
or devices.
      (13)   “Sexual encounter establishment.”
         A.   A business or commercial establishment that, as one of its
principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration a place where
either of the following occur:
            1.   Two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort for
the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities.
            2.   Two or more persons appear nude or seminude for the purpose of
displaying their nude or seminude bodies for their receipt of consideration or
compensation in any type or form.
         B.   An establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in
medically approved and recognized therapy, including but not limited to massage
therapy, as regulated pursuant to R.C. § 4731.15, is not a “sexual encounter
establishment.”
      (14)   “Specified anatomical areas.” The cleft of the buttocks, anus,
male or female genitals, or the female breast.
      (15)   “Specified sexual activity.” Any of the following:
         A.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, or actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy;
         B.   Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the
activities described in division A. of this definition.
   (b)   No person knowingly shall allow an individual, including but not
limited to a patron, customer, or employee, who is under 18 years of age on the
premises of an adult entertainment establishment.
   (c)   No individual who is under 18 years of age knowingly shall show or
give false information concerning the individual’s name or age, or other false
identification, for the purpose of gaining entrance to an adult entertainment
establishment.
   (d)   A person shall not be found guilty of a violation of division (b) of
this section if the person raises as an affirmative defense and if the jury or,
in a nonjury trial, the court finds the person has established by a
preponderance of the evidence, all of the following:
      (1)   The individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment
establishment exhibited to an operator, employee, agent or independent
contractor of the adult entertainment establishment a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 and
4507.52 showing that the individual was then at least 18 years of age.
      (2)   The operator, employee, agent or independent contractor made a bona
fide effort to ascertain the true age of the individual gaining entrance to the
adult entertainment establishment by checking the identification presented, at
the time of entrance, to ascertain that the description on the identification
compared with the appearance of the individual and that the identification had
not been altered in any way.
      (3)   The operator, employee, agent or independent contractor had reason
to believe that the individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment
establishment was at least 18 years of age.
   (e)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense described in
division (d) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or the
Deputy Registrar who issued a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50 and 4507.52 shall be permitted to
submit certified copies of the records, in the Registrar’s or Deputy
Registrar’s possession, of the issuance of the license or identification card
in question, in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles in the action.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
permitting a juvenile on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment,
a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day a person violates this division
constitutes a separate offense.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of use by a
juvenile of false information to enter an adult entertainment establishment, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if committed by
an adult.
(R.C. § 2907.39)
§ 666.20 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES; ILLEGAL OPERATION AND ACTIVITY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Adult bookstore” or “adult video store.” A commercial
establishment that has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-
trade or inventory in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its
revenues from, devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior
business or advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or
display space for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of books,
magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or other visual
representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (2)   “Adult cabaret.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
      (3)   “Adult motion picture theater.” A commercial establishment where
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic
reproductions that are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown
to more than five individuals for any form of consideration.
      (4)   “Characterized by.” Describing the essential character or quality
of an item.
      (5)   “Employee.” Any individual who performs any service on the premises
of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis,
regardless of whether the individual is denominated an employee, independent
contractor, agent or otherwise, but does not include an individual exclusively
on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery
of goods to the premises.
      (6)   “Nudity,” “nude” or “state of nudity.” Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2907.39.
      (7)   “Operator.” Any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented
business who causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in operation
the business or who is authorized to manage the business or exercise overall
operational control of the business premises.
      (8)   “Patron.” Any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented
business except for any of the following:
         A.   An operator or an employee of the sexually oriented business;
         B.   An individual who is on the premises exclusively for repair or
maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises;
         C.   A public employee or a volunteer firefighter emergency medical
services worker acting within the scope of the public employee’s or volunteer’s
duties as a public employee or volunteer.
      (9)   “Premises.” The real property on which the sexually oriented
business is located and all appurtenances to the real property, including but
not limited to the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways
and parking lots or parking garages adjacent to the real property under the
ownership, control or supervision of the owner or operator of the sexually
oriented business.
      (10)   “Regularly.” Consistently or repeatedly.
      (11)   “Seminude” or “state of seminudity.” Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2907.39.
      (12)   “Sexual device.” Any three-dimensional object designed and
marketed for stimulation of the male or female human genitals or anus or female
breasts or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others, including but
not limited to dildos, vibrators, penis pumps and physical representations of
the human genital organs, but not including devices primarily intended for
protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy.
      (13)   “Sexual device shop.” A commercial establishment that regularly
features sexual devices, but not including any pharmacy, drug store, medical
clinic or establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare
products or services, and not including any commercial establishment that does
not restrict access to its premises by reason of age.
      (14)   “Sexual encounter center.” A business or commercial enterprise
that, as one of its principal business purposes, purports to offer for any form
of consideration physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
individuals of the opposite sex when one or more of the individuals is nude or
seminude.
      (15)   “Sexually oriented business.” An adult bookstore, adult video
store, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, sexual device shop or
sexual encounter center, but does not include a business solely by reason of
its showing, selling or renting materials that may depict sex.
      (16)   “Specified anatomical areas.” Includes human genitals, pubic
region and buttocks and the human female breast below a point immediately above
the top of the areola.
      (17)   “Specified sexual activity.” Sexual intercourse, oral copulation,
masturbation or sodomy, or excretory functions as a part of or in connection
with any of these activities.
   (b)   No sexually oriented business shall be or remain open for business
between midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day, except that a sexually oriented
business that holds a liquor permit pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4303 may remain
open until the hour specified in that permit if it does not conduct, offer or
allow sexually oriented entertainment activity in which the performers appear
nude.
   (c)   (1)   No patron who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family
shall knowingly touch any employee while that employee is nude or seminude or
touch the clothing of any employee while that employee is nude or seminude.
      (2)   No employee who regularly appears nude or seminude on the premises
of a sexually oriented business, while on the premises of that sexually
oriented business and while nude or seminude, shall knowingly touch a patron
who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who
is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or the clothing of a patron
who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who
is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or allow a patron who is not
a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who is not a
member of the employee’s immediate family to touch the employee or the clothing
of the employee.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of illegally
operating a sexually oriented business, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of illegal
sexually oriented activity in a sexually oriented business. If the offender
touches a specified anatomical area of the patron or employee, or the clothing
covering a specified anatomical area, a violation of division (c) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender does not touch a
specified anatomical area of the patron or employee, or the clothing covering a
specified anatomical area, a violation of division (c) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2907.40)
Statutory reference:
   State indemnification for certain municipal liability stemming from local
adult business regulations, see R.C. § 715.55
§ 666.21 UNLAWFUL ADVERTISING OF MASSAGE.
   (a)   No person, by means of a statement, solicitation, or offer in a print
or electronic publication, sign, placard, storefront display, or other medium,
shall advertise massage, relaxation massage, any other massage technique or
method, or any related service, with the suggestion or promise of sexual
activity.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful advertising of
massage, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (c)   Nothing in this section prevents the municipality from enacting any
regulation of the advertising of massage further than and in addition to the
provisions of divisions (a) and (b) of this section.
   (d)   As used in this section, “sexual activity” has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2907.01.
(R.C. § 2927.17)
§ 666.22 NONCONSENSUAL DISSEMINATION OF PRIVATE SEXUAL IMAGES.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Cable service provider.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
1332.01.
      (2)   “Direct-to-home satellite service.” Has the meaning defined in 47
U.S.C. § 303, as amended.
      (3)   “Disseminate.” Means to post, distribute, or publish on a computer
device, computer network, web site, or other electronic device or medium of
communication.
      (4)   “Image.” Means a photograph, film, videotape, digital recording, or
other depiction or portrayal of a person.
      (5)   “Interactive computer service.” Has the meaning defined in the
“Telecommunications Act of 1996”, 47 U.S.C. § 230, as amended.
      (6)   “Internet provider.” Means a provider of internet service,
including all of the following:
         A.   Broadband service, however defined or classified by the Federal
Communications Commission;
         B.   Information service or telecommunications service, both as
defined in the “Telecommunications Act of 1996”, 47 U.S.C. § 153, as amended;
         C.   Internet protocol-enabled services, as defined in R.C. § 4927.01.
      (7)   “Mobile service.” Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153, as
amended.
      (8)   “Sexual act.” Means any of the following:
         A.   Sexual activity;
         B.   Masturbation;
         C.   An act involving a bodily substance that is performed for the
purpose of sexual arousal or gratification;
         D.   Sado-masochistic abuse.
      (9)   “Telecommunications carrier.” Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C.
§ 153, as amended.
      (10)   “Video service provider.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
1332.21.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly disseminate an image of another person if
all of the following apply:
      (1)   The person in the image is 18 years of age or older.
      (2)   The person in the image can be identified from the image itself or
from information displayed in connection with the image and the offender
supplied the identifying information.
      (3)   The person in the image is in a state of nudity or is engaged in a
sexual act.
      (4)   The image is disseminated without consent from the person in the
image.
      (5)   The image is disseminated with intent to harm the person in the
image.
   (c)   This section does not prohibit the dissemination of an image if any of
the following apply:
      (1)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of a criminal
investigation that is otherwise lawful.
      (2)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of, or in connection
with, the reporting of unlawful conduct.
      (3)   The image is part of a news report or commentary or an artistic or
expressive work, such as a performance, work of art, literary work, theatrical
work, musical work, motion picture, film, or audiovisual work.
      (4)   The image is disseminated by a law enforcement officer, or a
corrections officer or guard in a detention facility, acting within the scope
of the person’s official duties.
      (5)   The image is disseminated for another lawful public purpose.
      (6)   The person in the image is knowingly and willingly in a state of
nudity or engaged in a sexual act and is knowingly and willingly in a location
in which the person does not have a reasonable expectation of privacy.
      (7)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of medical treatment or
examination.
   (d)   The following entities are not liable for a violation of this section
solely as a result of an image or other information provided by another person:
      (1)   A provider of interactive computer service;
      (2)   A mobile service;
      (3)   A telecommunications carrier;
      (4)   An internet provider;
      (5)   A cable service provider;
      (6)   A direct-to-home satellite service;
      (7)   A video service provider.
   (e)   Any conduct that is a violation of this section and any other section
of this Code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, the
other section, or both sections.
   (f)   (1)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (f)(1)B., (f)
(1)C., or (f)(1)D. of this section, whoever violates this section is guilty of
nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images, a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of this section or any substantially equivalent state or
local law, nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images is a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
         C.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section or any substantially
equivalent state or local law, nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual
images is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         D.   If the offender is under 18 years of age and the person in the
image is not more than five years older than the offender, the offender shall
not be prosecuted under this section.
      (2)   In addition to any other penalty or disposition authorized or
required by law, the court may order any person who is convicted of a violation
of this section or who is adjudicated delinquent by reason of a violation of
this section to criminally forfeit all of the following property to the state
under R.C. Chapter 2981:
         A.   Any profits or proceeds and any property the person has acquired
or maintained in violation of this section that the sentencing court determines
to have been acquired or maintained as a result of the violation;
         B.   Any interest in, securities of, claim against, or property or
contractual right of any kind affording a source of influence over any
enterprise that the person has established, operated, controlled, or conducted
in violation of this section that the sentencing court determines to have been
acquired or maintained as a result of the violation.
   (g)   A victim of a violation of this section may commence a civil cause of
action against the offender, as described in R.C. § 2307.66.
(R.C. § 2917.211)
§ 666.23 GROOMING.
   (a)   As used in this section, "pattern of conduct" has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 2903.211.
   (b)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in a pattern of
conduct with a minor who is less than 16 years of age and who is four or more
years younger than the person, when the pattern of conduct would cause a
reasonable adult person to believe that the person is communicating with the
minor with purpose to do either of the following:
      (1)   Entice, coerce, or solicit the minor to engage in sexual activity,
and when the person's purpose in engaging in the pattern of conduct is to
entice, coerce, or solicit the minor to engage in sexual activity with the
person or a third person;
      (2)   Prepare the minor to engage in sexual activity, and when the
person's purpose in engaging in the pattern of conduct is to prepare the minor
to engage in sexual activity with the person or a third person that would be a
violation of R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, or 2907.07.
   (c)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in a pattern of
conduct with a minor if the person and the minor are in any of the
relationships described in R.C. § 2907.03(A)(5) to (A)(13), when the pattern of
conduct would cause a reasonable adult person to believe that the person is
communicating with the minor with purpose to do either of the following:
      (1)   Entice, coerce, or solicit the minor to engage in sexual activity,
and when the person's purpose in engaging in the pattern of conduct is to
entice, coerce, or solicit the minor to engage in sexual activity with the
person or a third person;
      (2)   Prepare the minor to engage in sexual activity, and when the
person's purpose in engaging in the pattern of conduct is to prepare the minor
to engage in sexual activity with the person or a third person that would be a
violation of R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, or 2907.07.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of grooming.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of
division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
victim of the offense is less than 13 years of age or if the offender supplied
alcohol or a drug of abuse to the victim of the offense, a violation of
division (b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. If the victim of the offense is less than 13 years of age and if the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
this section or a sexually oriented offense or a child-victim oriented offense
or the offender supplied alcohol or a drug of abuse to the victim of the
offense, a violation of division (b) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or a sexually
oriented offense or a child-victim oriented offense and the offender supplied
alcohol or a drug of abuse to the victim of the offense, a violation of
division (b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of
division (c) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender supplied alcohol or a drug of abuse to the victim of the offense, a
violation of division (c) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If the victim of the offense is less than 13 years of
age or if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of this section or a sexually oriented offense or a child-victim
oriented offense, a violation of division (c) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the victim of the offense is less
than 13 years of age and if the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or a sexually oriented offense or
a child-victim oriented offense or the offender supplied alcohol or a drug of
abuse to the victim of the offense, a violation of division (c) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (e)   A prosecution for a violation of this section does not preclude a
prosecution of a violation of any other section of the this code or the Ohio
Revised Code. One or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of behavior that
can be prosecuted under this section or any other section of this code or the
Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, the other section of
this code or the Revised Code, or both sections.
(R.C. § 2907.071)
§ 666.98 PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN SEXUALLY ORIENTED OFFENDERS FROM RESIDING
WITHIN 1,000 FEET OF SCHOOLS AND PARKS.
   (a)   No person who has been convicted of, is convicted of, has plead guilty
to, or pleads guilty to either a sexually oriented offense that is not a
registration-exempt sexually oriented offense or a child-victim oriented
offense shall establish a residence or occupy residential premises within 1,000
feet of any school premises or public park that is located within the City of
Avon Lake.
   (b)   If a person to whom this section applies violates this section by
establishing a residence or occupying residential premises within 1,000 feet of
any school premises or public park that is located within the city, the Law
Director has a cause of action for injunctive relief against the person. The
city shall not be required to prove irreparable harm in order to obtain the
relief.
   (c)   The city adopts the provisions of the law of Ohio now or hereafter in
effect concerning the definition, determination, registration or classification
of a person who has been convicted of, is convicted of, has plead guilty to, or
pleads guilty to either a sexually oriented offense that is not a registration-
exempt sexually oriented offense or a child-victim oriented offense.
   (d)   The City Council finds that because children are especially vulnerable
to being victims of sexually abusive behavior, kidnapping and abduction, and
are likely to be present a significant amount of time on or near school
premises and public parks, that certain persons who have been convicted of, or
have pleaded guilty to, a sexually oriented offense or child-victim oriented
offense must not establish a residence or occupy residential premises within
1,000 feet of any school premises or public park.
   (e)   The Council adopts the determinations and intent of the Ohio General
Assembly as articulated in R.C. § 2950.02.
   (f)   As used in this section, “school” and “school premises” have the same
meanings as in R.C. Chapter 2950, as the same may be revised. As used in this
section, “public parks” means those areas of the city owned or managed by the
city or the Lorain County Metropolitan Park District, in whole or in part, and
that are designated for park and/or recreational purposes, including city
parks, beaches, aquatic centers, sports facilities, and fields.
   (g)   Anyone presently affected by this section and its inclusion of parks
shall be required to register with the Police Chief and shall not be required
to leave their current residence as a result of the enactment of this section.
   (h)   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the
divisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and words of this section are
severable, and if any word, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this
section shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid
judgment of decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining words,
clauses sentences, paragraphs, and divisions of this section, because the same
would have been enacted by the City Council without the incorporation in this
section of any such unconstitutional or invalid word, clause, sentence,
paragraph or division.
(Ord. 83-06, passed 6-26-2006; Ord. 36-2017, passed 3-13-2017)
§ 666.99 SENTENCING FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED OFFENSES; SEXUAL PREDATORS;
REGISTRATION.
   (a)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented offense or
child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after
January 1, 1997, and the offender is a tier III sex offender/child-victim
offender relative to the offense or the offense is any offense listed in R.C. §
2901.07(D)(1) to (D)(3), the judge shall include in the offender’s sentence a
statement that the offender is a tier III sex offender/child-victim offender,
shall comply with the requirements of R.C. § 2950.03, and shall require the
offender to submit to a DNA specimen collection procedure pursuant to R.C. §
2901.07.
   (b)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented offense or a
child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after
January 1, 1997, the judge shall include in the sentence a summary of the
offender’s duties imposed under R.C. §§ 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05 and 2950.06,
and the duration of the duties. The judge shall inform the offender, at the
time of sentencing, of those duties and of their duration. If required under
R.C. § 2950.03(A)(2), the judge shall perform the duties specified in that
section or, if required under R.C. § 2950.03(A)(6), the judge shall perform the
duties specified in that division.
(R.C. § 2929.23)
CHAPTER 667: SMOKING IN MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS
Section
667.01 Definitions
667.02 Restrictions in public places
667.03 Prohibitions as a condition of employment
667.04 Prohibition at public meetings
667.05 Signs
667.06 Enforcement
667.07 Relation to other law
667.08 Violations
§ 667.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY LAND. Any unenclosed land owned or managed by the city, including, but
not limited to, parking lots and landscaped areas, but not including dedicated
streets, sidewalks, and tree lawns.
   CITY PROPERTY. Any enclosed area of any building, structure, vehicle, or
other enclosed space owned and operated by the city, wheresoever located within
the city.
   MARIHUANA. All parts of a plant of the genus cannabis, whether growing or
not; the seeds of a plant of that type; the resin extracted from a part of a
plant of that type; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture
or preparation of a plant of that type or of its seeds or resin. MARIHUANA does
not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks,
oils or cake made from the seeds of the plant, or any other compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the mature stalks,
except the resin extracted from the mature stalks, fiber, oil or cake, or the
sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of germination. MARIHUANA does
not include HEMP or a HEMP PRODUCT as those terms are defined in R.C. § 928.01.
   SIGN. Legible, English lettering on a contrasting background to clearly
indicate that smoking is not permitted and to provide related information. The
international “NO SMOKING” symbol, consisting of a pictorial representation of
a burning cigarette enclosed with a red circle with a red bar across it, may be
used in or substituted for a sign indicating that smoking is prohibited. A sign
shall be of sufficient size to be clearly legible to one of normal vision
throughout the area it is intended to mark.
   SMOKING. The combustion of tobacco, including cigarette tobacco, pipe
tobacco, cigar tobacco and all other types and forms of tobacco products.
   SMOKING MATERIALS. Any cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed, plant or other smoking
equipment in any form.
   TOBACCO. Any lighted or unlighted cigarette, cigar, pipe, bidi, clove
cigarette, electronic cigarette and any other smoking product, and spit
tobacco, also known as smokeless, dip, chew and snuff, in any form.
(Ord. 191-94, passed 10-24-1994; Ord. 197-2017, passed 12-18-2017; Ord. 102-
2018, passed 6-11-2018; Ord. 24-17R, passed 2-12-2024)
§ 667.02 RESTRICTIONS IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   (a)   No person shall engage in smoking or the use of tobacco or marihuana
in city property.
   (b)   No person shall engage in smoking or the use of tobacco or marihuana
on city land.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 191-94, passed 10-24-1994; Ord. 150-06, passed 12-18-2006; Ord. 102-2018,
passed 6-11-2018; Ord. 24-17R, passed 2-12-2024)
§ 667.03 PROHIBITIONS AS A CONDITION OF EMPLOYMENT.
   Any person employed by the city on and after the adoption of this chapter
shall be required to refrain from smoking as prohibited herein, and such
prohibition shall be a condition of further continuous employment with the
city.
(Ord. 191-94, passed 10-24-1994)
§ 667.04 PROHIBITION AT PUBLIC MEETINGS.
   (a)   No person, member of the public, invitee, employee or any other person
shall cause to occur the combustion of a tobacco product during the continuance
of any official meeting, in public or executive session, held pursuant to a
directive of, or under the auspices or aegis of, the government of the city,
and whether or not such official meeting is held upon property owned by the
city or otherwise.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 191-94, passed 10-24-1994)
§ 667.05 SIGNS.
   (a)   Signs indicating that smoking is not permitted shall be clearly,
sufficiently and conspicuously posted in every establishment where smoking is
regulated by this chapter in such manner as to give adequate notice to members
of the general public.
   (b)   Signs indicating that smoking is prohibited in elevators and
stairwells shall be posted in elevators and stairwell entrances on each floor.
(Ord. 191-94, passed 10-24-1994)
§ 667.06 ENFORCEMENT.
   Enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be implemented by the
Mayor, who shall establish a telephone number through which all complaints by
citizens relating to violations of this chapter may be directed or referred.
(Ord. 191-94, passed 10-24-1994)
§ 667.07 RELATION TO OTHER LAW.
   This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where
it is otherwise restricted by law, nor to relieve any proprietor, employer or
other responsible party from any liability resulting from exposure to tobacco
smoke.
(Ord. 191-94, passed 10-24-1994)
§ 667.08 VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   No person who manages or otherwise controls the use of any building,
structure, office, room or other enclosed area subject to the restrictions of
this chapter shall fail to comply with its provisions.
   (b)   No person shall smoke in any area restricted by the provisions of this
chapter.
   (c)   Whoever violates any provision of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be subject to the provisions of §
698.02. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 191-94, passed 10-24-1994)
CHAPTER 668: VEGETATION AND LITTER
Section
668.01 Trimming of trees, plants and shrubbery along public streets and
sidewalks
668.02 Noxious weeds and undesirable vegetation defined; declaration of
nuisance
668.03 Cutting and removing noxious weeds and undesirable vegetation
668.04 Notice to cut trees, plants, shrubbery along public streets and
sidewalks; noxious weeds and undesirable vegetation; or litter
668.05 Service and return of notices; fees
668.06 Noncompliance with notice; removal by city
668.07 Assessment of costs by city
Editor’s note:
   Chapter 668, previously titled “Trees, Weeds and Grass,” and being a
codification of Ordinance 1233, passed November 24, 1958, Ordinance 94-74,
passed June 10, 1974, and Ordinance 133-83, passed October 24, 1983, was re-
enacted in its entirety by Ordinance 40-92, passed March 23, 1992.
§ 668.01 TRIMMING OF TREES, PLANTS AND SHRUBBERY ALONG PUBLIC STREETS AND
SIDEWALKS.
   (a)   The owner of every lot or parcel of land within the city upon which a
tree, plant or shrubbery stands, with any part thereof upon or overhanging a
public street or sidewalk, shall be subject to the regulations provided in this
chapter. Upon such owner’s failure to comply, after written notice, with this
chapter, the city shall cause any such trees, plants or shrubbery to be trimmed
or cut down and removed in accordance with these regulations and assess the
cost thereof against the owner of such lot or parcel of land, as provided for
in this chapter.
   (b)   The owner shall trim or cause to be trimmed any such tree, plant or
shrubbery so that a clear height of eight feet between the lowest branches and
the sidewalk is maintained and such height over the street as may be designated
by the Public Works Director or the Urban Forester.
   (c)   The owner shall trim or remove, as the case may require, every dead,
decayed or broken tree, plant or shrubbery, or part thereof, so that the same
does not fall into the street or sidewalk.
   (d)   The owner shall cut down and remove any tree, plant or shrubbery, or
any part thereof, as may be necessary to provide a clear and unobstructed view
of traffic from all directions at any street, private driveway, or other
intersection, or to abate a nuisance, where such abatement is necessary to
protect life, limb or property of persons, drivers of vehicles or pedestrians
using the street or sidewalk.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 40-92, passed 3-23-1992; Ord. 123-05, passed 7-11-2005; Ord. 43-2014,
passed 4-14-2014; Ord. 23-84, passed 5-9-2023)
§ 668.02 NOXIOUS WEEDS AND UNDESIRABLE VEGETATION DEFINED; DECLARATION OF
NUISANCE.
   (a)   Noxious weeds, invasive plant species and undesirable vegetation shall
include:
      (1)   Any weed declared to be a noxious weed in the O.A.C. § 901:5-37-01,
as amended;
(2)   Any plant species declared to be invasive in the O.A.C. § 901:5-30-01;
      (3)   Poison ivy, ragweed, poison oak and poison sumac;
      (4)   Any vegetation, other than trees, bushes, flowers or other
ornamental plants, which exceeds eight inches in height. In environmentally
sensitive areas, native vegetation is hereby excluded from this classification;
and
      (5)   Any vegetation which, by reason of the pollen or the seeds which it
spreads or produces, or due to the density of its growth or its unsightliness,
injuriously affects the public health or welfare.
   (b)   All noxious weeds and undesirable vegetation, as defined in division
(a) of this section, are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(Ord. 40-92, passed 3-23-1992; Ord. 123-05, passed 7-11-2005; Ord. 58-09,
passed 6-8-2009; Ord. 23-84, passed 5-9-2023; Ord. 24-74, passed 6-24-2024)
§ 668.03 CUTTING AND REMOVING NOXIOUS WEEDS AND UNDESIRABLE VEGETATION.
   (a)   All noxious weeds and undesirable vegetation shall be cut and removed
or destroyed by the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person having care or
control of a plot of ground upon which such vegetation is growing as
hereinafter described:
      (1)   All parcels in a recorded subdivision in their entirety;
      (2)   All residentially zoned property not within a recorded subdivision
where subject property is less than two acres in area and fronts a public
right-of-way;
      (3)   All land which lies within 25 feet of a lot line which is adjacent
to lots or lands upon which a residential dwelling or commercial building
exists, whether or not such dwelling or building is occupied; and
      (4)   All land which lies within 50 feet of a dedicated thoroughfare.
   This section shall not apply to lands which are used for agricultural or
horticultural purposes.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 40-92, passed 3-23-1992; Ord. 123-05, passed 7-11-2005; Ord. 58-09,
passed 6-8-2009)
§ 668.04 NOTICE TO CUT TREES, PLANTS, SHRUBBERY ALONG PUBLIC STREETS AND
SIDEWALKS; NOXIOUS WEEDS AND UNDESIRABLE VEGETATION; OR LITTER.
   (a)   Upon failure of the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person having
care or control of a plot of ground to cut and remove trees, plants or
shrubbery along public streets and highways, as required in this chapter, the
city shall cause written notice to be served on the owner, lessee, tenant or
agent having charge of such land, notifying him or her that such trees, plants
or shrubbery are growing on such lands and that they must be cut and destroyed
within five days after service of such notice. If there is not an imminent
hazard, and upon agreement of the Urban Forester and the Code Administrator,
the period of time for compliance may be extended up to 90 days.
   (b)   Upon failure of the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person having
care or control of a plot of ground to cut and remove noxious weeds and
undesirable vegetation, as required in this chapter, the city shall cause
written notice to be served on the owner, lessee, tenant or agent having charge
of such land, notifying him or her that such noxious weeds and undesirable
vegetation are growing on such lands and that they must be cut and destroyed
within five days after service of such notice. For purposes of this division
(b), only one notice per calendar year is required for a lot or parcel. If,
after a notice has been served in accordance with this section, the Code
Administrator determines that a continuing violation is occurring or a
subsequent violation has occurred, the city may proceed with the remedy set
forth in this chapter without further notice.
   (c)   Upon a finding by the city that litter has been placed on lands in the
city, has not been removed and constitutes a detriment to public health, the
city shall cause written notice to be served upon the owner, or upon the
lessee, agent or tenant having charge of the littered land, notifying him or
her that litter is on the land and that it must be collected and removed within
15 days after service of such notice.
   (d)   As used in this section and §
668.06, “litter” includes, but is not limited to, any garbage, waste which
shall include yard waste, peelings of vegetables or fruits, rubbish, ashes,
cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, parts of automobiles, wagons,
furniture, glass or oil of an unsightly or unsanitary nature, and anything else
of an unsightly nature.
   (e)   Notice shall be served by regular mail, addressed to the last known
address of the owner as shown in the office of the Lorain County Auditor. If
the last known address of the owner cannot be ascertained, it is sufficient to
publish the notice once in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. In
either case, the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous manner on the property
when possible. Date of service of the notice shall be determined (where service
is by mail) as the day following the day of mailing for notices to addresses
within the city and as of the fourth day after the day of mailing for notices
to addresses outside the city. Where the day of service would fall upon a
Sunday or other day when mail is not ordinarily delivered, then the day of
service shall be the next regular delivery day. When notice is published, date
of service shall be date of publication.
   (f)   This section does not apply to land being used under a permit or
license issued pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3734, §§ 4737.05 to 4737.12 or R.C.
Chapter 6111.
   (g)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 40-92, passed 3-23-1992; Ord. 123-05, passed 7-11-2005; Ord. 58-09,
passed 6-8-2009)
§ 668.05 SERVICE AND RETURN OF NOTICES; FEES.
   The Code Administrator may make service and return of the notice provided
for in §
668.04 and shall be allowed the same fees as those provided for service and
return of summonses in civil cases before a magistrate as provided for in the
Ohio Revised Code.
(Ord. 40-92, passed 3-23-1992; Ord. 123-05, passed 7-11-2005)
§ 668.06 NONCOMPLIANCE WITH NOTICE; REMOVAL BY CITY.
   If the owner, lessee, agent or tenant having charge of the lands mentioned
in this chapter fails to comply with the notice provided for in this chapter,
the city shall cause such trees, plants or shrubbery along public streets and
highways, noxious weeds and undesirable vegetation, to be cut and destroyed, or
such litter to be removed, and may employ the necessary labor to perform the
task. “Labor” shall include removal of rocks, debris, garbage, wood or other
materials which, by their presence, would damage or destroy mowing equipment or
cause the cutting of weeds to be unachievable. All expenses incurred shall be
paid out of money in the Treasury of the city not otherwise appropriated.
(Ord. 40-92, passed 3-23-1992; Ord. 123-05, passed 7-11-2005; Ord. 58-09,
passed 6-8-2009; Ord. 1-2013, passed 1-14-2013)
§ 668.07 ASSESSMENT OF COSTS BY CITY.
   Whenever any tree, plant, shrubbery, noxious weeds or undesirable
vegetation, or parts thereof, are trimmed or removed or such litter removed in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter by the city, then after such
work is performed, the Code Administrator shall determine the cost of cutting
and removal and shall cause a statement thereof to be mailed to the property
owner of record. If such work is done by contract, the entire cost shall be
determined by adding 15% to the actual contract cost as a reasonable charge to
pay for the cost of supervision by the Code Administrator, the service of
notice, inspection and/or other factors incidental to the completion of the
work. The owner shall pay such costs as are charged in accordance with this
chapter within 30 days after the statement of charges has been mailed to the
owner at the address of record in the office of the County Auditor. Such
payments shall be credited to the appropriation from which such cost was paid
by the city. If the charge is not paid within 30 days after mailing, the Code
Administrator shall make a written return to the County Auditor of his or her
actions under this chapter with a statement of the charges or services, the
amount paid for labor, the fee of the officers serving the notices, the charges
incurred for notification and a proper description of the premises. These
amounts, when allowed, shall be entered into the tax duplicate and become a
lien upon such lands from and after the date of entry and be collected as other
taxes and returned to the city with the General Fund.
(Ord. 40-92, passed 3-23-1992; Ord. 123-05, passed 7-11-2005; Ord. 58-09,
passed 6-8-2009; Ord. 1-2013, passed 1-14-2013; Ord. 25-2014, passed 2-24-2014;
Ord. 23-84, passed 5-9-2023)
CHAPTER 670: WATERCRAFT
Section
670.01 Definitions; applicability
670.02 Flashing lights prohibited; exceptions
670.03 Siren prohibited; exceptions
670.04 Regulations for operation of powercraft of more than ten horsepower
670.05 Restrictions on child operators; duty of supervisory adult
670.06 Reckless operation; maintaining sufficient control; wakes restricted
670.07 Unsafe conditions
670.08 Marking of bathing and vessel areas
670.09 Mooring prohibited in certain areas
670.10 Operating under influence of alcohol or drugs prohibited
670.11 Implied consent
670.12 Incapacitated operators prohibited
670.13 Water skiing confined to ski zones
670.14 Observer required when towing skier
670.15 Water skiing after dark prohibited
670.16 Personal flotation device required for towed person
670.17 Ski jumps prohibited
670.18 Permit for special water events
670.19 Sale of single celled inflatable vessels prohibited
670.20 Sitting, standing, walking on moving vessels restricted
670.21 Engine warm-up required
670.22 Personal flotation devices for children under ten
670.23 Operation without personal flotation devices prohibited
670.24 Distress signal or flag required
670.25 Anchor requirements
670.26 Specification for fire extinguishers
670.27 Backfire flame control device required
670.28 Ventilation requirement on powercraft
670.29 Abandonment of junk vessels or outboard motors
670.30 Exhaust muffler required; noise levels; exceptions
670.31 Safety equipment on rental vessels
670.32 Capacity plate
670.33 Dwellings; sanitary systems
670.34 Prima facie evidence of negligence
670.35 Requirements for operating personal watercraft
670.36 Numbering
670.37 Registration
670.38 Altering of serial numbers; false information prohibited
670.39 Accident reports
670.40 Enforcement
670.41 Certificate of title; exceptions
670.42 Manufacturer’s or importer’s certificate
670.43 Prohibitions
670.44 Permanently displayed hull identification number
670.45 Tampering with navigation aid or vessel prohibited
§ 670.01 DEFINITIONS; APPLICABILITY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CANOE. A paddlecraft that is normally an open, narrow vessel of shallow
draft, typically pointed at both ends and propelled by its occupants through
the use of paddles while kneeling or sitting on a raised seat, including a
flat-backed canoe and a racing canoe.
      COAST GUARD APPROVED. Bearing an approval number assigned by the United
States Coast Guard.
      CONDITIONAL APPROVAL. A personal flotation device approval that has one
or more conditions with which the user must comply in order for the device to
be considered appropriate for meeting the requirements for personal flotation
devices for the vessel on which it is being used.
      DIVER’S FLAG. A red flag not less than one foot square having a diagonal
white stripe extending from the masthead to the opposite lower corner that when
displayed indicates that divers are in the water.
      DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4506.01.
      ELECTRONIC. Includes electrical, digital, magnetic, optical,
electromagnetic, or any other form of technology that entails capabilities
similar to these technologies.
      ELECTRONIC RECORD. A record generated, communicated, received, or stored
by electronic means for use in an information system or for transmission from
one information system to another.
      ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE. A signature in electronic form attached to or
logically associated with an electronic record.
      IDLE SPEED. The slowest possible speed needed to maintain steerage or
maneuverability.
      IMPOUNDMENT. The reservoir created by a dam or other artificial barrier
across a watercourse that causes water to be stored deeper than and generally
beyond the banks of the natural channel of the watercourse during periods of
normal flow, but does not include water stored behind rock piles, rock riffle
dams, and low channel dams where the depth of water is less than ten feet above
the channel bottom and is essentially confined within the banks of the natural
channel during periods of normal stream flow.
      INFLATABLE WATERCRAFT. Any vessel constructed of rubber, canvas, or other
material that is designed to be inflated with any gaseous substance,
constructed with two or more air cells, and operated as a vessel. An inflatable
watercraft propelled by a motor is a powercraft. An inflatable watercraft
propelled by a sail is a sailboat. An inflatable watercraft propelled by human
muscular effort utilizing a paddle or pole is a paddlecraft. An inflatable
watercraft propelled by human muscular effort utilizing an oar with the aid of
a fulcrum provided by oarlocks, tholepins, crutches, or similar arrangements is
a rowboat.
      IN OPERATION. In reference to a vessel means that the vessel is being
navigated or otherwise used on the waters in this state.
      KAYAK. A paddlecraft that is typically pointed at both ends and is
propelled by human muscular effort by one or more seated individuals who use a
double-bladed paddle, including an open kayak with an open deck for operator
seating, an enclosed kayak designed to enclose an occupant within a cockpit, a
tandem kayak designed for multiple occupants, and a racing kayak.
      LAW ENFORCEMENT VESSEL. Any vessel used in law enforcement or under the
command of a law enforcement officer.
      MUFFLER. An acoustical suppression device or system that is designed and
installed to abate the sound of exhaust gases emitted from an internal
combustion engine and that prevents excessive or unusual noise.
      NAVIGABLE WATERS. Waters that come under the jurisdiction of the
Department of the Army of the United States and any waterways within or
adjacent to this state, except inland lakes having neither a navigable inlet
nor outlet.
      NO WAKE. Has the same meaning as “idle speed”.
      OPERATOR. Includes any person who uses, navigates, employs, or has under
the person’s control a vessel, or vessel and detachable motor, on the waters in
this state.
      OWNER. Includes any person, other than a secured party, who claims lawful
possession of a vessel by virtue of legal title or equitable interest therein
that entitled the person to use or possess the vessel, including a person
entitled to use or possess a vessel subject to a security interest in another
person, but does not include a lessee under a lease not intended as a security.
      PADDLECRAFT. Any type of canoe, kayak, paddleboard, or other vessel
powered only by its occupants using a single or double-bladed paddle as a lever
without the aid of a fulcrum provided by oarlocks, tholepins, crutches, or
similar mechanisms.
      PERFORMANCE TYPE. The in-water performance classification of a personal
flotation device as determined by the United States Coast Guard.
      PERSON. Includes any legal entity defined as a person in R.C. § 1.59 and
any body politic, except the United States and this state, and includes any
agent, trustee, executor, receiver, assignee, or other representative thereof.
      PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A United States Coast Guard approved personal
safety device designed to provide buoyancy to support a person in the water.
      PERSONAL WATERCRAFT. A vessel, less than 16 feet in length, that is
propelled by a water- jet pump or other machinery and designed to be operated
by an individual sitting, standing, or kneeling on the vessel rather than by an
individual sitting or standing inside the vessel.
      POWERCRAFT. Any vessel propelled by machinery, fuel, rockets, or similar
device.
      ROWBOAT. An open vessel, other than a paddlecraft, that is designed to be
rowed and that is propelled by human muscular effort by oars and upon which no
mechanical propulsion device, electric motor, internal combustion engine, or
sail has been affixed or is used for the operation of the vessel. The term
includes a racing shell and a rowing skull regardless of length or
construction.
      RULES. Rules adopted by the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft
under R.C. Chapter 1547, unless the context indicates otherwise.
      SAILBOAT. Any vessel, equipped with mast and sails, dependent upon the
wind to propel it in the normal course of operation. A vessel with sail as its
primary method of propulsion and mechanical propulsion as its secondary method
of propulsion is an auxiliary sail. Any sailboat being propelled by mechanical
power, whether under sail or not, is deemed a powercraft and subject to all
laws and rules governing powercraft operation.
      SEWAGE. Human body wastes and the wastes from toilets and other
receptacles intended to receive or retain body waste.
      THROWABLE PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A device that is intended to be
thrown to a person in the water. The phrase includes a personal flotation
device marked as “Type IV” or “Type V with Type IV performance”. The phrase
does not include a wearable personal flotation device unless it is specifically
marked otherwise.
      TOWED WATERSPORT. Any activity that involves being towed by or riding in
the wake of a recreational vessel, including both of the following:
         (a)   Riding or attempting to ride on one or more water skis, a
wakeboard, a surfboard, an inflatable device, or any other device manufactured
or used for the purpose of being towed by a recreational vessel;
         (b)   Engaging or attempting to engage in barefoot skiing or
parasailing.
      TYPE ONE PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A device that is designed to turn an
unconscious person floating in water from a face downward position to a
vertical or slightly face upward position and that has at least nine kilograms,
approximately 20 pounds, of buoyancy.
      TYPE TWO PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A device that is designed to turn an
unconscious person in the water from a face downward position to a vertical or
slightly face upward position and that has at least seven kilograms,
approximately 15.4 pounds, of buoyancy.
      TYPE THREE PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A device that is designed to keep a
conscious person in a vertical or slightly face upward position and that has at
least seven kilograms, approximately 15.4 pounds, of buoyancy.
      TYPE FOUR PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A device that is designed to be
thrown to a person in the water and not worn and that has at least 7.5
kilograms, approximately 16.5 pounds, of buoyancy.
      TYPE FIVE PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A device that, unlike other personal
flotation devices, has limitations on its approval by the United States Coast
Guard, including, without limitation, any of the following:
         A.   A designation that states the device is approved only for use
while participating in specific activities;
         B.   A designation that states the device is approved only for use by
an operator or passenger of specific types of vessels;
         C.   A designation that states the device is specifically approved as
a substitute for the type of personal flotation device required for use while
engaged in certain activities or as an operator or passenger of a vessel.
      VESSEL. Includes every description of craft, including nondisplacement
craft, multimodal craft, and submersibles, being used or capable of being used
as a means of transportation on water.
      VISIBLE. Means visible on a dark night with clear atmosphere.
      WATERCOURSE. A substantially natural channel with recognized banks and
bottom in which a flow of water occurs, with an average of at least ten feet
mean surface water width and at least five miles of length.
      WATERCRAFT.
         A.   Any of the following when used or capable of being used for
transportation on the water:
            1.   A vessel operated by machinery either permanently or
temporarily affixed;
            2.   A sailboat other than a sailboard;
            3.   An inflatable, manually propelled vessel that is required by
federal law to have a hull identification number meeting the requirements of
the United States Coast Guard;
            4.   A canoe, kayak, pedalboat, or rowboat;
            5.   Any of the following multimodal craft being operated on waters
in this state:
               a.   An amphibious vehicle;
               b.   A submersible;
               c.   An airboat or hovercraft.
            6.   A vessel that has been issued a certificate of documentation
with a recreational endorsement under 46 C.F.R. 67.
         B.   The term does not include ferries as referred to in R.C. Chapter
4583.
         C.   Watercraft subject to R.C. § 1547.54 are divided into five
classes as follows:
            1.   Class A: less than 16 feet in length;
            2.   Class 1: at least 16 feet, but less than 26 feet in length;
            3.   Class 2: At least 26 feet, but less than 40 feet in length;
            4.   Class 3: At least 40 feet, but less than 65 feet in length;
            5.   Class 4: At least 65 feet in length.
      WATERCRAFT DEALER. Any person who is regularly engaged in the business of
manufacturing, selling, displaying, offering for sale, or dealing in vessels at
an established place of business that is used primarily for the selling,
displaying, offering for sale, or dealing of vessels. The phrase does not
include a person who is a marine salvage dealer or any other person who
dismantles, salvages, or rebuilds vessels using used parts.
      WATERS IN THIS STATE. All streams, rivers, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, and other bodies of water, natural or human-made, that
are situated wholly or partially within this state or within its jurisdiction
and are used for recreational boating.
      WEARABLE PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE. A device that is intended to be worn
or otherwise attached to a person’s body. The phrase includes a personal
flotation device marked as “Type I”, “Type II”, “Type III”, “Type V with Type
II performance”, or “Type V with Type III performance”.
(R.C. § 1546.01)
   (b)   Unless otherwise provided, this chapter applies to all vessels
operating on the waters in this municipality. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed in contravention of any valid federal or state act or regulation, but
is in addition to the act or regulation where not inconsistent.
(R.C. § 1547.02)
§ 670.02 FLASHING LIGHTS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   No person shall install or use any intermittently flashing light of
any type or color on any vessel in use or operation on the waters in this
municipality, except in accordance with federal law.
   (b)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.03) (Prior Code, § 670.03)
§ 670.03 SIREN PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   No person, except an authorized watercraft representative of the
federal government, the state, or any of its political subdivisions shall use
or operate a siren on the waters in this municipality except for emergency
purposes.
   (b)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.04) (Prior Code, § 670.04)
§ 670.04 REGULATIONS FOR OPERATION OF POWERCRAFT OF MORE THAN TEN HORSEPOWER.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) of this section, no person
born on or after January 1, 1982, shall operate on the waters in this
municipality a powercraft powered by more than ten horsepower, unless the
operator successfully has completed either a safe boater course approved by the
National Association of State Boating Law Administrators or a proctored or
nonproctored proficiency examination that tests knowledge of information
included in the curriculum of such a course, and has received a certificate as
evidence of successful completion of the course or examination.
      (2)   Division (a)(1) of this section does not apply to an individual who
possesses valid merchant mariner credentials issued by the United States Coast
Guard in accordance with 46 C.F.R. 10.109 with at least one endorsement of
master or operator as defined in 46 C.F.R. § 10.107. Such an individual, while
operating any recreational vessel on the waters in this municipality, shall
carry onboard documentation of the merchant mariner credentials and required
endorsements and shall present the documentation to a natural resources officer
or law enforcement officer upon request.
      (3)   No person shall permit a powercraft to be operated in this
municipality in violation of division (a)(1) of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.05)
   (b)   A person born on or after January 1, 1982, who is operating on the
waters in this municipality a powercraft powered by more than ten horsepower
and who is stopped by a law enforcement officer in the enforcement of R.C.
Chapter 1547 or rules shall present to the law enforcement officer, not later
than 72 hours after being stopped, a certificate obtained by the person
pursuant to division (a) of this section prior to being stopped or proof of
holding such a certificate. Failure of the person to present the certificate or
proof of holding it within 72 hours constitutes prima facie evidence of a
violation of division (a) of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.051)
   (c)   No rental business shall lease, hire, or rent a powercraft powered by
more than ten horsepower for operation on the waters in this municipality to a
person born on or after January 1, 1982, unless the person meets one of the
following requirements:
      (1)   The person signs a statement on the rental agreement or attached to
the rental agreement that the person has successfully completed a safe boater
course approved by the National Association of State Boating Law Administrators
or has successfully completed a proficiency examination as provided in division
(a) of this section.
      (2)   The person receives educational materials from the rental business
and successfully passes, with a score of 90% or better, an abbreviated
examination given by the rental business. The achievement of a passing score on
the examination shall be indicated on or attached to the powercraft rental
agreement.
   (d)   Any person born on or after January 1, 1982, operating or supervising
the operation of a leased, hired, or rented powercraft shall:
      (1)   Meet the requirements for boater education of division (c) of this
section.
      (2)   Be named as an operator on the agreement that leases, hires, or
rents the powercraft.
   (e)   The Division of Parks and Watercraft shall make available to all
watercraft rental businesses in the state boater safety educational materials
and an abbreviated examination that shall be used by the watercraft rental
business for the purposes of division (c)(2) of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.052)
   (f)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the violation is not related to a
collision, injury to a person, or damage to property and a misdemeanor of the
third degree if the violation is related to a collision, injury to a person, or
damage to property.
(R.C. § 1547.99(K))
(Prior Code, § 670.055)
§ 670.05 RESTRICTIONS ON CHILD OPERATORS; DUTY OF SUPERVISORY ADULT.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, no person under 16
years of age shall operate a personal watercraft on the waters in this
municipality. A person who is not less than 12 nor more than 15 years of age
may operate a personal watercraft if a supervising person 18 years of age or
older is aboard the personal watercraft and, in the case of a supervising
person born on or after January 1, 1982, if the supervising person holds a
certificate obtained under §
670.04(a) or, in the case of a rented powercraft, meets the requirements of §
670.04(c) and (d).
   (b)   No person under 12 years of age shall operate any vessel on the waters
in this municipality unless the person is under the direct visual and audible
supervision, during the operation, of a person who is 18 years of age or older.
This division does not apply to a personal watercraft, which shall be governed
by division (a) of this section, or to a powercraft, other than a personal
watercraft, powered by more than ten horsepower, which shall be governed by
division (c) of this section.
   (c)   No person under 12 years of age shall operate on the waters in this
municipality a powercraft, other than a personal watercraft, powered by more
than ten horsepower unless the person is under the direct visual and audible
supervision, during the operation, of a person 18 years of age or older who is
aboard the powercraft and, in the case of such a supervising person born on or
after January 1, 1982, who holds a certificate obtained under §
670.04(a) or, in the case of a rented powercraft, meets the requirements of §
670.04(c) and (d).
   (d)   No supervising person 18 years of age or older shall permit any person
who is under the supervising person’s supervision and who is operating a vessel
on the waters in this municipality to violate any section of this chapter, R.C.
Chapter 1547 or a rule.
(R.C. § 1547.06) (Prior Code, § 670.06)
§ 670.06 RECKLESS OPERATION; MAINTAINING SUFFICIENT CONTROL; WAKES RESTRICTED.
   (a)   Reckless operation.
      (1)   Any person who operates any vessel or manipulates any water skis,
aquaplane, or similar device on the waters in this municipality carelessly or
heedlessly, or in disregard of the rights or safety of any person, vessel, or
property, or without due caution, at a rate of speed or in a manner so as to
endanger any person, vessel, or property is guilty of reckless operation of the
vessel or other device.
      (2)   No person shall operate or permit the operation of a vessel in an
unsafe manner. A vessel shall be operated in a reasonable and prudent manner at
all times. Unsafe vessel operation includes, without limitation, any of the
following:
         A.   A vessel becoming airborne or completely leaving the water while
crossing the wake of another vessel at a distance of less than 100 feet, or at
an unsafe distance, from the vessel creating the wake;
         B.   Operating at such a speed and proximity to another vessel or to a
person attempting to ride on one or more water skis, surfboard, inflatable
device, or similar device being towed by a vessel so as to require the operator
of either vessel to swerve or turn abruptly to avoid collision;
         C.   Operating less than 200 feet directly behind a person water
skiing or attempting to water ski;
         D.   Weaving through congested traffic.
(R.C. § 1547.07)
   (b)   Maintaining sufficient control. No person shall operate or permit the
operation of a vessel on the waters in this municipality without maintaining
sufficient control to avoid an incident that results in property damage,
physical injury, loss of life, or any combination of them.
(R.C. § 1547.072)
   (c)   Wakes restricted.
      (1)   As used in this division (c), PUBLIC SERVICE means activities that
include but are not limited to escorting or patrolling special water events,
traffic control, salvage, firefighting, medical assistance, assisting disabled
vessels, and search and rescue.
      (2)   No person shall operate a vessel at a speed that creates a wake
within 100 feet of a stationary law enforcement vessel displaying at least one
flashing, oscillating, or rotating light conforming with 33 C.F.R. § 88.11.
      (3)   No person shall operate a vessel at a speed that creates a wake
within 100 feet of a vessel that is being used to provide public service and
that displays at least one flashing, oscillating, or rotating light conforming
with 33 C.F.R. § 88.12.
      (4)   No person shall permit any vessel to be operated on the waters in
this municipality in violation of this division (c).
(R.C. § 1547.132)
   (d)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates divisions (a) or (c) of this section without
causing injury to persons or damage to property is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(D))
      (2)   Whoever violates divisions (a) or (c) of this section causing
injury to persons or damage to property is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(E))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section shall be subject to
the penalty provided in § 202.99.
(Prior Code, § 670.07)
§ 670.07 UNSAFE CONDITIONS.
   (a)   If a law enforcement officer observes a vessel being used and
determines that at least one of the unsafe conditions identified in division
(c) of this section is present and that an especially hazardous condition
exists, the officer may direct the operator of the vessel to take whatever
immediate and reasonable actions are necessary for the safety of the persons
aboard the vessel, including directing the operator to return the vessel to
mooring and remain there until the situation creating the hazardous condition
is corrected or has ended. For the purposes of this section, an especially
hazardous condition is one in which a reasonably prudent person would believe
that the continued operation of a vessel would create a special hazard to the
safety of the persons aboard the vessel.
   (b)   The refusal by an operator of a vessel to terminate use of the vessel
after being ordered to do so by a law enforcement officer under division (a) of
this section is prima facie evidence of a violation of §
670.06.
   (c)   For the purposes of this section, any of the following is an unsafe
condition:
      (1)   Insufficient personal flotation devices;
      (2)   Insufficient fire extinguishers;
      (3)   Overloaded, insufficient freeboard for the water conditions in
which the vessel is operating;
      (4)   Improper display of navigation lights;
      (5)   Fuel leaks, including fuel leaking from either the engine or the
fuel system;
      (6)   Accumulation of or an abnormal amount of fuel in the bilges;
      (7)   Inadequate backfire flame control;
      (8)   Improper ventilation.
   (d)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Foreign vessels temporarily using waters that are subject to the
jurisdiction of the United States;
      (2)   Military vessels, vessels owned by the state or a political
subdivision, or other public vessels, except those that are used for
recreation;
      (3)   A ship’s lifeboats, as defined in R.C. § 1548.01;
      (4)   Vessels that are solely commercial and that are carrying more than
six passengers for hire.
(R.C. § 1547.071) (Prior Code, § 670.075)
§ 670.08 MARKING OF BATHING AND VESSEL AREAS.
   (a)   No person shall operate a vessel within or through a designated
bathing area or within or through any area that has been buoyed off designating
it as an area in which vessels are prohibited.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall operate a vessel at greater than idle speed or
at a speed that creates a wake under any of the following circumstances:
         A.   Within 300 feet of any marina, boat docking facility, boat
gasoline dock, launch ramp, recreational boat harbor, or harbor entrance on
Lake Erie or on the Ohio River;
         B.   During the period from sunset to sunrise according to local time
within any water between the Dan Beard bridge and the Brent Spence bridge on
the Ohio River for any vessel not documented by the United States Coast Guard
as commercial;
         C.   Within any area buoyed or marked as a no wake area on the waters
in this municipality.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply in either of the
following places:
         A.   An area designated by the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft unless it is marked by a buoy or sign as a no wake or idle speed
area;
         B.   Within any water between the Dan Beard bridge and the Brent
Spence bridge on the Ohio River when the United States Coast Guard has
authorized the holding of a special event of a community nature on that water.
   (c)   No person shall operate a vessel in any area of restricted or
controlled operation in violation of the designated restriction.
   (d)   No person shall operate a vessel within 300 feet of an official
diver’s flag unless the person is tendering the diving operation.
   (e)   (1)   All areas of restricted or controlled operation as described in
division (a) of this section or as provided for in §
670.13 or R.C. § 1547.16 or 1547.61 shall be marked by a buoy or sign
designating the restriction. All waters surrounded by or lying between such a
buoy or sign and the closest shoreline are thereby designated as an area in
which the designated restrictions shall apply in the operation of any vessel.
      (2)   Markings on buoys designating areas of restricted or controlled
operation shall be so spaced as to show all around the horizon. Lineal spacing
between the buoys shall be such that under normal conditions of visibility any
buoy shall be readily visible from the next adjacent buoy. No colors or
symbols, except as provided for in rules, shall be used on buoys or signs for
marking closed or controlled areas of boating waters.
      (3)   Any state department, conservancy district, or political
subdivision having jurisdiction and control of impounded boating waters may
place such buoys or signs on its waters. Any political subdivision may apply to
the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft for permission to place such
buoys or signs on other waters within its territorial limits. No person shall
place or cause to be placed a regulatory buoy or sign on, into, or along the
waters in this municipality unless the person has complied with all the
provisions of this chapter and R.C. Chapter 1547.
   (f)   No person shall enter, operate a vessel that enters, or allow a vessel
to enter a federally-declared security zone as defined in 33 C.F.R. Chapter 1,
subparts 6.01-1, 6.01-2, 6.01-3, 6.01-4, 6.01-5, 6.04-1, 6.04-5, 6.04-6, 6.04-
7, and 6.04-8.
   (g)   No person shall permit any vessel to be operated on the waters in this
municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.08)
   (h)   (1)   Whoever violates divisions (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), or (g) of
this section shall be punished as provided in § 202.99.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (f) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(B))
(Prior Code, § 670.08)
§ 670.09 MOORING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS.
   (a)   No person shall moor or anchor any vessel in a designated speed zone
or water ski zone. No person, unless in distress and no other vessel is
endangered thereby, shall moor to, anchor to, or tie up to any marker, aid,
buoy, light, or other aid to navigation.
   (b)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.09) (Prior Code, § 670.09)
§ 670.10 OPERATING UNDER INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL OR DRUGS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall operate or be in physical control of any vessel
underway or shall manipulate any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device on
the waters in this municipality if, at the time of the operation, control, or
manipulation, any of the following applies:
      (1)    The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
a combination of them.
      (2)   The person has a concentration of 0.08% or more by weight of
alcohol per unit volume in the person’s whole blood.
      (3)   The person has a concentration of 0.096% or more by weight per unit
volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or plasma.
      (4)   The person has a concentration of 0.11 grams or more by weight of
alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
      (5)   The person has a concentration of 0.08 grams or more by weight of
alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
      (6)   Except as provided in division (h) of this section, the person has
a concentration of any of the following controlled substances or metabolites of
a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds any of the following:
         A.   The person has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s
urine of at least 500 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter
of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
         B.   The person has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s urine
of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s urine or
has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
         C.   The person has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter
of the person’s urine or has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of
cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
         D.   The person has a concentration of heroin in the person’s urine of
at least 2,000 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s urine or has
a concentration of heroin in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma
of at least 50 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma.
         E.   The person has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl
morphine) in the person’s urine of at least ten nanograms of heroin metabolite
(6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a
concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma.
         F.   The person has a concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s urine of
at least 25 nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a
concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of
at least ten nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma.
         G.   The person has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s urine
of at least ten nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the person’s urine or
has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least two nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
         H.   The State Board of Pharmacy has adopted a rule pursuant to R.C. §
4729.041 that specifies the amount of salvia divinorum and the amount of
salvinorin A that constitute concentrations of salvia divinorum and salvinorin
A in a person’s urine, in a person’s whole blood, or in a person’s blood serum
or plasma at or above which the person is impaired for purposes of operating or
being in physical control of any vessel underway or manipulating any water
skis, aquaplane, or similar device on the waters of this state, the rule is in
effect, and the person has a concentration of salvia divinorum or salvinorin A
of at least that amount so specified by rule in the person’s urine, in the
person’s whole blood, or in the person’s blood serum or plasma.
         I.   Either of the following applies:
            1.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse,
or a combination of them, and, as measured by gas chromatography mass
spectrometry, the person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the
person’s urine of at least 15 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter
of the person’s urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least five nanograms of
marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum
or plasma.
            2.   As measured by gas chromatography mass spectrometry, the
person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s urine of at
least 35 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s urine
or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
         J.   The person has a concentration of methamphetamine in the person’s
urine of at least 500 nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of the
person’s urine or has a concentration of methamphetamine in the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of methamphetamine per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
         K.   The person has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person’s
urine of at least 25 nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter
of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
   (b)   No person under 21 years of age shall operate or be in physical
control of any vessel underway or shall manipulate any water skis, aquaplane,
or similar device on the waters in this municipality if, at the time of the
operation, control, or manipulation, any of the following applies:
      (1)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02%, but less than
0.08% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
      (2)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.03% but less than
0.096% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma.
      (3)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.028 grams, but less
than 0.11 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
      (4)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02 grams, but less
than 0.08 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’
   (c)   In any proceeding arising out of one incident, a person may be charged
with a violation of division (a)(1) and a violation of division (b)(1), (b)(2),
(b)(3), or (b)(4) of this section, but the person shall not be convicted of
more than one violation of those divisions.
   (d)   (1)   A.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding
for a violation of division (a) or (b) of this section or for an equivalent
offense that is watercraft-related, the result of any test of any blood, oral
fluid, or urine withdrawn and analyzed at any health care provider, as defined
in R.C. § 2317.02, may be admitted with expert testimony to be considered with
any other relevant and competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence
of the defendant.
         B.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (a) or (b) of this section or for an equivalent offense
that is watercraft-related, the court may admit evidence on the presence and
concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse, controlled substances, metabolites of
a controlled substance, or a combination of them in the defendant's or child's
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, urine, oral fluid, or breath at the time of
the alleged violation as shown by chemical analysis of the substance withdrawn,
or specimen taken within three hours of the time of the alleged violation. The
three-hour time limit specified in this division regarding the admission of
evidence does not extend or affect the two-hour time limit specified in R.C. §
1547.111(C), or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, as the
maximum period of time during which a person may consent to a chemical test or
tests as described in that section. The court may admit evidence on the
presence and concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse, or a combination of them
as described in this division when a person submits to a blood, breath, urine,
oral fluid, or other bodily substance test at the request of a law enforcement
officer under R.C. § 1547.111, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, or a blood or urine sample is obtained pursuant to a search warrant.
Only a physician, a registered nurse, an emergency medical technician-
intermediate, an emergency medical technician-paramedic, or a qualified
technician, chemist, or phlebotomist shall withdraw blood for the purpose of
determining the alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled
substance, or combination content of the whole blood, blood serum, or blood
plasma. This limitation does not apply to the taking of breath, oral fluid, or
urine specimens. A person authorized to withdraw blood under this division may
refuse to withdraw blood under this division if, in that person's opinion, the
physical welfare of the defendant or child would be endangered by withdrawing
blood.
         C.   The whole blood, blood serum or plasma, urine, oral fluid, or
breath withdrawn under division (d)(1)B. of this section shall be analyzed in
accordance with methods approved by the Director of Health by an individual
possessing a valid permit issued by the Director pursuant to R.C. § 3701.143.
      (2)   In a criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (a) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is
watercraft-related, if there was at the time the bodily substance was taken a
concentration of less than the applicable concentration of alcohol specified
for a violation of division (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), or (a)(5) of this section
or less than the applicable concentration of a listed controlled substance or a
listed metabolite of a controlled substance specified for a violation of
division (a)(6) of this section, that fact may be considered with other
competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant or in
making an adjudication for the child. This division does not limit or affect a
criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of division
(b) of this section or for a violation of a prohibition that is substantially
equivalent to that division.
      (3)   A.   Upon the request of the person who was tested, the results of
the chemical test shall be made available to the person or the person's
attorney immediately upon completion of the test analysis.
         B.   If the chemical test was administered pursuant to division (d)
(1)B. of this section, the person tested may have a physician, registered
nurse, or qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist of the person's own
choosing administer a chemical test or tests in addition to any administered at
the direction of a law enforcement officer, and shall be so advised. The
failure or inability to obtain an additional test by a person shall not
preclude the admission of evidence relating to the test or tests taken at the
direction of a law enforcement officer.
   (e)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (a) or (b) of this section, of a municipal ordinance
relating to operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or to
manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device on the waters of this
state while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them, or of a municipal ordinance relating to operating or being in physical
control of any vessel underway or to manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or
similar device on the waters of this state with a prohibited concentration of
alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine, if a law
enforcement officer has administered a field sobriety test to the operator or
person found to be in physical control of the vessel underway involved in the
violation or the person manipulating the water skis, aquaplane, or similar
device involved in the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing
evidence that the officer administered the test in substantial compliance with
the testing standards for reliable, credible, and generally accepted field
sobriety tests for vehicles that were in effect at the time the tests were
administered, including but not limited to any testing standards then in effect
that have been set by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, that
by their nature are not clearly inapplicable regarding the operation or
physical control of vessels underway or the manipulation of water skis,
aquaplanes, or similar devices, all of the following apply:
         A.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
         B.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field sobriety
test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal prosecution
or juvenile court proceeding.
         C.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (e)(1)a. or (e)(1)b. of this section and if the testimony or evidence
is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the testimony
or evidence, and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the trier of
fact considers to be appropriate.
      (2)   Division (e)(1) of this section does not limit or preclude a court,
in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (e)(1) of this section.
   (f)   (1)   Subject to division (f)(3) of this section, in any criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of division (a) or (b)
of this section or for an equivalent offense that is substantially equivalent
to either of those divisions, the court shall admit as prima facie evidence a
laboratory report from any laboratory personnel issued a permit by the
Department of Health authorizing an analysis as described in this division that
contains an analysis of the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine,
or other bodily substance tested and that contains all of the information
specified in this division. The laboratory report shall contain all of the
following:
         A.   The signature, under oath, of any person who performed the
analysis;
         B.   Any findings as to the identity and quantity of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, a controlled substance, a metabolite of a controlled substance, or a
combination of them that was found;
         C.   A copy of a notarized statement by the laboratory director or a
designee of the director that contains the name of each certified analyst or
test performer involved with the report, the analyst’s or test performer’s
employment relationship with the laboratory that issued the report, and a
notation that performing an analysis of the type involved is part of the
analyst’s or test performer’s regular duties;
         D.   An outline of the analyst’s or test performer’s education,
training, and experience in performing the type of analysis involved and a
certification that the laboratory satisfies appropriate quality control
standards in general and, in this particular analysis, under rules of the
Department of Health.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the admission
of evidence, a report of the type described in division (f)(1) of this section
is not admissible against the defendant or child to whom it pertains in any
proceeding, other than a preliminary hearing or a grand jury proceeding, unless
the prosecutor has served a copy of the report on the defendant’s or child’s
attorney or, if the defendant or child has no attorney, on the defendant or
child.
      (3)   A report of the type described in division (f)(1) of this section
shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity, or amount of any
substance if, within seven days after the defendant or child to whom the report
pertains or the defendant’s or child’s attorney receives a copy of the report,
the defendant or child or the defendant’s or child’s attorney demands the
testimony of the person who signed the report. The judge in the case may extend
the seven- day time limit in the interests of justice.
   (g)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, any physician,
registered nurse, emergency medical technician-intermediate, emergency medical
technician-paramedic, or qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist who
withdraws blood from a person pursuant to this section, R.C. § 1547.111 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and a hospital, first-aid
station, or clinic at which blood is withdrawn from a person pursuant to this
section, R.C. § 1547.111 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
is immune from criminal and civil liability based upon a claim of assault and
battery or any other claim that is not a claim of malpractice, for any act
performed in withdrawing blood from the person. The immunity provided in this
division also extends to an emergency medical service organization that employs
an emergency medical technician-intermediate or an emergency medical
technician-paramedic who withdraws blood under this section. The immunity
provided in this division is not available to a person who withdraws blood if
the person engages in willful or wanton misconduct.
   (h)   Division (a)(6) of this section does not apply to a person who
operates or is in physical control of a vessel underway or manipulates any
water skis, aquaplane, or similar device while the person has a concentration
of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled
substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that
equals or exceeds the amount specified in that division, if both of the
following apply:
      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
      (2)   The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
   (i)   As used in this section and §
670.11:
      COCAINE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
      CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL
TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4765.01.
      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.181.
      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE THAT IS WATERCRAFT-RELATED. Means an equivalent
offense that is one of the following:
         A.   A violation of division (a) of this section;
         B.   A violation of a municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from
operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or from
manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device on the waters of this
state while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them or prohibiting a person from operating or being in physical control of
any vessel underway or from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar
device on the waters of this state with a prohibited concentration of alcohol,
a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine;
         C.   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
division (a) of this section;
         D.   A violation of an existing or former law of this state that is or
was substantially equivalent to division (a) of this section.
      L.S.D. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
      MARIHUANA. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
      NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMINISTRATION. Has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 4511.19.
      OPERATE. Means that a vessel is being used on the waters in this state
when the vessel is not securely affixed to a dock or to shore or to any
permanent structure to which the vessel has the right to affix or that a vessel
is not anchored in a designated anchorage area or boat camping area that is
established by the United States Coast Guard, this state, or a political
subdivision and in which the vessel has the right to anchor.
(R.C. § 1547.11)
   (j)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree and shall be punished as provided in division (j)(1), (j)(2), or (j)(3)
of this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (j)(2) or (j)(3) of this
section, the court shall sentence the offender to a jail term of three
consecutive days and may sentence the offender pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24 to a
longer jail term. In addition, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine
of not less than $150 nor more than $1,000. The court may suspend the execution
of the mandatory jail term of three consecutive days that it is required to
impose by this division (j)(1) if the court, in lieu of the suspended jail
term, places the offender under a community control sanction pursuant to R.C. §
2929.25 and requires the offender to attend, for three consecutive days, a
drivers’ intervention program that is certified pursuant to R.C. § 5119.38. The
court also may suspend the execution of any part of the mandatory jail term of
three consecutive days that it is required to impose by this division (j)(1) if
the court places the offender under a community control sanction pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.25 for part of the three consecutive days; requires the offender to
attend, for that part of the three consecutive days, a drivers’ intervention
program that is certified pursuant to R.C. § 5119.38; and sentences the
offender to a jail term equal to the remainder of the three consecutive days
that the offender does not spend attending the drivers’ intervention program.
The court may require the offender, as a condition of community control, to
attend and satisfactorily complete any treatment or education programs, in
addition to the required attendance at a drivers’ intervention program, that
the operators of the drivers’ intervention program determine that the offender
should attend and to report periodically to the court on the offender’s
progress in the programs. The court also may impose any other conditions of
community control on the offender that it considers necessary.
      (2)   If, within ten years of the offense, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of division (a) of this
section, R.C. § 1547.11(A) or one other equivalent offense, the court shall
sentence the offender to a jail term of ten consecutive days and may sentence
the offender pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24 to a longer jail term. In addition, the
court shall impose upon the offender a fine of not less than $150 nor more than
$1,000. In addition to any other sentence that it imposes upon the offender,
the court may require the offender to attend a drivers’ intervention program
that is certified pursuant to R.C. § 5119.38.
      (3)   If, within ten years of the offense, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to more than one violation or offense identified
in division (j)(2) of this section, the court shall sentence the offender to a
jail term of 30 consecutive days and may sentence the offender to a longer jail
term of not more than one year. In addition, the court shall impose upon the
offender a fine of not less than $150 nor more than $1,000. In addition to any
other sentence that it imposes upon the offender, the court may require the
offender to attend a drivers’ intervention program that is certified pursuant
to R.C. § 5119.38.
      (4)   Upon a showing that serving a jail term would seriously affect the
ability of an offender sentenced pursuant to division (j)(1), (j)(2), or (j)(3)
of this section to continue the offender’s employment, the court may authorize
that the offender be granted work release after the offender has served the
mandatory jail term of three, ten, or 30 consecutive days that the court is
required by division (j)(1), (j)(2), or (j)(3) of this section to impose. No
court shall authorize work release during the mandatory jail term of three,
ten, or 30 consecutive days that the court is required by division (j)(1), (j)
(2), or (j)(3) of this section to impose. The duration of the work release
shall not exceed the time necessary each day for the offender to commute to and
from the place of employment and the place in which the jail term is served and
the time actually spent under employment.
      (5)   Notwithstanding any section of the Ohio Revised Code that
authorizes the suspension of the imposition or execution of a sentence or the
placement of an offender in any treatment program in lieu of being imprisoned
or serving a jail term, no court shall suspend the mandatory jail term of ten
or 30 consecutive days required to be imposed by division (j)(2) or (j)(3) of
this section or place an offender who is sentenced pursuant to division (j)(2)
or (j)(3) of this section in any treatment program in lieu of being imprisoned
or serving a jail term until after the offender has served the mandatory jail
term of ten or 30 consecutive days required to be imposed pursuant to division
(j)(2) or (j)(3) of this section. Notwithstanding any section of the Ohio
Revised Code that authorizes the suspension of the imposition or execution of a
sentence or the placement of an offender in any treatment program in lieu of
being imprisoned or serving a jail term, no court, except as specifically
authorized by division (j)(1) of this section, shall suspend the mandatory jail
term of three consecutive days required to be imposed by division (j)(1) of
this section or place an offender who is sentenced pursuant to division (j)(1)
of this section in any treatment program in lieu of imprisonment until after
the offender has served the mandatory jail term of three consecutive days
required to be imposed pursuant to division (j)(1) of this section.
      (6)   As used in this division (j) of this section:
         EQUIVALENT OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.181.
         JAIL TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
         MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
(R.C. § 1547.99(G))
(Prior Code, § 670.10)
§ 670.11 IMPLIED CONSENT.
   (a)   (1)   A.   Any person who operates or is in physical control of a
vessel or manipulates any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device upon any
waters in this municipality shall be deemed to have given consent to a chemical
test or tests to determine the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance,
metabolite of a controlled substance, or combination content of the person's
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine if arrested
for operating or being in physical control of a vessel or manipulating any
water skis, aquaplane, or similar device in violation of R.C. § 1547.11 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
         B.   The test or tests under division (a)(1) of this section shall be
administered at the request of a law enforcement officer having reasonable
grounds to believe the person was operating or in physical control of a vessel
or manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device in violation of
R.C. § 1547.11 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. The law
enforcement agency by which the officer is employed shall designate which test
or tests shall be administered.
      (2)   Any person who is dead or unconscious or who otherwise is in a
condition rendering the person incapable of refusal shall be deemed to have
consented as provided in division (a)(1) of this section, and the test or tests
may be administered, subject to R.C. §§ 313.12 through 313.16.
   (b)   (1)   If a law enforcement officer arrests a person for operating or
being in physical control of a vessel or manipulating any water skis, aquaplane
or similar device in violation of R.C. § 1547.11 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and if the person previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to two or more violations of § 1547.11(A) or other equivalent
offenses, the law enforcement officer shall request the person to submit, and
the person shall submit, to a chemical test or tests of the person's whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine for the purpose of
determining the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a
controlled substance, or combination content of the person's whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine. A law enforcement officer who
makes a request pursuant to this division that a person submit to a chemical
test or tests is not required to advise the person of the consequences of
refusing to submit to the test or tests and is not required to give the person
the form described in division (c) of this section, but the officer shall
advise the person at the time of the arrest that if the person refuses to take
a chemical test the officer may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary
to ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person's whole
blood or blood serum or plasma. The officer shall also advise the person at the
time of the arrest that the person may have an independent chemical test taken
at the person's own expense. The advice shall be in written form prescribed by
the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft and shall be read to the
person. The form shall contain a statement that the form was shown to the
person under arrest and read to the person by the arresting officer. The
reading of the form shall be witnessed by one or more persons, and the
witnesses shall certify to this fact by signing the form. Divisions (a)(1)B.
and (a)(2) of this section apply to the administration of a chemical test or
tests pursuant to this division.
      (2)   If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test upon a request
made pursuant to division (b)(1) of this section, the law enforcement officer
who made the request may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary to
ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma. A law enforcement officer who acts pursuant to this
division to ensure that a person submits to a chemical test of the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma is immune from criminal and civil
liability based upon a claim for assault and battery or any other claim for the
acts, unless the officer so acted with malicious purpose, in bad faith, or in a
wanton or reckless manner.
   (c)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, any person under
arrest for violating R.C. § 1547.11 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance shall be advised of the consequences of refusing to submit to a
chemical test or tests designated as provided in division (a) of this section.
The advice shall be in a written form prescribed by the Chief of the Division
of Parks and Watercraft and shall be read to the person. The form shall contain
a statement that the form was shown to the person under arrest and read to the
person by the arresting officer. The reading of the form shall be witnessed by
one or more persons, and the witnesses shall certify to this fact by signing
the form. The person must submit to the chemical test or tests, subsequent to
the request of the arresting officer, within two hours of the time of the
alleged violation, and if the person does not submit to the test or tests
within that two-hour time limit, the failure to submit automatically
constitutes a refusal to submit to the test or tests.
   (d)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, if a law
enforcement officer asks a person under arrest for violating R.C. § 1547.11 or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to submit to a chemical test or
tests as provided in division (a) of this section, if the arresting officer
advises the person of the consequences of the person’s refusal as provided in
division (c) of this section, and the person refuses to submit, no chemical
test shall be given. Upon receipt of a sworn statement of the officer that the
arresting law enforcement officer had reasonable grounds to believe the
arrested person violated R.C. § 1547.11 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance and that the person refused to submit to the chemical test upon the
request of the officer, and upon receipt of the form as provided in division
(c) of this section certifying that the arrested person was advised of the
consequences of the refusal, the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft
shall inform the person by written notice that the person is prohibited from
operating or being in physical control of a vessel, from manipulating any water
skis, aquaplane, or similar device, and from registering any watercraft in
accordance with R.C. § 1547.54, for one year following the date of the alleged
violation. The suspension of these operation, physical control, manipulation,
and registration privileges shall continue for the entire one-year period,
subject to review as provided in this section.
      (2)   If the person under arrest is the owner of the vessel involved in
the alleged violation, the law enforcement officer who arrested the person
shall seize the watercraft registration certificate and tags from the vessel
involved in the violation and forward them to the Chief of the Division of
Parks and Watercraft. The Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft shall
retain the impounded registration certificate and tags and shall impound all
other registration certificates and tags issued to the person in accordance
with R.C. §§ 1547.54 and 1547.57, for a period of one year following the date
of the alleged violation, subject to review as provided in this section.
      (3)   If the arrested person fails to surrender the registration
certificate because it is not on the person of the arrested person or in the
watercraft, the law enforcement officer who made the arrest shall order the
person to surrender it within 24 hours to the law enforcement officer or the
law enforcement agency that employs the law enforcement officer. If the person
fails to do so, the law enforcement officer shall notify the Chief of the
Division of Parks and Watercraft of that fact in the statement the officer
submits to the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft under this
division.
   (e)   Upon suspending a person’s operation, physical control, manipulation,
and registration privileges in accordance with division (d) of this section,
the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft shall notify the person in
writing, at the person’s last known address, and inform the person that the
person may petition for a hearing in accordance with division (f) of this
section. If a person whose operation, physical control, manipulation, and
registration privileges have been suspended petitions for a hearing or appeals
any adverse decision, the suspension shall begin at the termination of any
hearing or appeal unless the hearing or appeal results in a decision favorable
to the person.
   (f)   (1)   Any person who has been notified by the Chief of the Division of
Parks and Watercraft that the person is prohibited from operating or being in
physical control of a vessel or manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or
similar device and from registering any watercraft in accordance with R.C. §
1547.54, or who has had the registration certificate and tags of the person’s
watercraft impounded pursuant to division (d) of this section, within 20 days
of the notification or impoundment, may file a petition in the municipal court
or the county court, or if the person is a minor in juvenile court, with
jurisdiction over the place at which the arrest occurred, agreeing to pay the
cost of the proceedings and alleging error in the action taken by the Chief of
the Division of Parks and Watercraft under division (d) of this section or
alleging one or more of the matters within the scope of the hearing as provided
in this section, or both. The petitioner shall notify the Chief of the Division
of Parks and Watercraft of the filing of the petition and send the Chief of the
Division of Parks and Watercraft a copy of the petition.
      (2)   The scope of the hearing is limited to the issues of whether the
law enforcement officer had reasonable grounds to believe the petitioner was
operating or in physical control of a vessel or manipulating any water skis,
aquaplane, or similar device in violation of R.C. § 1547.11 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, whether the petitioner was placed under arrest,
whether the petitioner refused to submit to the chemical test upon request of
the officer, and whether the petitioner was advised of the consequences of the
petitioner’s refusal.
   (g)   (1)   The Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft shall furnish
the court a copy of the affidavit as provided in division (c) of this section
and any other relevant information requested by the court.
      (2)   In hearing the matter and in determining whether the person has
shown error in the decision taken by the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft as provided in division (d) of this section, the court shall decide
the issue upon the relevant, competent, and material evidence submitted by the
Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft or the person whose operation,
physical control, manipulation, and registration privileges have been
suspended. In the proceedings, the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft shall be represented by the prosecuting attorney of the county in
which the petition is filed if the petition is filed in a county court or
juvenile court, except that if the arrest occurred within a city or village
within the jurisdiction of the county court in which the petition is filed, the
city director of law or village solicitor of that city or village shall
represent the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft. If the petition is
filed in the municipal court, the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft
shall be represented as provided in R.C. § 1901.34.
      (3)   If the court finds from the evidence submitted that the person has
failed to show error in the action taken by the Chief of the Division of Parks
and Watercraft under division (d) of this section or in one or more of the
matters within the scope of the hearing as provided in division (f) of this
section, or both, the court shall assess the cost of the proceeding against the
person and shall uphold the suspension of the operation, physical control, use,
and registration privileges provided in division (d) of this section. If the
court finds that the person has shown error in the action taken by the Chief of
the Division of Parks and Watercraft under division (d) of this section or in
one or more of the matters within the scope of the hearing as provided in
division (f) of this section, or both, the cost of the proceedings shall be
paid out of the county treasury of the county in which the proceedings were
held, Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft shall reinstate the
operation, physical control, manipulation, and registration privileges of the
person without charge, and the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft
shall return the registration certificate and tags, if impounded, without
charge.
      (4)   The court shall give information in writing of any action taken
under this section to the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft.
   (h)   At the end of any period of suspension or impoundment imposed under
this section, and upon request of the person whose operation, physical control,
use, and registration privileges were suspended or whose registration
certificate and tags were impounded, the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft shall reinstate the person’s operation, physical control,
manipulation, and registration privileges by written notice and return the
certificate and tags.
   (i)   No person who has received written notice from the Chief of the
Division of Parks and Watercraft that the person is prohibited from operating
or being in control of a vessel, from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane,
or similar device, and from registering a watercraft, or who has had the
registration certificate and tags of the person’s watercraft impounded, in
accordance with division (d) of this section or R.C. § 1547.111(D), shall
operate or be in physical control of a vessel or manipulate any water skis,
aquaplane, or similar device for a period of one year following the date of the
person’s alleged violation of R.C. § 1547.11 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 1547.111)
   (j)   Whoever violates division (i) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(B))
(Prior Code, § 670.105)
§ 670.12 INCAPACITATED OPERATORS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall operate any vessel if the person is so mentally or
physically incapacitated as to be unable to operate the vessel in a safe and
competent manner.
   (b)   No person shall permit any vessel to be operated on the waters in this
municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.12)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section without causing injury to persons or
damage to property is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(D))
   (d)   Whoever violates this section causing injury to persons or damage to
property is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(E))
(Prior Code, § 670.11)
§ 670.13 WATER SKIING CONFINED TO SKI ZONES.
   (a)   Except on the waters of the Ohio River, or Lake Erie and immediately
connected harbors and bays, any person who rides or attempts to ride upon one
or more water skis, surfboard, or similar device, or who engages or attempts to
engage in barefoot skiing, and any person who operates a vessel towing a person
riding or attempting to ride on one or more water skis, surfboard, or similar
device, or engaging or attempting to engage in barefoot skiing, shall confine
that activity to the water area within a designated ski zone on all bodies of
water on which a ski zone has been established.
   (b)   On all bodies of water where no specific activity zones have been
established, the activities described in division (a) of this section shall be
confined to areas where the activities are not specifically restricted by this
chapter, R.C. Chapter 1547 and rules.
   (c)   Divisions (a) and (b) of this section do not apply to an activity
described in division (a) of this section if the vessel involved in the
activity is traveling at idle speed in a designated no wake zone and the
activity is not being conducted in any of the following areas:
      (1)   Within 300 feet of a gas dock, marina, launch ramp, or harbor
entrance;
      (2)   Within a designated anchorage area, swim zone, boat swim zone, or
boat camping area;
      (3)   Under a bridge or within 300 feet of a bridge underpass;
      (4)   Any area designated as a no ski zone.
   (d)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.14)
(Prior Code, § 670.12)
§ 670.14 OBSERVER REQUIRED WHEN TOWING SKIER.
   (a)   Any person who operates a vessel towing any person riding or
attempting to ride upon one or more water skis or upon a surfboard or similar
device, or engaging or attempting to engage in barefoot skiing, on the waters
in this municipality shall have present in the vessel a person or persons other
than the operator, ten years of age or older, who shall at all times observe
the progress of the person being towed. The operator of the towing vessel shall
at all times observe the traffic pattern toward which the vessel is
approaching.
   (b)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.15) (Prior Code, § 670.13)
§ 670.15 WATER SKIING AFTER DARK PROHIBITED.
   No person shall ride or attempt to ride upon water skis, surfboard, or
similar device, or engage or attempt to engage in barefoot skiing, or use or
operate any vessel to tow any person thereon on the waters in this municipality
during that period of the day between sunset and sunrise, except upon special
permit issued by the state department, conservancy district, or political
subdivision having jurisdiction and control of such water.
(R.C. § 1547.16) (Prior Code, § 670.14)
§ 670.16 PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE REQUIRED FOR TOWED PERSON.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, no person shall
engage in any form of towed watersports without wearing an adequate and
effective Coast Guard approved wearable personal flotation device specifically
designed for towed watersports, in good and serviceable condition and of
appropriate size, except upon special permit issued by one of the following
persons or entities that manages the waterway:
      (1)   The political subdivision having primary jurisdiction;
      (2)   The administrator of a federal agency;
      (3)   The director of a state agency;
      (4)   The board of directors of a conservancy district;
      (5)   Any other governing body having jurisdiction.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a person engaging or
attempting to engage in barefoot skiing if the person is wearing a wet suit
specifically designed for barefoot skiing that is in good and serviceable
condition and of appropriate size.
   (c)   No operator of a vessel shall allow any person who fails to comply
with division (a) or (b) of this section to engage in any form of towed
watersports.
(R.C. § 1547.18) (Prior Code, § 670.15)
§ 670.17 SKI JUMPS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall install or maintain any structure or inclined platform known
as a water ski jump on the waters in this municipality. No person shall use any
such platform or structure for the purpose of water ski jumping, except upon
special permit issued by the state department, conservancy district, or
political subdivision having jurisdiction and control over such water.
(R.C. § 1547.19) (Prior Code, § 670.16)
§ 670.18 PERMIT FOR SPECIAL WATER EVENTS.
   (a)   No person or organization shall conduct any race, regatta, or other
special event upon the waters in this municipality without first obtaining
written permission, upon application not less than 30 days prior to the time of
the proposed race, regatta, or event, of the federal agency, state department,
conservancy district, or political subdivision having jurisdiction and control
over such waters. Any state department, conservancy district, or political
subdivision may suspend its respective rules during a race, regatta, or special
event. Nothing in this section shall be construed to mean that the operator of
a vessel competing in a specially authorized race, regatta, or special event
shall not attempt to attain high speeds on a marked racing course.
   (b)   On any waters in this municipality over which no federal agency, state
department, conservancy district, or political subdivision has jurisdiction and
control, no person or organization shall conduct any race, regatta, or other
special event without first obtaining written permission, upon application not
less than 30 days prior to the time of the proposed race, regatta, or event, of
the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft. The Chief of the Division of
Parks and Watercraft may, after determining that the public safety will be
adequately protected, grant written permission for holding such race, regatta,
or special event. This section does not apply to privately owned lakes or ponds
nor to canoes or rowboats.
(R.C. § 1547.20) (Prior Code, § 670.17)
§ 670.19 SALE OF SINGLE CELLED INFLATABLE VESSELS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall use or offer for use on the waters in this municipality any
inflatable vessel made of canvas, rubber, synthetic rubber, or vinyl plastic
unless the inflatable vessel is of multiple air cell or compartment
construction and is capable of remaining afloat if one air cell or compartment
is punctured or collapsed.
(R.C. § 1547.21) (Prior Code, § 670.18)
§ 670.20 SITTING, STANDING, WALKING ON MOVING VESSELS RESTRICTED.
   (a)   No occupant of any vessel underway on the waters in this municipality
shall sit, stand, or walk upon any portion of the vessel not specifically
designed for that movement, except when immediately necessary for the safe and
reasonable navigation or operation of the vessel. No operator of a vessel
underway on the waters in this municipality shall allow any occupant of the
vessel to sit, stand, or walk on any portion of the vessel underway not
specifically designed for that use, except when immediately necessary for the
safe and reasonable navigation or operation of the vessel.
   (b)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.22) (Prior Code, § 670.19)
§ 670.21 ENGINE WARM-UP REQUIRED.
   The pilot or engineer of any powercraft for hire to carry passengers shall
not permit passengers to come aboard before the engine of such powercraft has
been permitted to run for a minimum of two minutes.
(R.C. § 1547.23) (Prior Code, § 670.20)
§ 670.22 PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICES FOR CHILDREN UNDER TEN.
   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel under 18 feet in
length while there is present in the vessel any person under ten years of age,
not wearing a Coast Guard approved wearable personal flotation device in good
and serviceable condition of appropriate size securely attached to the person
under ten years of age.
(R.C. § 1547.24) (Prior Code, § 670.21)
§ 670.23 OPERATION WITHOUT PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel, other
than a vessel exempted by rules, on the waters in this municipality:
      (1)   That is 16 feet or greater in length without carrying aboard one
wearable personal flotation device for each person aboard and one throwable
personal flotation device;
      (2)   That is less than 16 feet in length, including paddlecraft of any
length, without carrying aboard one wearable personal flotation device for each
person aboard.
   (b)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any commercial vessel
on the waters in this municipality:
      (1)   That is less than 40 feet in length and is not carrying persons for
hire without carrying aboard at least one wearable personal flotation device
for each person aboard;
      (2)   That is carrying persons for hire or is 40 feet in length or longer
and is not carrying persons for hire without carrying aboard at least one type
one wearable personal flotation device for each person aboard that complies
with all of the following:
         A.   It is designed to support the person wearing the wearable
personal flotation device in the water in an upright or slightly backward
position and provides support to the head so that the face of an unconscious or
exhausted person is held above the water.
         B.   It is capable of turning the person wearing the wearable personal
flotation device, upon entering the water, to a safe flotation position.
         C.   It is capable of being worn inside out.
         D.   It is capable of supporting a minimum of 22 pounds in fresh water
for 48 hours.
         E.   It is a highly visible color.
      (3)   That is 26 feet in length or longer without carrying aboard at
least one throwable personal flotation device in addition to the applicable
requirements of divisions (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section.
   (c)   Each personal flotation device carried aboard a vessel, including a
commercial vessel, pursuant to this section shall be Coast Guard approved and
in good and serviceable condition, of appropriate size for the wearer, and
readily accessible to each person aboard the vessel at all times, and used in
accordance with any requirements on its approval label or in accordance with
requirements in its owner’s manual if the approval label refers to such a
manual.
   (d)   A personal flotation device shall not be used in a manner that is
inconsistent with any limitations or restrictions related to federal approval
under 46 C.F.R. 160 or special instructions for use provided by the
manufacturer. Appropriate use shall be indicated on the label of an approved
personal flotation device.
   (e)   As used in this section, COMMERCIAL VESSEL means any vessel used in
the carriage of any person or property for a valuable consideration whether
flowing directly or indirectly from the owner, partner, or agent or any other
person interested in the vessel. The phrase does not include any vessel that is
manufactured or used primarily for noncommercial use or that is leased, rented,
or chartered to another for noncommercial use.
(R.C. § 1547.25)
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
(Prior Code, § 670.22)
§ 670.24 DISTRESS SIGNAL OR FLAG REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall operate on the waters of Lake Erie or the immediately
connecting bays, harbors, and anchorage areas at any time a vessel that is 16
or more feet in length or any vessel carrying six or fewer passengers for hire
without carrying Coast Guard approved visual distress signals for both day and
night use.
   (b)   No person shall operate upon the waters of Lake Erie or the
immediately connecting bays, harbors, and anchorage areas during the period
from sunset to sunrise according to local time any of the following without
carrying Coast Guard approved visual distress signals for night use:
      (1)   A vessel less than 16 feet in length;
      (2)   A vessel competing in an organized marine parade, race, regatta, or
similar event;
      (3)   A manually propelled vessel;
      (4)   A sailboat less than 26 feet in length with completely open
construction and without propulsion machinery.
   (c)   No person shall operate a vessel on the waters in this state other
than Lake Erie or the immediately connecting bays, harbors, and anchorage areas
unless the vessel carries either a distress flag at least two feet square and
international orange in color or a Coast Guard approved daytime distress
signal.
   (d)   No person shall display any distress signal unless a vessel or a
person is in distress and in need of help.
   (e)   Divisions (a) and (c) of this section do not apply to any of the
following:
      (1)   Vessels competing in an organized marine parade, race, regatta, or
similar event;
      (2)   Manually propelled vessels;
      (3)   Sailboats less than 26 feet in length with completely open
construction and without propulsion machinery.
   (f)   The distress signals required by this section shall be in good and
serviceable condition, readily accessible, and of the type and quantities
required by regulations adopted under 46 U.S.C. § 4302, as amended.
   (g)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any vessel on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.251) (Prior Code, § 670.23)
§ 670.25 ANCHOR REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   All watercraft, except sailboats less than 16 feet long having a
cockpit depth of less than 12 inches and except canoes, shall carry an anchor
and line of sufficient weight and length to anchor the watercraft securely. The
Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft, by rule, may exempt other types
of watercraft from this section after determining that carrying such an anchor
and line would constitute a hazard.
   (b)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any watercraft on the
waters in this municipality in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.26) (Prior Code, § 670.24)
§ 670.26 SPECIFICATION FOR FIRE EXTINGUISHERS.
   (a)   Except those powercraft less than 26 feet in length designed for use
with an outboard motor, of open construction that is not capable of entrapping
explosive or flammable gases or vapors, and not carrying passengers for hire,
all powercraft shall carry fire extinguishers as prescribed in this section.
The fire extinguishers shall be capable of extinguishing a burning gasoline
fire, shall be in such condition as to be ready for immediate and effective
use, and shall comply with minimum or higher standards for such extinguishers
then prevailing as prescribed by the United States coast guard.
   (b)   Except for vessels subject to exemptions listed in 33 C.F.R. § 175.380
or § 175.380, any vessel not equipped with fixed fire extinguishing systems in
machinery spaces shall carry the following:
      (1)   Class A and Class 1 powercraft shall carry at least one 5-
B portable fire extinguisher.
      (2)   Class 2 powercraft shall carry at least two 5-B portable fire
extinguishers or at least one 20-B portable fire extinguisher.
      (3)   Class 3 powercraft shall carry at least three 5-B portable fire
extinguishers, or at least one 5-B portable and one 20-B portable fire
extinguishers.
      (4)   Class 4 powercraft shall carry the number and type of 20-B portable
fire extinguishers specified by gross tonnage as prescribed by 33 C.F.R. Part
175, Subpart E.
   (c)   All portable and semi-portable fire extinguishers for use on a vessel
shall:
      (1)   Be on board the vessel and be readily accessible;
      (2)   Be of an approved type;
      (3)   Not be expired or appear to have been previously used;
      (4)   Be maintained in good and serviceable working condition. As used in
division (c)(4) of this section, “good and serviceable working condition” means
all of the following:
         A.   If the fire extinguisher has a pressure gauge or indicator, the
reading or indicator is in the operable range or position;
         B.   The fire extinguisher’s lock pin is firmly in place;
         C.   The fire extinguisher’s discharge nozzle is clean and free of
obstruction;
         D.   The fire extinguisher does not show visible signs of significant
corrosion or damage.
   (d)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated on the waters in this
municipality any powercraft that does not comply with this section.
(R.C. § 1547.27) (Prior Code, § 670.25)
   (e)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. 1547.99(C))
§ 670.27 BACKFIRE FLAME CONTROL DEVICE REQUIRED.
   Every gasoline engine installed in a vessel after April 25, 1940, except an
outboard motor, shall be equipped with an acceptable device to control backfire
flame. The device shall comply with all of the following:
   (a)   Be securely attached to the air intake with a flame-tight connection;
   (b)   Be in proper working order;
   (c)   Be Coast Guard approved or comply with either SAE J1928 or UL 1111;
   (d)   Be marked to indicate approval or compliance under division (c) of
this section.
(R.C. § 1547.28) (Prior Code, § 670.26)
§ 670.28 VENTILATION REQUIREMENT ON POWERCRAFT.
   All powercraft using gasoline or other liquid fuel having a flashpoint of
less than 110°F. shall be provided with ventilation as follows:
   (a)   At least two ventilators fitted with cowls or their equivalent for the
purpose of properly and efficiently ventilating the bilges of every engine and
fuel tank compartment in order to remove any inflammable or explosive gases;
   (b)   Any type of ventilating system approved for use by the United States
Coast Guard;
   (c)   The ventilation of the boat is not required where the greater portion
of the bilges of the engine and fuel tank compartment is open to the natural
atmosphere.
(R.C. § 1547.29) (Prior Code, § 670.27)
§ 670.29 ABANDONMENT OF JUNK VESSELS OR OUTBOARD MOTORS.
   (a)   Law enforcement official may order storage of vessel or outboard motor
left on private property; towing by private dock owner.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Means any organization or unit comprised of
law enforcement officers, as defined in R.C. § 2901.01.
         VESSEL OR OUTBOARD MOTOR. Excludes an abandoned junk vessel or
outboard motor, as defined in division (d) of this section, or any vessel or
outboard motor under R.C. § 1547.305.
      (2)   A.   The County Sheriff, Police Chief, or other chief of a law
enforcement agency, within the Sheriff’s or Chief’s respective territorial
jurisdiction, upon complaint of any person adversely affected, may order into
storage any vessel or outboard motor that has been left on private property,
other than a private dock or mooring facility or structure, for at least 72
hours without the permission of the person having the right to the possession
of the property. The Sheriff or Chief, upon complaint of the owner of a marine
repair facility or place of storage, may order into storage any vessel or
outboard motor that has been left at the facility or place of storage for a
longer period than that agreed upon. The place of storage shall be designated
by the Sheriff or Chief. When ordering a vessel or motor into storage under
division (a)(2)A. of this section, a Sheriff or Chief, whenever possible, shall
arrange for the removal of the vessel or motor by a private tow truck operator
or towing company.
         B.   1.   Except as provided in division (a)(2)B.4. of this section,
no person, without the consent of the owner or other person authorized to give
consent, shall moor, anchor, or tie a vessel or outboard motor at a private
dock or mooring facility or structure owned by another person if the owner has
posted, in a conspicuous manner, a prohibition against the mooring, anchoring,
or tying of vessels or outboard motors at the dock, facility, or structure by
any person not having the consent of the owner or other person authorized to
give consent.
            2.   If the owner of a private dock or mooring facility or
structure has posted at the dock, facility, or structure, in a conspicuous
manner, conditions and regulations under which the mooring, anchoring, or tying
of vessels or outboard motors is permitted at the dock, facility, or structure,
no person, except as provided in division (a)(2)B.4. of this section, shall
moor, anchor, or tie a vessel or outboard motor at the dock, facility, or
structure in violation of the posted conditions and regulations.
            3.   The owner of a private dock or mooring facility or structure
may order towed into storage any vessel or outboard motor found moored,
anchored, or tied in violation of division (a)(2)B.1. or (a)(2)B.2. of this
section, provided that the owner of the dock, facility, or structure posts on
it a sign that states that the dock, facility, or structure is private, is
visible from all entrances to the dock, facility, or structure, and contains
all of the following information:
               a.   The information specified in division (a)(2)B.1. or (a)
(2)B.2. of this section, as applicable;
               b.   A notice that violators will be towed and that violators
are responsible for paying the cost of the towing;
               c.   The telephone number of the person from whom a towed vessel
or outboard motor may be recovered, and the address of the place to which the
vessel or outboard motor will be taken and the place from which it may be
recovered.
            4.   Divisions (a)(2)B.1. or (a)(2)B.2. of this section do not
prohibit a person from mooring, anchoring, or tying a vessel or outboard motor
at a private dock or mooring facility or structure if either of the following
applies:
               a.   The vessel or outboard motor is disabled due to a
mechanical or structural malfunction, provided that the person immediately
removes the vessel or outboard motor from the dock, facility, or structure when
the malfunction is corrected or when a reasonable attempt has been made to
correct it;
               b.   Weather conditions are creating an imminent threat to safe
operation of the vessel or outboard motor, provided that the person immediately
removes the vessel or outboard motor from the dock, facility, or structure when
the weather conditions permit safe operation of the vessel or outboard motor.
            5.   A person whose vessel or outboard motor is towed into storage
under division (a)(2)B.3. of this section either shall pay the costs of the
towing of the vessel or outboard motor or shall reimburse the owner of the dock
or mooring facility or structure for the costs that the owner incurs in towing
the vessel or outboard motor.
         C.   Subject to division (a)(3) of this section, the owner of a vessel
or motor that has been removed under division (a)(2) of this section may
recover the vessel or motor only in accordance with division (a)(6) of this
section.
      (3)   If the owner or operator of a vessel or outboard motor that has
been ordered into storage under division (a)(2) of this section arrives after
the vessel or motor has been prepared for removal, but prior to its actual
removal from the property, the owner or operator shall be given the opportunity
to pay a fee of not more than one-half of the charge for the removal of vessels
or motors under division (a)(2) of this section that normally is assessed by
the person who has prepared the vessel or motor for removal, in order to obtain
release of the vessel or motor. Upon payment of that fee, the vessel or motor
shall be released to the owner or operator, and upon its release, the owner or
operator immediately shall move it so that it is not on the private property
without the permission of the person having the right to possession of the
property, or is not at the facility or place of storage without the permission
of the owner, whichever is applicable.
      (4)   The County Sheriff, Police Chief, and each other chief of a law
enforcement agency shall maintain a record of vessels or outboard motors that
are ordered into storage under division (a)(2)A. of this section. The record
shall include an entry for each such vessel or motor that identifies the
vessel’s hull identification number or serial number, if any, the vessel’s or
motor’s make, model, and color, the location from which it was removed, the
date and time of its removal, the telephone number of the person from whom it
may be recovered, and the address of the place to which it has been taken and
from which it may be recovered. Any information in the record that pertains to
a particular vessel or motor shall be provided to any person who, pursuant to a
statement the person makes either in person or by telephone, is identified as
the owner or operator of the vessel or motor and requests information
pertaining to its location.
      (5)   Any person who registers a complaint that is the basis of a
Sheriff’s or Chief’s order for the removal and storage of a vessel or outboard
motor under division (a)(2)A. of this section shall provide the identity of the
law enforcement agency with which the complaint was registered to any person
who, pursuant to a statement the person makes, is identified as the owner or
operator of the vessel or motor and requests information pertaining to its
location.
      (6)   (a)   The owner of a vessel or outboard motor that is ordered into
storage under division (a)(2) of this section may reclaim it upon payment of
any expenses or charges incurred in its removal, in an amount not to exceed
$200, and storage, in an amount not to exceed $5 per 24-hour period, and upon
presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a certificate of
title to the vessel or motor, certificate of United States Coast Guard
documentation, or certificate of registration if the vessel or motor is not
subject to titling under R.C. § 1548.01.
         (b)   If a vessel or outboard motor that is ordered into storage under
division (a)(2)A. of this section remains unclaimed by the owner for 30 days,
the procedures established by divisions (b) and (c) of this section shall
apply.
         (c)   If a vessel or outboard motor ordered into storage under
division (a)(2)B. of this section remains unclaimed for 72 hours after being
stored, the tow truck operator or towing company that removed the vessel or
outboard motor shall provide notice of the removal and storage to the County
Sheriff, Police Chief, or other chief of a law enforcement agency within whose
territorial jurisdiction the vessel or outboard motor had been moored,
anchored, or tied in violation of division (a)(2)B. of this section. The notice
shall be in writing and include the vessel’s hull identification number or
serial number, if any, the vessel’s or outboard motor’s make, model, and color,
the location from which it was removed, the date and time of its removal, the
telephone number of the person from whom it may be recovered, and the address
of the place to which it has been taken and from which it may be recovered.
            1.   Upon receipt of the notice, the Sheriff or Chief immediately
shall cause a search to be made of the records of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft to ascertain the owner and any lienholder of the vessel or outboard
motor, and, if known, shall send notice to the owner and lienholder, if any, at
the owner’s and lienholder’s last known address by certified mail, return
receipt requested, that the vessel or outboard motor will be declared a
nuisance and disposed of if not claimed not later than 30 days after the date
of the mailing of the notice.
            2.   If the owner or lienholder makes no claim to the vessel or
outboard motor within 30 days of the date of the mailing of the notice, the
Sheriff or Chief shall file with the Clerk of Courts of the county in which the
place of storage is located an affidavit showing compliance with the
requirements of division (a)(6)(c) of this section, and the vessel or outboard
motor shall be disposed of in accordance with division (c) of this section.
      (7)   No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any vessel or
outboard motor from private property other than in accordance with division (a)
(2) of this section or division (b) of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.30)
   (b)   Storage of vessel or motor left in sunken, beached, drifting or docked
condition; notice; affidavit; salvage certificate.
      (1)   The County Sheriff, Police Chief, or other chief of a law
enforcement agency, within the Sheriff’s or Chief’s respective territorial
jurisdiction, or a state highway patrol trooper, upon notification to the
Sheriff or Chief of such action and of the location of the place of storage,
may order into storage any vessel or outboard motor that has been left in a
sunken, beached, or drifting condition for any period of time, or in a docked
condition, on a public street or other property open to the public, or upon or
within the right-of-way of any waterway, road, or highway, for 48 hours or
longer without notification to the Sheriff or Chief of the reasons for leaving
the vessel or motor in any such place or condition. The Sheriff or Chief shall
designate the place of storage of any vessel or motor ordered removed by the
Sheriff or Chief.
      (2)   The Sheriff or Chief shall immediately cause a search to be made of
the records of the Division of Parks and Watercraft to ascertain the owner and
any lienholder of a vessel or outboard motor ordered into storage by the
Sheriff or Chief, and, if known, shall send notice to the owner and lienholder,
if any, at the owner’s or lienholder’s last known address by certified mail,
return receipt requested, that the vessel or motor will be declared a nuisance
and disposed of if not claimed within ten days of the date of mailing of the
notice. The owner or lienholder of the vessel or motor may reclaim it upon
payment of any expenses or charges incurred in its removal and storage, and
presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a certificate of
title to the vessel or motor, certificate of United States Coast Guard
documentation, or certificate of registration if the vessel or motor is not
subject to titling under R.C. § 1548.01.
      (3)   If the owner or lienholder makes no claim to the vessel or outboard
motor within ten days of the date of mailing of the notice, and if the vessel
or motor is to be disposed of at public auction as provided in division (c) of
this section, the Sheriff or Chief shall file with the Clerk of Courts of the
county in which the place of storage is located an affidavit showing compliance
with the requirements of this division (b). Upon presentation of the affidavit,
the Clerk of Courts shall without charge issue a salvage certificate of title,
free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, to the Sheriff or Chief and shall
send a copy of the affidavit to the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft. If the vessel or motor is to be disposed of to a marine salvage
dealer or other facility as provided in division (c) of this section, the
Sheriff or Chief shall execute in triplicate an affidavit, as prescribed by the
Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft, describing the vessel or motor
and the manner in which it was disposed of, and that all requirements of this
division (b) have been complied with. The Sheriff or Chief shall retain the
original of the affidavit for the Sheriff’s or Chief’s records and shall
furnish two copies to the marine salvage dealer or other facility. Upon
presentation of a copy of the affidavit by the marine salvage dealer or other
facility, the Clerk of Courts shall issue to such owner a salvage certificate
of title, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances.
      (4)   Whenever the marine salvage dealer or other facility receives an
affidavit for the disposal of a vessel or outboard motor as provided in this
division (b), such owner shall not be required to obtain an Ohio certificate of
title to the vessel or motor in the owner’s own name if the vessel or motor is
dismantled or destroyed and both copies of the affidavit are delivered to the
Clerk of Courts. Upon receipt of such an affidavit, the Clerk of Courts shall
send one copy of it to the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft.
(R.C. § 1547.301)
   (c)   Disposal of unclaimed vessel or motor.
      (1)   Unclaimed vessels or outboard motors ordered into storage under
division (a)(2) of this section or division (b) of this section shall be
disposed of at the order of the County Sheriff, the Police Chief, or another
chief of a law enforcement agency, in any of the following ways:
         A.   To a marine salvage dealer;
         B.   To any other facility owned, operated, or under contract with the
state or the county, municipality, township, or other political subdivision;
         C.   To a charitable organization, religious organization, or similar
organization not used and operated for profit;
         D.   By sale at public auction by the Sheriff, the Chief, or an
auctioneer licensed under R.C. Chapter 4707, after giving notice of the auction
by advertisement, published once a week for two consecutive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county or as provided in R.C. § 7.16.
      (2)   Any moneys accruing from the disposition of an unclaimed vessel or
motor that are in excess of the expenses resulting from the removal and storage
of the vessel or motor shall be credited to the General Revenue Fund or to the
General Fund of the county, municipality, township, or other political
subdivision, as appropriate.
      (3)   As used in this division (c), CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 1716.01.
(R.C. § 1547.302)
   (d)   Disposal of abandoned vessel or motor.
      (1)   As used in this division and division (e) of this section:
         ABANDONED JUNK VESSEL OR OUTBOARD MOTOR. Means any vessel or outboard
motor meeting all of the following requirements:
            1.   It has been left on private property for at least 72 hours
without the permission of the person having the right to the possession of the
property; left in a sunken, beached, or drifting condition for any period of
time; or left in a docked condition, on a public street or other property open
to the public, or upon or within the right- of-way of any waterway, road, or
highway, for 48 hours or longer without notification to the County Sheriff, the
Police Chief, or other chief of a law enforcement agency having territorial
jurisdiction with respect to the location of the vessel or motor, of the
reasons for leaving the vessel or motor in any such place or condition;
            2.   It is three years old or older;
            3.   It is extensively damaged, such damage including but not
limited to any of the following: missing deck, hull, transom, gunwales, motor,
or outdrive;
            4.   It is apparently inoperable;
            5.   It has a fair market value of $200 or less.
         LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Means any organization or unit comprised of
law enforcement officers, as defined in R.C. § 2901.01.
      (2)   The County Sheriff, Police Chief, or other chief of a law
enforcement agency, within the Sheriff’s or Chief’s respective territorial
jurisdiction, or a state highway patrol trooper, upon notification to the
Sheriff or Chief of such action, shall order any abandoned junk vessel or
outboard motor to be photographed by a law enforcement officer. The officer
shall record the make of vessel or motor, the hull identification number or
serial number when available, and shall also detail the damage or missing
equipment to substantiate the value of $200 or less. The Sheriff or Chief shall
thereupon immediately dispose of the abandoned junk vessel or outboard motor to
a marine salvage dealer or other facility owned, operated, or under contract to
the state, the county, township, or municipality for the destruction of such
vessels or motors. The records and photographs relating to the abandoned junk
vessel or outboard motor shall be retained by the law enforcement agency
ordering the disposition of the vessel or motor for a period of at least two
years. The law enforcement agency shall execute in quadruplicate an affidavit,
as prescribed by the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft, describing
the vessel or motor and the manner in which it was disposed of, and that all
requirements of this section have been complied with, and shall sign and file
the same with the Clerk of Courts of the county in which the vessel or motor
was abandoned. The Clerk of Courts shall retain the original of the affidavit
for the Clerk’s files, shall furnish one copy thereof to the Chief of the
Division of Parks and Watercraft, one copy to the marine salvage dealer or
other facility handling the disposal of the vessel or motor, and one copy to
the law enforcement agency ordering the disposal, who shall file such copy with
the records and photographs relating to the disposal. Any moneys arising from
the disposal of an abandoned junk vessel or outboard motor shall be credited to
the General Revenue Fund, or to the General Fund of the county, township,
municipality, or other political subdivision, as appropriate.
      (3)   Notwithstanding division (b) of this section, any vessel or
outboard motor meeting the requirements of divisions (d)(1)A.3. to (d)(1)A.5.
of this section which has remained unclaimed by the owner or lienholder for a
period of ten days or longer following notification as provided in division (b)
of this section may be disposed of as provided in this division (d).
(R.C. § 1547.303)
   (e)   Abandonment of vessel or motor without notice to law enforcement
official prohibited.
      (1)   No person shall purposely leave an abandoned junk vessel or
outboard motor on private property for more than 72 hours without the
permission of the person having the right to the possession of the property; in
a sunken, beached, or drifting condition for any period of time; or in a docked
condition, on a public street or other property open to the public, or upon or
within the right-of-way of any waterway, road, or highway, for 48 hours or
longer without notification to the County Sheriff, Police Chief or other chief
of a law enforcement agency having territorial jurisdiction with respect to the
location of the vessel or motor, of the reasons for leaving the vessel or motor
in any such place or condition.
      (2)   For purposes of this division (e), the fact that an abandoned junk
vessel or outboard motor has been so left without permission or notification is
prima facie evidence of abandonment.
      (3)   Nothing in this section or R.C. §§ 1547.30, 1547.301, and 1547.303
invalidates the provisions of any ordinance of the municipality regulating or
prohibiting the abandonment of vessels or outboard motors on waterways,
beaches, docks, streets, highways, public property, or private property within
the boundaries of the municipality.
(R.C. § 1547.304)
   (f)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(7) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (e) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree and also shall be assessed any costs incurred
by the state or a county, township, municipal corporation, or other political
subdivision in disposing of an abandoned junk vessel or outboard motor, less
any money accruing to the state, county, township, municipal corporation, or
other political subdivision from that disposal.
(R.C. § 1547.99(H))
(Prior Code, § 670.28)
Statutory reference:
   Alternate procedure to obtain certificate of title for unclaimed vessel or
outboard motor, see R.C. § 1547.305
§ 670.30 EXHAUST MUFFLER REQUIRED; NOISE LEVELS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Every powercraft operated on the waters in this municipality shall be
equipped at all times with a muffler or a muffler system that is in good
working order, in constant operation, and effectively installed to prevent
excessive or unusual noise.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall operate or give permission for the operation of
a powercraft on the waters in this municipality in such a manner as to exceed a
noise level of 90 decibels on the “A” scale when subjected to a stationary
sound level test as prescribed by SAE J2005.
      (2)   No person shall operate or give permission for the operation of a
powercraft on the waters in this municipality in such a manner as to exceed a
noise level of 75 decibels on the “A” scale measured as specified by SAE J1970.
Measurement of a noise level of not more than 75 decibels on the “A” scale of a
powercraft in operation does not preclude the conducting of a stationary sound
level test as prescribed by SAE J2005.
   (c)   No person shall operate or give permission for the operation of a
powercraft on the waters in this municipality that is equipped with an altered
muffler or muffler cutout, or operate or give permission for the operation of a
powercraft on the waters in this municipality in any manner that bypasses or
otherwise reduces or eliminates the effectiveness of any muffler or muffler
system installed in accordance with this section, unless the applicable
mechanism has been permanently disconnected or made inoperable.
   (d)   No person shall remove, alter, or otherwise modify in any way a
muffler or muffler system in a manner that will prevent it from being operated
in accordance with this section.
   (e)   No person shall manufacture, sell, or offer for sale a powercraft that
is not equipped with a muffler or muffler system that prevents noise levels in
excess of those established in division (b)(1) of this section.
   (f)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A powercraft that is designed, manufactured, and sold for the sole
purpose of competing in racing events. The exception established under this
division (f)(1) shall be documented in each sale agreement and shall be
acknowledged formally by the signatures of the buyer and the seller. The buyer
and the seller shall maintain copies of the sale agreement. A copy of the sale
agreement shall be kept aboard the powercraft when it is operated. A powercraft
to which the exception established under this division (f)(1) applies shall be
operated on the waters in this municipality only in accordance with division
(f)(2) of this section.
      (2)   A powercraft that is actually participating in a sanctioned racing
event or in tune-up periods for a sanctioned racing event on the waters in this
municipality and that is being operated in accordance with this division (f)
(2). For the purposes of this division (f)(2), a sanctioned racing event is a
racing event that is conducted in accordance with § 670.18 or R.C. § 1547.20 or
that is approved by the United States Coast Guard. The operator of a powercraft
that is operated on the waters in this municipality for the purpose of a
sanctioned racing event shall comply with § 670.18 and R.C. § 1547.20 and
requirements established under it or with requirements established by the Coast
Guard, as appropriate. Failure to comply subjects the operator to this section.
      (3)   A powercraft that is being operated on the waters in this
municipality by or for a boat or engine manufacturer for the purpose of
testing, development, or both and that complies with this division (f)(3). The
operator of such a powercraft shall have aboard at all times and shall produce
on demand of a law enforcement officer a current, valid letter issued by the
Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft in accordance with rules adopted
under R.C. § 1547.31(I)(1). Failure to produce the letter subjects the operator
to this section.
   (g)   A law enforcement officer who is trained in accordance with rules
adopted under R.C. § 1547.31(I)(2) and who has reason to believe that a
powercraft is not in compliance with the noise levels established in this
section may direct the operator of the powercraft to submit it to an on-site
test to measure the level of the noise emitted by the powercraft. The operator
shall comply with that direction. The officer may remain aboard the powercraft
during the test at the officer’s discretion. If the level of the noise emitted
by the powercraft exceeds the noise levels established in this section, the
officer may direct the operator to take immediate and reasonable measures to
correct the violation, including returning the powercraft to a mooring and
keeping it at the mooring until the violation is corrected or ceases.
   (h)   A law enforcement officer who conducts powercraft noise level tests
pursuant to this section shall be trained to do so in accordance with rules
adopted under R.C. § 1547.31(I)(2).
(R.C. § 1547.31(A) - (H))
   (i)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on a first offense. On each subsequent offense, the person is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(J))
(Prior Code, § 670.29)
§ 670.31 SAFETY EQUIPMENT ON RENTAL VESSELS.
   (a)   No person who lets vessels for hire, or the agent or employee thereof,
shall rent, lease, charter, or otherwise permit the use of a vessel, unless the
person provides the vessel with the equipment required under R.C. §§ 1547.25,
1547.251, 1547.26, 1547.27, 1547.28, 1547.29, and 1547.31 and rules, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, regarding the equipment of
vessels, and complies with the requirements of R.C. §§ 1547.24, 1547.40,
1547.53, 1547.57, and either R.C. § 1547.54 or 1547.542, and rules, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, to implement and enforce those
sections.
(R.C. § 1547.38)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
(Prior Code, § 670.30)
§ 670.32 CAPACITY PLATE.
   (a)   Required; display.
      (1)   No person, after January 1, 1977, shall manufacture, sell, or offer
for sale any watercraft propelled by machinery as its principal source of
power, or watercraft designed to be manually propelled, less than 20 feet in
length, and designed to carry two or more persons, manufactured after that
date, unless a capacity plate containing the correct information, as prescribed
by regulations adopted by the United States Coast Guard, is firmly attached to
the watercraft. The capacity plate shall be attached in such a location that it
is clearly legible from the position designed or intended to be occupied by the
operator when the watercraft is underway.
      (2)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated on the waters in
this municipality watercraft for which a capacity plate is required under this
section unless the capacity plate is attached.
      (3)   No person shall alter, remove, or deface any information contained
on the capacity plate unless the manufacturer has altered the watercraft in
such a way that would require a change in the information contained on the
capacity plate.
      (4)   As used in this division (a), MANUFACTURE means to construct or
assemble a watercraft, or to alter a watercraft in such a manner as to affect
or change its weight capacity or occupant capacity.
(R.C. § 1547.39)
   (b)   Prohibitions.
      (1)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated on the waters in
this municipality a watercraft to which a capacity plate is attached if the
total load exceeds the weight capacity indicated on the capacity plate, if the
number of persons aboard exceeds the occupant capacity indicated on the
capacity plate, or if the horsepower of any attached outboard motor exceeds the
maximum horsepower indicated on the capacity plate.
      (2)   When no capacity plate exists, no person shall operate or permit to
be operated on the waters in this municipality a watercraft if a reasonably
prudent person would believe that either of the following circumstances
applies:
         A.   The total load aboard the watercraft has associated with it a
risk of physical harm to persons or property;
         B.   The total horsepower of any inboard engine or attached outboard
motor has associated with it a risk of physical harm to persons or property.
(R.C. § 1547.40)
   (c)   Penalty. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
(Prior Code, § 670.31)
§ 670.33 DWELLINGS; SANITARY SYSTEMS.
   (a)   Watercraft dwelling unlawful if a nuisance; exception. No person shall
use any vessel for the purpose of establishing or maintaining a dwelling which
creates a nuisance of either permanent or temporary nature on any of the waters
in this state except Lake Erie, the Muskingum River, the Ohio River, and the
immediately connected harbors and anchorage facilities or in such other areas
as may be designated for the purpose.
(R.C. § 1547.32)
   (b)   Discharging sanitary systems prohibited; exception. Except on the
waters of Lake Erie, the Muskingum River, or the Ohio River, no person shall
launch, moor, dock, use, operate, or permit to be operated on any of the waters
in this state any vessel that contains a sink, toilet, or sanitary system that
is capable of discharging urine, fecal matter, contents of a chemical commode,
kitchen wastes, laundry wastes, slop sink drainage, or other household wastes
into the waters in this state. Such a sink, toilet, or sanitary system shall be
removed, sealed, or made to drain into a tank or reservoir that can be carried
or pumped ashore for disposal in a sewage treatment works approved by the
Director of Environmental Protection.
(R.C. § 1547.33)
   (c)   Penalty. Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
(Prior Code, § 670.32)
§ 670.34 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF NEGLIGENCE.
   Violations of §§
670.02 through
670.33 and/or R.C. §§ 1547.02 through 1547.36 which result in injury to persons
or damage to property shall constitute prima facie evidence of negligence in a
civil action.
(R.C. § 1547.34) (Prior Code, § 670.33)
§ 670.35 REQUIREMENTS FOR OPERATING PERSONAL WATERCRAFT.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall operate or permit the operation of a personal
watercraft unless each person on the watercraft is wearing a Coast Guard
approved wearable personal flotation device used in compliance with
manufacturer labeling.
      (2)   A person operating a personal watercraft that is equipped by the
manufacturer with a lanyard type engine cutoff switch shall attach the lanyard
to the person, the person’s clothing, or the personal flotation device as
appropriate for the specific watercraft.
      (3)   No person shall operate a personal watercraft at any time between
sunset and sunrise.
      (4)   No person who owns a personal watercraft or who has charge over or
control of a personal watercraft shall authorize or knowingly permit the
personal watercraft to be operated in violation of this chapter or R.C. Chapter
1547.
   (b)   This section does not apply to a person who is participating in a
regatta, race, marine parade, tournament, or exhibition that is operated in
accordance with §
670.18 or R.C. § 1547.20 or that is United States Coast Guard approved.
(R.C. § 1547.41) (Prior Code, § 670.335)
§ 670.36 NUMBERING.
   (a)   Every watercraft operated on the waters in this municipality shall be
numbered by this state in accordance with federal law or a federally approved
numbering system of another state. A watercraft numbered by this state shall
display the number on the watercraft as provided in R.C. § 1547.57.
   (b)   Watercraft exempt from numbering by the state are:
      (1)   Those currently documented by the United States Coast Guard or its
successor;
      (2)   Those whose principal use is not on the waters in this state and
that have not been used within this state for more than 60 days and have a
valid number assigned under a federally approved numbering system by another
state if the number is displayed in accordance with the requirements of that
system and the certificate of number is available for inspection whenever the
watercraft is on waters in this state;
      (3)   Those from a country other than the United States, temporarily
using the waters in this state;
      (4)   Those whose owner is the United States, a state, or a political
subdivision of a state, that fit either of the following descriptions, and that
are clearly identifiable as such:
         A.   A powercraft that principally is used for governmental purposes
other than recreational purposes;
         B.   A watercraft other than a powercraft;
      (5)   A ship’s lifeboat. As used in this division, LIFEBOAT means a
watercraft that is held aboard another vessel and used exclusively for
emergency purposes;
      (6)   Those that have been exempted from numbering by the Chief of the
Division of Parks and Watercraft after the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft has found that the numbering of the watercraft will not materially
aid in their identification and, if an agency of the United States has a
numbering system applicable to the watercraft, after the Chief of the Division
of Parks and Watercraft has further found that they also would be exempt from
numbering by the United States government if they were subject to the federal
law;
      (7)   Those temporarily using the waters in this state under a waiver
issued by the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft to an organization
sponsoring a race, regatta, or special event. The Chief of the Division of
Parks and Watercraft may issue a waiver upon application by the sponsoring
organization at least 15 days before the date of the proposed race, regatta, or
special event. The waiver shall be effective for ten days including the day or
days of the proposed race, regatta, or special event. Such a waiver does not
obviate the need for compliance with § 670.18 or R.C. § 1547.20;
      (8)   Canoes, rowboats, and inflatable watercraft that are registered
under R.C. § 1547.54 and that an owner, in accordance with this division,
chooses not to have numbered under this section. An owner of a canoe, rowboat,
or inflatable watercraft may choose to do either of the following:
         (a)   Have it numbered under this section, pay a lesser registration
fee under R.C. § 1547.54(A)(2)(a), and obtain square tags under R.C. § 1547.57
(A);
         (b)   Not have it numbered under this section, pay a higher
registration fee under R.C. § 1547.54(A)(2)(b), and obtain a rectangular tag
under R.C. § 1547.57(C).
(R.C. § 1547.53) (Prior Code, § 670.34)
§ 670.37 REGISTRATION.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) or (b) of this section, no
person shall operate or give permission for the operation of any watercraft on
the waters in this municipality unless the watercraft is registered in the name
of the current owner in accordance with R.C. § 1547.54, and the registration is
valid and in effect.
      (2)   A.   On and after January 1, 1999, if a watercraft that is required
to be issued a certificate of title under R.C. Chapter 1548 is transferred to a
new owner, it need not be registered under R.C. § 1547.54 for 60 days following
the date of the transfer, provided that the new owner purchases a temporary
watercraft registration under division (a) of this section or holds a bill of
sale from a watercraft dealer.
         B.   For the purposes of division (a)(2) of this section, a temporary
watercraft registration or a bill of sale from a watercraft dealer shall
contain at least all of the following information:
            1.   The hull identification number or serial number of the
watercraft;
            2.   The make of the watercraft;
            3.   The length of the watercraft;
            4.   The type of propulsion, if any;
            5.   The state in which the watercraft principally is operated;
            6.   The name of the owner;
            7.   The address of the owner, including the zip code;
            8.   The signature of the owner;
            9.   The date of purchase;
            10.   A notice to the owner that the temporary watercraft
registration expires 60 days after the date of purchase of the watercraft or
that the watercraft cannot be operated on the waters in this state solely under
the bill of sale beginning 60 days after the date of purchase of the
watercraft, as applicable.
      (3)   A person may purchase a temporary watercraft registration from the
Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft or from an authorized agent
designated under R.C. § 1547.54. The Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft shall furnish forms for temporary watercraft registrations to
authorized agents. In addition to completing the registration form with the
information specified in divisions (a)(2) of this section, the person shall pay
one of the applicable fees required under R.C. § 1547.54(A)(2)(a) through (A)
(2)(g) as provided in that section. Moneys received for the payment of
temporary watercraft registrations shall be deposited to the credit of the
Waterways Safety Fund created in R.C. § 1547.75.
      (4)   In addition to the applicable fee required under division (a)(3) of
this section, the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft or an
authorized agent shall charge an additional writing fee of $3 for a temporary
watercraft registration that the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft
or the authorized agent issues. When the temporary watercraft registration is
issued by an authorized agent, the agent may retain the additional writing fee.
When the temporary watercraft registration is issued by the Chief of the
Division of Parks and Watercraft, the additional writing fee shall be deposited
to the credit of the Waterways Safety Fund.
      (5)   A person who purchases a temporary watercraft registration for a
watercraft and who subsequently applies for a registration certificate under
R.C. § 1547.54 need not pay the fee required under R.C. § 1547.54(A)(2) for the
initial registration certificate issued for that watercraft, provided that at
the time of application for the registration certificate, the person furnishes
proof of payment for the temporary watercraft registration.
      (6)   A person who purchases a temporary watercraft registration, who
subsequently applies for a registration certificate under R.C. § 1547.54, and
who is exempt from payment for the registration certificate under R.C. §
1547.54(P), may apply to the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft for
a refund of the amount paid for the temporary watercraft registration at the
time that the person applies for a registration certificate. The Chief of the
Division of Parks and Watercraft shall refund that amount upon issuance to the
person of a registration certificate.
      (7)   All records of the Division of Parks and Watercraft made or
maintained for the purposes of divisions (a)(2) through (a)(8) of this section
are public records. The records shall be available for inspection at reasonable
hours and in a manner that is compatible with normal operations of the
division.
      (8)   Pursuant to R.C. § 1546.04(C)(2), the Chief of the Division of
Parks and Watercraft may adopt rules establishing all of the following:
         A.   Record-keeping requirements governing the issuance of temporary
watercraft registrations and the use of bills of sale from watercraft dealers
for the purposes of division (a)(2) of this section;
         B.   Procedures and requirements for the refund of fees under division
(a)(6) of this section;
         C.   Any other procedures and requirements necessary for the
administration and enforcement of divisions (a)(2) through (a)(8) of this
section.
   (b)   All of the following watercraft are exempt from registration:
      (1)   Those that are exempt from numbering by the state under R.C. §
1547.53(B) through (G);
      (2)   Those that have been issued a commercial documentation by the
United States Coast Guard or its successor and are used exclusively for
commercial purposes;
      (3)   Those that have been documented by the United States Coast Guard or
its successor as temporarily transitting, whose principal use is not on the
waters in this state, and that have not been used within this state for more
than 60 days.
   (c)   No person shall operate a watercraft documented by the United States
Coast Guard or its successor unless the certificate of documentation is valid,
is on the watercraft for which it has been issued, and is available for
inspection whenever the watercraft is in operation. In accordance with 46
C.F.R. § 67, as amended, the watercraft shall display the official number, the
vessel name, and the home port listed on the certificate of documentation.
   (d)   (1)   For the purposes of this section and R.C. § 1547.53, a
watercraft is principally using the waters in this state if any of the
following applies:
         (a)   The owner resides in this state and declares that the watercraft
principally is using the waters in this state.
         (b)   The owner resides in another state but declares that the
watercraft principally is using the waters in this state.
         (c)   The watercraft is registered in another state or documented by
the United States Coast Guard and is used within this state for more than 60
days regardless of whether it has been assigned a seasonal or permanent mooring
at any public or private docking facility in this state.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (d)(1)C. of this section, a person on
active duty in the armed forces of the United States may register a watercraft
in the person’s state of permanent residence in lieu of registering it in this
state regardless of the number of days that the watercraft is used in this
state.
(R.C. § 1547.531)
   (e)   No person shall operate a watercraft in this municipality if it
displays an identification number or registration decal that is any of the
following:
      (1)   Fictitious;
      (2)   A counterfeit or an unlawfully made copy of any identification
number or registration decal;
      (3)   An identification number or registration decal that belongs to
another watercraft.
(R.C. § 1547.533)
(Prior Code, § 670.345)
§ 670.38 ALTERING OF SERIAL NUMBERS; FALSE INFORMATION PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall deface or alter any serial number, model designation,
or other identifying mark on any watercraft or motor as placed thereon by the
manufacturer thereof, or remove, deface, or alter the registration number of
any watercraft as the registration number appears on the bow thereof except by
specific order of the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft.
   (b)   No person shall give purposely false information concerning any
watercraft or motor when applying for registration of the watercraft. Any
certificate issued which is found to be based on such false information is
void.
(R.C. § 1547.66)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(B))
(Prior Code, § 670.35)
§ 670.39 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (a)   Operator to stop and furnish information upon accident or collision.
      (1)   In case of accident to or collision with persons or property on the
waters of this municipality, due to the operation of any vessel, the operator
having knowledge of the accident or collision shall immediately stop the vessel
at the scene of the accident or collision, to the extent that it is safe and
practical, and shall remain at the scene of the accident or collision until he
or she has given his or her name and address and, if he or she is not the
owner, the name and address of the owner of the vessel, together with the
registration number of the vessel, if any, to any person injured in the
accident or collision or to the operator, occupant, owner, or attendant of any
vessel damaged in the accident or collision, or to any law enforcement officer
at the scene of the accident or collision.
      (2)   If the injured person is unable to comprehend and record the
information required to be given by this section, the other operator involved
in the accident or collision shall forthwith notify the nearest law enforcement
agency having authority concerning the location of the accident or collision,
and his or her name, address, and the registration number, if any, of the
vessel he or she was operating, and then remain at the scene of the accident or
collision or at the nearest location from which notification is possible until
a law enforcement officer arrives, unless removed from the scene by an
emergency vehicle operated by the state or a political subdivision or by an
ambulance.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
vessel, the operator so colliding with the vessel shall securely attach the
information required to be given in this section, in writing, to a conspicuous
place in or on the unoccupied or unattended vessel.
(R.C. § 1547.10)
   (b)   Duties after collision or accident; accident reports.
      (1)   The operator of a vessel involved in a collision, accident, or
other casualty, so far as the operator can do so without serious danger to the
operator’s own vessel, crew, and passengers, shall render to other persons
affected by the collision, accident, or other casualty such assistance as may
be practicable and as may be necessary in order to save them from or minimize
any danger caused by the collision, accident, or other casualty. The operator
also shall give the operator’s name, address, and identification of the
operator’s vessel in writing to any person injured and to the owner of any
property damaged in the collision, accident, or other casualty.
      (2)   Any person who renders assistance at the scene of a collision,
accident, or other casualty involving a vessel is not liable in a civil action
for damages or injury to persons or property resulting from any act or omission
in rendering assistance or in providing or arranging salvage, towage, medical
treatment, or other assistance, except that the person is liable for willful or
wanton misconduct in rendering assistance. Nothing in this section precludes
recovery from any tortfeasor causing a collision, accident, or other casualty
of damages caused or aggravated by the rendering of assistance.
      (3)   In the case of collision, accident, or other casualty involving a
vessel, the operator thereof, if the collision, accident, or other casualty
results in loss of life, personal injury requiring medical treatment beyond
first aid, or damage to property in excess of $1,000, or the total loss of a
vessel, shall file with the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft a
full description of the collision, accident, or other casualty on a form
prescribed by the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft.
      (4)   If the operator of the vessel involved in a collision, accident, or
other casualty is incapacitated, the investigating law enforcement officer
shall file the required form as prescribed by the Chief of the Division of
Parks and Watercraft.
(R.C. § 1547.59)
   (c)   Penalty. Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(B))
(Prior Code, § 670.36)
§ 670.40 ENFORCEMENT.
   Every Sheriff, deputy sheriff, Marshal, deputy marshal, member of the
organized police department of any municipal corporation, police constable of
any township, wildlife officer, natural resources officer, conservancy district
police officer, and other law enforcement officer, within the area of any such
law enforcement officer’s authority, may enforce this chapter, R.C. Chapter
1547 and rules and, in the exercise thereof, may stop and board any vessel
subject to this chapter and R.C. Chapter 1547, and rules.
(R.C. § 1547.63) (Prior Code, § 670.37)
§ 670.41 CERTIFICATE OF TITLE; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   No person, except as provided in §
670.42, shall sell or otherwise dispose of a watercraft or outboard motor
without delivering to the purchaser or transferee a physical certificate of
title with an assignment on it as is necessary to show title in the purchaser
or transferee; nor shall any person purchase or otherwise acquire a watercraft
or outboard motor without obtaining a certificate of title for it in the
person’s name in accordance with R.C. Chapter 1548; however, a purchaser may
take possession of and operate a watercraft or outboard motor on the waters in
this state without a certificate of title for a period not exceeding 60 days if
the purchaser has been issued and has in the purchaser’s possession a dealer’s
dated bill of sale, or in the case of a casual sale, a notarized bill of sale.
(R.C. § 1548.03)
   (b)   Division (a) of this section and §§
670.43 and
670.44 do not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A watercraft covered by a marine document in effect that has been
assigned to it by the United States government pursuant to federal law;
      (2)   A watercraft from a country other than the United States
temporarily using the waters in this state;
      (3)   A watercraft whose owner is the United States, a state, or a
political subdivision of a state;
      (4)   A ship’s lifeboat. As used in this division (b)(4), LIFEBOAT means
a watercraft that is held aboard another vessel and used exclusively for
emergency purposes;
      (5)   A canoe;
      (6)   A watercraft less than 14 feet in length without a permanently
affixed mechanical means of propulsion;
      (7)   A watercraft less than 14 feet in length with a permanently fixed
mechanical means of propulsion of less than ten horsepower as determined by the
manufacturer’s rating;
      (8)   Outboard motors of less than ten horsepower as determined by the
manufacturer’s rating.
   (c)   The various certificates, applications, and assignments necessary to
provide certificates of title for watercraft and outboard motors shall be made
on appropriate forms approved by the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft.
(R.C. § 1548.01(B), (C))
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(Prior Code, § 670.39)
§ 670.42 MANUFACTURER’S OR IMPORTER’S CERTIFICATE.
   (a)   No manufacturer, importer, dealer, or other person shall sell or
otherwise dispose of a new watercraft or outboard motor to a dealer to be used
by the dealer for purposes of display and resale without delivering to the
dealer a manufacturer’s or importer’s certificate executed in accordance with
this section and with such assignments on it as are necessary to show title in
the name of the purchaser. No dealer shall purchase or acquire a new watercraft
or outboard motor without obtaining from the seller the manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate.
   (b)   A manufacturer’s or importer’s certificate of the origin of a
watercraft or outboard motor shall contain the following information in such
form and together with such further information as the Chief of the Division of
Parks and Watercraft may require:
      (1)   Description of the watercraft, including the make, year, length,
series or model, if any, body type, hull identification number or serial
number, and make, manufacturer’s serial number, and horsepower of any inboard
motor or motors; or description of the outboard motor, including the make,
year, series or model, if any, manufacturer’s serial number, and horsepower;
      (2)   Certification of the date of transfer of the watercraft or outboard
motor to a distributor or dealer or other transferee, and the name and address
of the transferee;
      (3)   Certification that this was the first transfer of the new
watercraft or outboard motor in ordinary trade and commerce;
      (4)   Signature and address of a representative of the transferor.
   (c)   An assignment of a manufacturer’s or importer’s certificate before a
notary public or other officer empowered to administer oaths shall be printed
on the reverse side of the manufacturer’s or importer’s certificate in the form
to be prescribed by the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft. The
assignment form shall include the name and address of the transferee, a
certification that the watercraft or outboard motor is new, and a warranty that
the title at the time of delivery is subject only to such liens and
encumbrances as are set forth and described in full in the assignment.
(R.C. § 1548.05)
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(Prior Code, § 670.40)
§ 670.43 PROHIBITIONS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this municipality a watercraft for which a certificate
of title is required or a watercraft powered by an outboard motor for which a
certificate of title is required without having the certificate or a valid
temporary permit and number in accordance with R.C. Chapter 1548 or, if a
physical certificate of title has not been issued for it, operate the
watercraft or outboard motor in this state knowing that the ownership
information relating to the watercraft or outboard motor has not has not been
entered into the automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas;
      (2)   Operate in this municipality a watercraft for which a certificate
of title is required, or a watercraft powered by an outboard motor for which a
certificate of title is required, upon which the certificate of title has been
canceled;
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title upon cancellation of it
by the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft and notice of the
cancellation as prescribed in R.C. Chapter 1548;
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapter 1548, in case of the destruction or
dismantling or change of a watercraft or outboard motor in such respect that it
is not the watercraft or outboard motor described in the certificate of title;
      (5)   Violate any provision of R.C. Chapter 1548 for which no penalty is
otherwise provided, or any lawful rules adopted pursuant to R.C. Chapter 1548;
      (6)   Operate in this municipality a watercraft or outboard motor knowing
that the certificate of title to or ownership of the watercraft or outboard
motor as otherwise reflected in the automated title processing system has been
canceled.
(R.C. § 1548.18)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 1548.99(A))
(Prior Code, § 670.41)
§ 670.44 PERMANENTLY DISPLAYED HULL IDENTIFICATION NUMBER.
   (a)   A watercraft constructed on or after November 1, 1972, shall have a
hull identification number permanently displayed and affixed to it in
accordance with federal law.
   (b)   A watercraft constructed before November 1, 1972, shall have a hull
identification number assigned to it by the Chief of the Division of Parks and
Watercraft at the time of registration, at the time of application for title,
after transfer of ownership, or at the time of a change to this state as the
principal location of operation. The number shall be permanently displayed and
affixed as prescribed by rules.
   (c)   A person who builds a watercraft or imports a watercraft from another
county for personal use and not for the purpose of sale shall request a hull
identification number from the Chief of the Division of Parks and Watercraft
and permanently display and affix the number as prescribed by rules.
   (d)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any watercraft on the
waters in this state in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 1547.65)
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
(Prior Code, § 670.42)
§ 670.45 TAMPERING WITH NAVIGATION AID OR VESSEL PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly:
      (1)   Damage, remove, or tamper with any signal, buoy, or other aid to
navigation;
      (2)   Sever the mooring lines of, set adrift, or tamper with any vessel
that is moored or tied up on the waters in this municipality.
(R.C. § 1547.92)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 1547.99(F))
(Prior Code, § 670.44)
CHAPTER 672: WEAPONS AND EXPLOSIVES
Section
672.01 Pointing and discharging firearms and other weapons
672.02 Discharge of a firearm on or near prohibited premises
672.03 Fireworks
672.04 Endangering aircraft and airport operations
672.05 Slingshot, bow and arrow and air rifle
672.06 Possessing criminal tools
§ 672.01 POINTING AND DISCHARGING FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS.
   Except as otherwise provided by R.C. § 9.68, elsewhere in the Ohio Revised
Code as amended from time to time, or as provided in division (c) of this
section.
   (a)   No person shall discharge any rifle, shotgun, revolver, pistol or
other firearm within the corporate limits of the municipality.
   (b)   No person shall, intentionally and without malice, point or aim a
firearm at or toward another or discharge a firearm so pointed or aimed.
   (c)   This section does not extend to cases in which firearms are used in
self-defense, in the discharge of official duty or in justifiable homicide.
   (d)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Prior Code, § 672.09) (Ord. 54-2020, passed 4-27-2020)
§ 672.02 DISCHARGE OF A FIREARM ON OR NEAR PROHIBITED PREMISES.
   Except as otherwise provided by R.C. § 2923.162, as amended from time to
time.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Without permission from the proper officials and subject to
division (b)(1) of this section, discharge a firearm upon or over a cemetery or
within 100 yards of a cemetery;
      (2)   Subject to division (b)(2) of this section, discharge of a firearm
on a lawn, park, pleasure ground, orchard or other ground appurtenant to a
schoolhouse, church or inhabited dwelling, the property of another, or a
charitable institution; or
      (3)   Discharge a firearm upon or over a public road or highway.
   (b)   (1)   Division (a)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
while on the person’s own land, discharges a firearm.
      (2)   Division (a)(2) of this section does not apply to a person who owns
any type of property described in that division and who, while on the person’s
own enclosure, discharges a firearm.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of discharge
of a firearm on or near prohibited premises. A violation of division (a)(1) or
(a)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A violation of
division (a)(3) of this section shall be punished as follows.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(2) of this section, a
violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   If the violation created a substantial risk of physical harm to any
person, caused serious physical harm to property, caused physical harm to any
person, or caused serious physical harm to any person, a violation of division
(a)(3) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(Prior Code, § 672.095) (Ord. 54-2020, passed 4-27-2020)
§ 672.03 FIREWORKS.
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section, unless otherwise provided:
      1.3G FIREWORKS. Display fireworks consistent with regulations of the
United States Department of Transportation as expressed using the designation
“Division 1.3” in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
      1.4G FIREWORKS. Consumer fireworks consistent with regulations of the
United States Department of Transportation as expressed using the designation
“Division 1.4” in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
      APA STANDARD 87-1. The Standard for Construction and Approval for
Transportation of Fireworks, Novelties, and Theatrical Pyrotechnics published
by the American Pyrotechnics Association.
      BEER and INTOXICATING LIQUOR. Have the same meaning as in §
612.01 of this code of ordinances.
      BOOBY TRAP. A small tube that has a string protruding from both ends that
has a friction-sensitive composition and that is ignited by pulling the ends of
the string.
      CIGARETTE LOAD. A small wooden peg that is coated with a small quantity
of explosive composition and that is ignited in a cigarette.
      CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in §
624.01 of this code of ordinances.
      DESIGNATED FIRE PREVENTION OFFICER. Refers to the Fire Chief of the city
or the Fire Chief’s designee for purposes of this section of this code of
ordinances.
      DESIGNATED LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Refers to the Police Chief of the
city or the Police Chief’s designee for purposes of this section of this code
of ordinances.
      DISCHARGE SITE. An area immediately surrounding the mortars used to fire
aerial shells.
      EXPLOSIVE. Any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the primary or
common purpose of which is to function by explosion. EXPLOSIVE includes all
materials that have been classified as division 1.1, division 1.2, division
1.3, or division 1.4 explosives by the United States Department of
Transportation in its regulations, and includes, but is not limited to,
dynamite, black powder, pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps,
electric blasting caps, safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant
fuses, instantaneous fuses, and igniter cords and igniters. EXPLOSIVES does not
include “fireworks,” as defined in R.C. § 3743.01 or this section of this code
of ordinances, or any substance or material otherwise meeting the definition of
explosive set forth therein that is manufactured, sold, possessed, transported,
stored, or used in any activity described in R.C. § 3743.80 or division (h) of
this section of this code of ordinances, provided the activity is conducted in
accordance with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations, including, but not
limited to, the provisions of R.C. § 3743.80, division (h) of this section of
this code of ordinances, and the rules of the Fire Marshal adopted pursuant to
R.C. § 3737.82 and Chapter 1608 of this code of ordinances.
      FIREWORKS. Any composition or device prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, deflagration or
detonation, except ordinary matches and except as provided in division (h) of
this section.
      FIREWORKS INCIDENT. Any action or omission that occurs at a fireworks
exhibition that results in injury or death, or a substantial risk of injury or
death, to any person, and that involves either of the following:
         A.   The handling or other use, or the results of the handling or
other use, of fireworks or associated equipment or other materials; or
         B.   The failure of any person to comply with any applicable
requirement or rule imposed or adopted under this section of this code of
ordinances, or R.C. Chapter 3743, or other similar state law or municipal
ordinance.
      FIREWORKS INCIDENT SITE. A discharge site or other location at a
fireworks exhibition where a fireworks incident occurs, a location where an
injury or death associated with a fireworks incident occurs, or a location
where evidence of a fireworks incident or an injury or death associated with a
fireworks incident is found.
      FIREWORKS PLANT. All buildings and other structures in which the
manufacturing of fireworks, or the storage or sale of manufactured fireworks by
a manufacturer, takes place.
      FOUNTAIN DEVICE. A specific type of 1.4G firework that meets all of the
following criteria.
         A.   It is nonaerial and nonreport producing.
         B.   It is recognized and manufactured in accordance with sections
3.1.1 and 3.5 of APA standard 87-1 (2001 edition).
         C.   It is a ground-based or hand-held sparkler with one or more tubes
containing a nonexplosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks
upon ignition, with or without additional effects that may include a colored
flame, audible crackling effect, audible whistle effect or smoke.
         D.   It contains not more than 75 grams of the nonexplosive
pyrotechnic mixture in any individual tube and not more than 500 grams or less
for multiple tubes.
      HIGHWAY. Any public street, road, alley, way, lane or other public
thoroughfare.
      LICENSED BUILDING. A building on the licensed premises of a licensed
manufacturer or wholesaler of fireworks that is approved for occupancy by the
building official having jurisdiction.
      LICENSED EXHIBITOR OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED EXHIBITOR. A person licensed
pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.50 through 3743.55.
      LICENSED FOUNTAIN DEVICE RETAILER or LICENSED RETAILER. A person licensed
pursuant to R.C. § 3743.26.
      LICENSED MANUFACTURER OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED MANUFACTURER. A person
licensed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.02 through 3743.08.
      LICENSED PREMISES. The real estate upon which a licensed manufacturer or
wholesaler of fireworks conducts business.
      LICENSED WHOLESALER OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED WHOLESALER. A person
licensed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.15 through 3743.21.
      MANUFACTURING OF FIREWORKS. The making of fireworks from raw materials,
none of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, or the processing of
fireworks.
      NOVELTIES and TRICK NOISEMAKERS.
         A.   Devices that produce a small report intended to surprise the
user, including, but not limited to, booby traps, cigarette loads, party
poppers and snappers;
         B.   Snakes or glow worms;
         C.   Smoke devices;
         D.   Trick matches.
      PARTY POPPER. A small plastic or paper item that contains not more than
16 milligrams of friction-sensitive explosive composition that is ignited by
pulling a string protruding from the item, and from which paper streamers are
expelled when the item is ignited.
      PROCESSING OF FIREWORKS. The making of fireworks from materials all or
part of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, but does not include
the mere packaging or repackaging of fireworks.
      RAILROAD. Any railway or railroad that carries freight or passengers for
hire, but does not include auxiliary tracks, spurs and sidings installed and
primarily used in serving a mine, quarry or plant.
      RETAIL SALE or SELL AT RETAIL. A sale of fireworks to a purchaser who
intends to use the fireworks and not to resell them.
      SMOKE DEVICE. A tube or sphere that contains pyrotechnic composition
that, upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the primary effect.
      SNAKE or GLOW WORM. A device that consists of a pressed pellet of
pyrotechnic composition that produces a large snake-like ash upon burning,
which ash expands in length as the pellet burns.
      SNAPPER. A small paper-wrapped item that contains a minute quantity of
explosive composition coated on small bits of sand and that, when dropped,
implodes.
      STORAGE LOCATION. A single parcel or contiguous parcels of real estate
approved by the Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. § 3743.04(1) or R.C. § 3743.17(G)
that are separate from a licensed premises containing a retail showroom, and
which parcel or parcels a licensed manufacturer or wholesaler of fireworks may
use only for the distribution, possession, and storage of fireworks in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 3743 and this section of this code of ordinances.
      TRICK MATCH. A kitchen or book match that is coated with a small quantity
of explosive composition and that, upon ignition, produces a small report or a
shower of sparks.
      WHOLESALE SALE or SELL AT WHOLESALE. A sale of fireworks to a purchaser
who intends to resell the fireworks so purchased.
      WIRE SPARKLER. A sparkler consisting of a wire or stick coated with a
nonexplosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks upon ignition
and that contains no more than 100 grams of this mixture.
   (b)   Manufacturing.
      (1)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall knowingly fail to
comply with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. §
3743.05 or the requirements of R.C. § 3743.06.
      (2)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall fail to maintain
complete inventory, wholesale sale and retail records as required by R.C. §
3743.07, or to permit an inspection of these records or the premises of a
fireworks plant or the wholesaler pursuant to R.C. § 3743.08.
      (3)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to R.C. § 3743.08(B)(1) within
the specified period of time.
      (4)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to R.C. § 3743.08(B)(2) until
the nonconformities are eliminated, corrected or otherwise remedied or the 72
hour period specified in those divisions has expired, whichever occurs first.
      (5)   No person shall smoke or shall carry a pipe, cigarette or cigar, or
a match, lighter, other flame-producing item, or open flame on, or shall carry
a concealed source of ignition into, the premises of a fireworks plant, except
as smoking is authorized in specified lunchrooms or restrooms by a manufacturer
pursuant to R.C. § 3743.06(C).
      (6)   No person shall have possession or control of, or be under the
influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer or controlled substance while on
the premises of a fireworks plant.
   (c)   Wholesaling.
      (1)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall knowingly fail to comply
with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. § 3743.18 or
the requirements of R.C. § 3743.19 or this section.
      (2)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall fail to maintain complete
inventory, wholesale sale and retail records as required by R.C. § 3743.20, or
to permit an inspection of these records or the premises of a fireworks plant
or the wholesaler pursuant to R.C. § 3743.21.
      (3)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to R.C. § 3743.21(B)(1) within
the specified period of time.
      (4)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to R.C. § 3743.21(B)(2) until
the nonconformities are eliminated, corrected or otherwise remedied or the 72-
hour period specified in those divisions has expired, whichever occurs first.
      (5)   No person shall smoke or shall carry a pipe, cigarette, or cigar,
or a match, lighter, other flame-producing item, or open flame on, or shall
carry a concealed source of ignition into, the premises of a wholesaler of
fireworks, except as smoking is authorized in specified lunchrooms or restrooms
by a wholesaler pursuant to R.C. § 3743.19(D).
      (6)   No person shall have possession or control of, or be under the
influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer or controlled substance while on
the premises of a wholesaler of fireworks.
   (d)   Purchasing and transporting. Notwithstanding any law to the contrary:
      (1)   No person who purchases fireworks in this state shall obtain
possession of the fireworks in this city unless the person complies with R.C.
Chapter 3743 and this section of this code of ordinances.
      (2)   Except for specific authorization as permitted under state or local
law, no person who resides in another state and who purchases fireworks in this
state shall obtain possession of fireworks in this city other than from a
licensed manufacturer or wholesaler, or fail, when transporting such fireworks,
to transport them directly out of this city within 72 hours after the time of
their purchase.
      (3)   No person shall obtain possession of fireworks in this city unless
the person complies with R.C. Chapter 3743 or this section of this code of
ordinances.
      (4)   No person who purchases fireworks in this state or elsewhere shall
give or sell to any other person in this city fireworks that the person has
acquired except in compliance with R.C. Chapter 3743 and this section of this
code of ordinances.
      (5)   No one who is authorized under R.C. Chapter 3743 to possess 1.4G
fireworks in this state may discharge, ignite, or explode those fireworks
anywhere within the boundaries of the city unless such person first obtains a
permit in accordance with division (e) of this section of this code of
ordinances.
   (e)   Prohibited activities by exhibitors.
      (1)   An exhibitor of fireworks licensed under R.C. Chapter 3743 who
wishes to conduct a public fireworks exhibition within the city shall apply to
the designated fire prevention officer and to the designated law enforcement
officer for approval to conduct the exhibition.
      (2)   The approval required by division (e)(l) of this section shall be
evidenced by a permit for the exhibition signed by both the designated fire
prevention officer and by the designated law enforcement officer. Any exhibitor
of fireworks who wishes to conduct a public fireworks exhibition may obtain a
copy of the form from the State Fire Marshal or, if available, from the
designated fire prevention officer or the designated law enforcement officer.
      (3)   Before a permit is signed and issued to a licensed exhibitor of
fireworks, the designated fire prevention officer, in consultation with the
designated law enforcement officer, shall inspect the premises on which the
exhibition will take place and shall determine that, in fact, the applicant for
the permit is a licensed exhibitor of fireworks. Each applicant shall show
their license as an exhibitor of fireworks to the designated fire prevention
officer.
      (4)   The designated fire prevention officer and the designated law
enforcement officer shall give approval to conduct a public fireworks
exhibition only if satisfied, based on the inspection, that the premises on
which the exhibition will be conducted allow the exhibitor to comply with the
rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. § 3743.53 and that the
applicant is, in fact, a licensed exhibitor of fireworks. The designated fire
prevention officer, in consultation with the designated law enforcement
officer, may inspect the premises immediately prior to the exhibition to
determine if the exhibitor has complied with the rules, and may revoke a permit
for noncompliance with the rules.
      (5)   If the Council has prescribed a fee for the issuance of a permit
for a public fireworks exhibition, the designated fire prevention officer and
designated law enforcement officer shall not issue a permit until the exhibitor
pays the requisite fee.
      (6)   Each exhibitor shall provide an indemnity bond in the amount of at
least $1,000,000 with surety satisfactory to the designated fire prevention
officer and to the designated law enforcement officer, conditioned for the
payment of all final judgments that may be rendered against the exhibitor on
account of injury, death, or loss to person or property emanating from the
fireworks exhibitor, or proof of insurance coverage of at least $1,000,000 for
liability arising from injury, death, or loss of persons or property emanating
from the fireworks exhibition. The Council may require the exhibitor to provide
an indemnity bond or proof of insurance coverage in amounts greater than those
required by this division (e)(6). The designated fire prevention officer and
designated law enforcement officer shall not issue a permit until the exhibitor
provides the bond or proof of the insurance coverage required by this division
(e)(6) or by the Council.
      (7)   Each permit for a fireworks exhibition issued in this city by the
designated fire prevention officer and by the designated law enforcement
officer shall contain a distinct number, designate the municipality, and
identify the certified fire safety inspector or fire prevention officer who
will be present before, during and after the exhibition, where appropriate. A
copy of each permit issued shall be forwarded by the designated fire prevention
officer and by the designated law enforcement officer issuing it to the State
Fire Marshal. A permit is not transferable or assignable.
      (8)   The designated fire prevention officer and designated law
enforcement officer, shall keep a record of issued permits for fireworks
exhibitions within the city. In this list, the designated fire prevention
officer or designated law enforcement officer shall list the name of the
exhibitor, their license number, the premises on which the exhibition will be
conducted, the date and time of the exhibition, and the number designation of
the permit issued to the exhibitor for the exhibition.
      (9)   The Council shall require that a certified fire safety inspector or
fire prevention officer be present before, during and after the exhibition, and
shall require the certified fire safety inspector or fire prevention officer to
inspect the premises where the exhibition is to take place and determine
whether the exhibition is in compliance with this section and R.C. Chapter
3743.
      (10)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall fail to comply with the
applicable requirements of the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant
to R.C. 3743.53(B) and (E), with R.C. 3743.53(C) and (D), or the requirements
of this section of this code of ordinances.
      (11)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall conduct a fireworks
exhibition unless a permit has been secured for the exhibition pursuant to R.C.
3743.54 and the provisions of this section of this code of ordinances, or if a
permit so secured is revoked by the State Fire Marshal or the designated fire
prevention officer, in consultation with the designated law enforcement
officer.
      (12)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall acquire fireworks for use
at a fireworks exhibition other than in accordance with R.C. §§ 3743.54 and
3743.55, and the provisions of this section of this code of ordinances.
      (13)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks or other person associated with
the conduct of a fireworks exhibition shall have possession or control of, or
be under the influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer, or controlled
substance while on the premises on which the exhibition is being conducted.
      (14)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall permit an employee or any
other person to assist the licensed exhibitor in conducting fireworks
exhibitions unless the employee or such other person is registered with the
State Fire Marshal under R.C. § 3743.56.
   (f)   Possession, sale, discharge and advertising; falsification.
      (1)   No person shall possess fireworks in this city or shall possess for
sale or sell fireworks in this city, except a licensed manufacturer of
fireworks as authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.02 through 3743.08, a licensed
wholesaler of fireworks as authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.15 through 3743.21, a
shipping permit holder as authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.40 and 3743.44, a licensed
fountain device retailer as authorized by R.C. § 3743.27, a person as
authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.44 and 3743.45, and in accordance with the
provisions of this section of this code of ordinances, or a licensed exhibitor
of fireworks as authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.50 through 3743.55, and except as
provided in R.C. § 3743.80 and the provisions of this section of this code of
ordinances.
      (2)   Except as otherwise permitted, no person shall discharge, ignite or
explode any fireworks in this city.
      (3)   No person shall use in a theater or public hall what is technically
known as fireworks showers, or a mixture containing potassium chlorate and
sulphur.
      (4)   No person shall sell fireworks of any kind to a person under 18
years of age. No person under 18 years of age shall enter a fireworks sales
showroom unless that person is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or other
responsible adult. No person under 18 years of age shall touch or possess
fireworks on a licensed premises without the consent of the licensee. A
licensee may eject any person from a licensed premises that is in any way
disruptive to the safe operation of the premises.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 3743.44, no person, other
than a licensed manufacturer, licensed wholesaler, licensed exhibitor or
shipping permit holder shall possess 1.3G fireworks in this city.
      (6)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 3743.06(J) and R.C. §
3743.19(K), no person shall knowingly disable a fire suppression system as
defined in R.C. § 3781.108 on the premises of a fireworks plant of a licensed
manufacturer of fireworks or on the premises of the business operations of a
licensed wholesaler of fireworks.
      (7)   No person shall discharge, ignite or explode fireworks while in
possession or control of, or under the influence of, any intoxicating liquor,
beer or controlled substance.
      (8)   No person shall discharge, ignite or explode fireworks on the
property of another person without that person’s permission to use fireworks on
that property.
   (g)   Transporting and shipping.
      (1)   No person shall transport fireworks in this city except in
accordance with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. §
3743.58 and the provisions of this section of this code of ordinances.
      (2)   As used in this division, “fireworks” includes only 1.3G and 1.4G
fireworks. No person shall ship fireworks into this city by mail, parcel post
or common carrier unless the person possesses a valid shipping permit issued
under R.C. § 3743.40, and the fireworks are shipped directly to the holder of a
license issued under R.C. §§ 3743.03, 3743.16 or 3743.51 and the provisions of
this section of this code of ordinances.
      (3)   No person shall ship fireworks within this city by mail, parcel
post or common carrier unless the fireworks are shipped directly to the holder
of a license issued under R.C. §§ 3743.01, 3743.16 or 3743.51 and the
provisions of this section of this code of ordinances.
   (h)   Exceptions. This section does not prohibit or apply to the following:
      (1)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage, or use
in emergency situations, of pyrotechnic signaling devices and distress signals
for marine, aviation, or highway use;
      (2)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of fusees, torpedoes or other signals necessary for the safe operation of
railroads;
      (3)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of blank cartridges in connection with theaters or shows, or in connection with
athletics as signals for ceremonial purposes;
      (4)   The manufacture for, the transportation, storage, possession or use
by, or the sale to the armed forces of the United States and the militia of
this state, as recognized by the Adjutant General of Ohio, of pyrotechnic
devices;
      (5)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices in which paper or plastic
caps containing 0.25 grains or less of explosive material are used, provided
that they are constructed so that a hand cannot come into contact with a cap
when it is in place for explosion, or apply to the manufacture, sale,
possession, transportation, storage or use of those caps;
      (6)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of novelties and trick noisemakers, auto burglar alarms, or model rockets and
model rocket motors designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling
recoverable aero models;
      (7)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of wire sparklers; or
      (8)   The conduct of radio-controlled special effect exhibitions that use
an explosive black powder charge of not more than one-quarter pound per charge,
and that are not connected in any manner to propellant charges; provided, that
the exhibition complies with all of the following:
         A.   No explosive aerial display is conducted in the exhibition;
         B.   The exhibition is separated from spectators by not less than 200
feet; and
         C.   The person conducting the exhibition complies with regulations of
the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms of the United States Department of
the Treasury and the United States Department of Transportation with respect to
the storage and transport of the explosive black powder used in the exhibition.
   (i)   Forfeiture and disposal. Fireworks manufactured, sold, possessed,
transported or used in violation of this section are subject to seizure and
forfeiture in accordance with R.C. § 3743.68.
      (1)   The Fire Marshal, an Assistant Fire Marshal or certified fire
safety inspector may arrest, or may cause the arrest of, any person whom the
Fire Marshal, Assistant Fire Marshal or certified fire safety inspector finds
in the act of violating, or who the Fire Marshal, Assistant Fire Marshal or
certified fire safety inspector has reasonable cause to believe has violated,
R.C. Chapter 3743 or the provisions of this section of this code of ordinances.
Any arrest shall be made in accordance with statutory and constitutional
provisions governing arrests by law enforcement officers.
      (2)   If the Fire Marshal, an Assistant Fire Marshal or certified fire
safety inspector has probable cause to believe that fireworks are being
manufactured, sold, possessed, transported or used in violation of R.C. Chapter
3743 or this section of this code of ordinances, the Fire Marshal, Assistant
Fire Marshal, or certified fire safety inspector may seize the fireworks. Any
seizure of fireworks shall be made in accordance with statutory and
constitutional provisions governing searches and seizures by law enforcement
officers. The Fire Marshal’s or certified fire safety inspector’s office shall
impound at the site or safely keep seized fireworks pending the time they are
no longer needed as evidence. A sample of the seized fireworks is sufficient
for evidentiary purposes. The remainder of the seized fireworks may be disposed
of pursuant to an order from a court of competent jurisdiction after notice and
a hearing.
      (3)   The Fire Marshal’s or certified fire safety inspector’s office
shall dispose of seized fireworks pursuant to the procedures specified in R.C.
§§ 2981.11 to 2981.13 for the disposal of forfeited property by law enforcement
agencies, and the Fire Marshal, or the certified fire safety inspector’s office
is not liable for claims for the loss of or damages to the seized fireworks.
      (4)   This division (i) does not affect the authority of the Police
Chief, other similar law enforcement officer, or a peace officer, as defined in
R.C. § 2935.01, to make arrests for violations of R.C. Chapter 3743 or this
section of this code of ordinances or to seize fireworks manufactured, sold,
possessed, transported, or used in violation of R.C. Chapter 3743 or this
section of this code of ordinances.
   (j)   Penalty.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (j)(2) and (j)(3) of this
section, whoever violates any provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree, with repeat violations to increase the degree
with each subsequent violation.
      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of R.C. § 3743.60(1) or R.C. § 3743.61(1), or a violation of
divisions (b)(5), (c)(5), (d)(5), (e)(13), or (f)(7) of this section of this
code of ordinances, or any substantially similar law or ordinance of another
jurisdiction, is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law and this
code of ordinances.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (e)(10) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to any other penalties that may be
imposed on a licensed exhibitor of fireworks under this division and unless the
third sentence of this division applies, the person’s license as an exhibitor
of fireworks or as an assistant exhibitor of fireworks shall be suspended, and
the person is ineligible to apply for either type of license, for a period of
five years. If the violation of division (e)(10) of this section results in
serious physical harm to persons or serious physical harm to property, the
person’s license as an exhibitor of fireworks or as an assistant exhibitor of
fireworks shall be revoked, and that person is ineligible to apply for a
license as or to be licensed as an exhibitor of fireworks or as an assistant
exhibitor of fireworks in this state.
      (4)   Except as provided for in division (j)(2), whoever violates
division (d)(5) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, a person also may
be convicted at the same trial or proceeding of a violation of division (f)(7)
and (f)(8) of this section and a violation of § 648.04(a)(2) or (b) and §
648.09(a) of this code of ordinances that constitutes the basis of the charge
of the violation of division (d)(5) of this section.
(Prior Code, § 672.10) (Ord. 22-67, passed 5-23-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state provisions, see R.C. §§ 2923.11(M), 3743.01, 3743.45(A), (D),
3743.54, 3743.60(E) - (J), 3743.61(E) - (J), 3743.63, 3743.64, 3743.65(A) -
(H), 3743.66, 3743.68(B), 3743.80, and 3743.99(C), (D)
§ 672.04 ENDANGERING AIRCRAFT AND AIRPORT OPERATIONS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Air gun.” A hand pistol or rifle that propels its projectile by
means of releasing compressed air, carbon dioxide or other gas.
      (2)   “Airport operational surface.” Any surface of land or water that is
developed, posted or marked so as to give an observer reasonable notice that
the surface is designed and developed for the purpose of storing, parking,
taxiing or operating aircraft, or any surface of land or water that is actually
being used for any of those purposes.
      (3)   “Firearm.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.
      (4)   “Spring-operated gun.” A hand pistol or rifle that propels a
projectile not less than four or more than five millimeters in diameter by
means of a spring.
   (b)   No person shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly throw an object at, or drop an object upon, any moving
aircraft.
      (2)   Knowingly shoot with a bow and arrow, or knowingly discharge a
firearm, air gun or spring- operated gun, at or toward any aircraft.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly or recklessly shoot with a bow and arrow, or
shall knowingly or recklessly discharge a firearm, air gun or spring-operated
gun, upon or over any airport operational surface. This division does not apply
to the following:
      (1)   An officer, agent or employee of this or any other state or of the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, authorized to discharge firearms
and acting within the scope of his or her duties.
      (2)   A person who, with the consent of the owner or operator of the
airport operational surface or the authorized agent of either, is lawfully
engaged in any hunting or sporting activity or is otherwise lawfully
discharging a firearm.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of endangering
aircraft, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation creates any risk
of physical harm to any person, or if the aircraft that is the subject of the
violation is occupied, endangering aircraft is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of endangering
airport operations, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the violation
creates a risk of physical harm to any person or substantial risk of serious
harm to any person, endangering airport operations is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law. In addition to any other penalty or sanction
imposed for the violation, the hunting license or permit of a person who
violates division (c) of this section while hunting shall be suspended or
revoked pursuant to R.C. § 1533.68.
(R.C. § 2909.08(A) - (E)) (Prior Code, § 672.12)
§ 672.05 SLINGSHOT, BOW AND ARROW AND AIR RIFLE.
   (a)   No person shall purposely or recklessly throw, shoot, cast or sling by
hand or by means of a slingshot, bow and arrow, air gun or otherwise, any
stone, arrow, pellet or other missile.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Prior Code, § 672.13) (Ord. 1233, passed 11-24-1958; Ord. 94-74, passed 6-10-
1974)
§ 672.06 POSSESSING CRIMINAL TOOLS.
   (a)   No person shall possess or have under his or her control any
substance, device, instrument or article, with purpose to use it criminally.
   (b)   Each of the following constitutes prima facie evidence of criminal
purpose:
      (1)   Possession or control of any dangerous ordnance, or the materials
or parts for making a dangerous ordnance, in the absence of circumstances
indicating the dangerous ordnance, materials or parts are intended for a
legitimate use.
      (2)   Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument or
article designed or specially adapted for criminal use.
      (3)   Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument or
article commonly used for criminal purposes, under circumstances indicating the
item is intended for criminal use.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing criminal tools.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, possessing criminal tools is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the circumstances indicate that the
substance, device, instrument or article involved in the offense was intended
for use in the commission of a felony, possessing criminal tools is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2923.24) (Prior Code, § 672.14)
CHAPTER 698: PENALTIES AND SENTENCING
Section
698.01 Definitions
698.02 Penalties for misdemeanor
698.03 Imposing sentence for misdemeanor
698.04 Organizational penalties
698.05 Multiple sentences
698.06 Suspension of driver’s license
§ 698.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DANGEROUS OFFENDER. A person who has committed an offense, whose history,
character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or she will be a
danger to others, and whose conduct has been characterized by a pattern of
repetitive, compulsive or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to the
consequences.
   REPEAT OFFENDER. A person who has a history of persistent criminal activity
and whose character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or she will
commit another offense. It is prima facie evidence that a person is a “repeat
offender” if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Having been convicted of one or more offenses of violence, as
defined in R.C. § 2901.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent offense of
violence;
      (2)   Having been convicted of one or more sexually oriented offenses, as
defined in R.C. § 2950.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent sexually
oriented offense;
      (3)   Having been convicted of one or more theft offenses, as defined in
R.C. § 2913.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for one or more
of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent theft offense;
      (4)   Having been convicted of one or more felony drug abuse offenses, as
defined in R.C. § 2925.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent felony drug
abuse offense;
      (5)   Having been convicted of two or more felonies, and having been
imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such offense, the person commits a
subsequent offense;
      (6)   Having been convicted of three or more offenses of any type or
degree other than traffic offenses, alcoholic intoxication offenses, or minor
misdemeanors, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such
offense, the person commits a subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 2935.36(E))
§ 698.02 PENALTIES FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   (a)   Considerations in misdemeanor sentencing.
      (1)   A court that sentences an offender for a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, or of any
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised Code, shall be guided
by the overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing. The overriding purposes
of misdemeanor sentencing are to protect the public from future crime by the
offender and others and to punish the offender. To achieve those purposes, the
sentencing court shall consider the impact of the offense upon the victim and
the need for changing the offender’s behavior, rehabilitating the defender, and
making restitution to the victim of the offense, the public, or the victim and
the public.
      (2)   A sentence imposed for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation
of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a violation of a municipal ordinance
that is subject to division (a)(1) of this section shall be reasonably
calculated to achieve the two overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing set
forth in division (a)(1) of this section, commensurate with and not demeaning
to the seriousness of the offender’s conduct and its impact upon the victim,
and consistent with sentences imposed for similar offenses committed by similar
offenders.
      (3)   A court that imposes a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor
or minor misdemeanor violation of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a
violation of a municipal ordinance that is subject to division (a)(1) of this
section shall not base the sentence upon the race, ethnic background, gender or
religion of the offender.
      (4)   Divisions (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section shall not apply to any
offense that is disposed of by a traffic violations bureau of any court
pursuant to Traffic Rule 13 and shall not apply to any violation of any
provision of the Ohio Revised Code that is a minor misdemeanor and that is
disposed of without a court appearance. Divisions (a)(1) to (a)(3) of this
section do not affect any penalties established by the municipality for a
violation of its ordinances that are not substantially equivalent to a
misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised
Code.
(R.C. § 2929.21)
   (b)   Misdemeanor jail terms.
      (1)   Except as provided in §
666.99 or
698.03 of this code or R.C. § 2929.22 or 2929.23 or division (b)(5) of this
section and unless another term is required or authorized pursuant to law, if
the sentencing court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor
elects or is required to impose a jail term on the offender pursuant to this
chapter, the court shall impose a definite jail term that shall be one of the
following:
         A.   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than 180 days;
         B.   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than 90 days;
         C.   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than 60 days;
         D.   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than 30 days.
      (2)   A.   A court that sentences an offender to a jail term under
division (b) of this section may permit the offender to serve the sentence in
intermittent confinement or may authorize a limited release of the offender as
provided in division (d)(2) of this section. The court retains jurisdiction
over every offender sentenced to jail to modify the jail sentence imposed at
any time, but the court shall not reduce any mandatory jail term.
         B.   1.   If a prosecutor, as defined in R.C. § 2935.01, has filed a
notice with the court that the prosecutor wants to be notified about a
particular case and if the court is considering modifying the jail sentence of
the offender in that case, the court shall notify the prosecutor that the court
is considering modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case. The
prosecutor may request a hearing regarding the court’s consideration of
modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, and, if the
prosecutor requests a hearing, the court shall notify the eligible offender of
the hearing.
            2.   If the prosecutor requests a hearing regarding the court’s
consideration of modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, the
court shall hold the hearing before considering whether or not to release the
offender from the offender’s jail sentence.
      (3)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under division (b)
of this section and the court assigns the offender to a County Jail that has
established a County Jail Industry Program pursuant to R.C. § 5147.30, the
court shall specify, as part of the sentence, whether the offender may be
considered for participation in the program. During the offender’s term in the
County Jail, the court retains jurisdiction to modify its specification
regarding the offender’s participation in the County Jail Industry Program.
      (4)   If a person sentenced to a jail term pursuant to division (b) of
this section, the court may impose as part of the sentence pursuant to R.C. §
2929.28 a reimbursement sanction, and, if the local detention facility in which
the term is to be served is covered by a policy adopted pursuant to R.C. §
307.93, 341.14, 341.19, 341.21, 341.23, 753.02, 753.04, 753.16, 2301.56 or
2947.19 and 2929.37, both of the following apply:
         A.   The court shall specify both of the following as part of the
sentence:
            1.   If the person is presented with an itemized bill pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.37 for payment of the costs of confinement, the person is required
to pay the bill in accordance with that section.
            2.   If the person does not dispute the bill described in division
(b)(4)A.1. of this section and does not pay the bill by the times specified in
R.C. § 2929.37, the Clerk of the Court may issue a certificate of judgment
against the person as described in that section.
         B.   The sentence automatically includes any certificate of judgment
issued as described in division (b)(4)A.2. of this section.
      (5)   A.   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241 or 2907.25, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and to a specification of the
type described in R.C. § 2941.1421 and if the court imposes a jail term on the
offender for the misdemeanor violation, the court may impose upon the offender
an additional definite jail term as follows:
            1.   Subject to division (b)(5)A.2. of this section, an additional
definite jail term of not more than 60 days;
            2.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one or more misdemeanor or felony violations of R.C. § 2907.22,
2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241 or 2907.25, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and also was convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1421 regarding one or more
of those violations, an additional definite jail term of not more than 120
days.
         B.   In lieu of imposing an additional definite jail term under
division (b)(5)A. of this section, the court may directly impose on the
offender a sanction that requires the offender to wear a real-time processing,
continual tracking electronic monitoring device during the period of time
specified by the court. The period of time specified by the court shall equal
the duration of an additional jail term that the court could have imposed upon
the offender under division (b)(5)A. of this section. A sanction imposed under
this division shall commence on the date specified by the court, provided that
the sanction shall not commence until after the offender has served the jail
term imposed for the misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241
or 2907.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and any
residential sanction imposed for the violation under division (d) of this
section or R.C. § 2929.26. A sanction imposed under this division shall be
considered to be a community control sanction for purposes of division (c) of
this section or R.C. § 2929.25, and all provisions of this Code and the Ohio
Revised Code that pertain to community control sanctions shall apply to a
sanction imposed under this division, except to the extent that they would by
their nature be clearly inapplicable. The offender shall pay all costs
associated with a sanction imposed under this division, including the cost of
the use of the monitoring device.
      (6)   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor
violation of R.C. § 2903.13 and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1423 that charges that the
victim of the violation was a woman whom the offender knew was pregnant at the
time of the violation, the court shall impose on the offender a mandatory jail
term that is a definite term of at least 30 days.
      (7)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under this division
(b), the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the offender and the jail
term. Upon motion of either party or upon the court’s own motion, the court, in
the court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may substitute
one or more community control sanctions under division (d) or (e) of this
section for any jail days that are not mandatory jail days.
(R.C. § 2929.24)
   (c)   Misdemeanor community control sanctions.
      (1)   A.   Except as provided in §§
666.99 and
698.03 of this code or R.C. §§ 2929.22 and 2929.23 or when a jail term is
required by law, in sentencing an offender for a misdemeanor, other than a
minor misdemeanor, the sentencing court may do either of the following:
            1.   Directly impose a sentence that consists of one or more
community control sanctions authorized by divisions (d), (e) or (f) of this
section. The court may impose any other conditions of release under a community
control sanction that the court considers appropriate. If the court imposes a
jail term upon the offender, the court may impose any community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions in addition to the jail
term.
            2.   Impose a jail term under division (b) of this section from the
range of jail terms authorized under that division for the offense, suspend all
or a portion of the jail term imposed, and place the offender under a community
control sanction or combination of community control sanctions authorized under
divisions (d), (e) or (f) of this section.
         B.   The duration of all community control sanctions imposed upon an
offender and in effect for an offender at any time shall not exceed five years.
         C.   At sentencing, if a court directly imposes a community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to division (c)
(1)A.1. of this section, the court shall state the duration of the community
control sanctions imposed and shall notify the offender that if any of the
conditions of the community control sanctions are violated the court may do any
of the following:
            1.   Impose a longer time under the same community control sanction
if the total time under all of the offender’s community control sanctions does
not exceed the five- year limit specified in division (c)(1)B. of this section;
            2.   Impose a more restrictive community control sanction under
division (d), (e) or (f) of this section, but the court is not required to
impose any particular sanction or sanctions;
            3.   Impose a definite jail term from the range of jail terms
authorized for the offense under division (b) of this section.
      (2)   If a court sentences an offender to any community control sanction
or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to division (c)(1)A.1.
of this section, the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the offender
and the period of community control for the duration of the period of community
control. Upon the motion of either party or on the court’s own motion, the
court, in the court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may
modify the community control sanctions or conditions of release previously
imposed, substitute a community control sanction or condition of release for
another community control sanction or condition of release previously imposed,
or impose an additional community control sanction or condition of release.
      (3)   A.   If a court sentences an offender to any community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions authorized under
division (d), (e) or (f) of this section, the court shall place the offender
under the general control and supervision of the court or of a Department of
Probation in the jurisdiction that serves the court for purposes of reporting
to the court a violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. If
the offender resides in another jurisdiction and a department of probation has
been established to serve the municipal court or county court in that
jurisdiction, the sentencing court may request the municipal court or the
county court to receive the offender into the general control and supervision
of that department of probation for purposes of reporting to the sentencing
court a violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. The
sentencing court retains jurisdiction over any offender whom it sentences for
the duration of the sanction or sanctions imposed.
         B.   The sentencing court shall require as a condition of any
community control sanction that the offender abide by the law and not leave the
state without the permission of the court or the offender’s probation officer.
In the interests of doing justice, rehabilitating the offender, and ensuring
the offender’s good behavior, the court may impose additional requirements on
the offender. The offender’s compliance with the additional requirements also
shall be a condition of the community control sanction imposed upon the
offender.
      (4)   A.   If the court imposing sentence upon an offender sentences the
offender to any community control sanction or combination of community control
sanctions authorized under division (d), (e) or (f) of this section, and the
offender violates any of the conditions of the sanctions, the public or private
person or entity that supervises or administers the program or activity that
comprises the sanction shall report the violation directly to the sentencing
court or to the Department of Probation or probation officer with general
control and supervision over the offender. If the public or private person or
entity reports the violation to the Department of Probation or probation
officer, the department or officer shall report the violation to the sentencing
court.
         B.   Except as provided in division (c)(4)C. of this section, if an
offender violates any condition of a community control sanction, the sentencing
court may impose upon the violator one or more of the following penalties:
            1.   A longer time under the same community control sanction if the
total time under all of the community control sanctions imposed on the violator
does not exceed the five-year limit specified in division (c)(1)B. of this
section;
            2.   A more restrictive community control sanction;
            3.   A combination of community control sanctions, including a jail
term.
         C.   If an offender was acting pursuant to R.C. § 2925.11(B)(2)(b), or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a related provision under
R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14, or R.C. § 2925.141, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and in so doing violated the conditions of a
community control sanction based on a minor drug possession offense, as defined
in R.C. § 2925.11, or violated R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. §
2925.141, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the sentencing
court shall not impose any of the penalties described in division (c)(4)B. of
this section based on the violation.
         D.   If the court imposes a jail term upon a violator pursuant to
division (c)(4)B. of this section, the total time spent in jail for the
misdemeanor offense and the violation of a condition of the community control
sanction shall not exceed the maximum jail term available for the offense for
which the sanction that was violated was imposed. The court may reduce the
longer period of time that the violator is required to spend under the longer
sanction or the more restrictive sanction imposed under division (c)(4)B. of
this section by all or part of the time the violator successfully spent under
the sanction that was initially imposed.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if an offender, for
a significant period of time, fulfills the conditions of a community control
sanction imposed pursuant to division (d), (e) or (f) of this section in an
exemplary manner, the court may reduce the period of time under the community
control sanction or impose a less restrictive community control sanction.
Fulfilling the conditions of a community control sanction does not relieve the
offender of a duty to make restitution under division (f) of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.25)
   (d)   Community residential sanction.
      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may
impose upon the offender any community residential sanction or combination of
community residential sanctions under this division (d). Community residential
sanctions include but are not limited to the following:
         A.   A term of up to 180 days in a halfway house or a term in a
halfway house not to exceed the longest jail term available for the offense,
whichever is shorter, if the political subdivision that would have
responsibility for paying the costs of confining the offender in a jail has
entered into a contract with the halfway house for use of the facility for
misdemeanor offenders;
         B.   If the offender is an eligible offender, as defined in R.C. §
307.932, a term in a community alternative sentencing center or district
community alternative sentencing center established and operated in accordance
with that section, in the circumstances specified in that section, with one of
the conditions of the sanction being that the offender successfully complete
the portion of the sentence to be served in the center.
      (2)   A sentence to a community residential sanction under division (d)
(1)B. of this section shall be in accordance with R.C. § 307.932. In all other
cases, the court that sentences an offender to a community residential sanction
under this division (d) may do either or both of the following:
         A.   Permit the offender to serve the offender’s sentence in
intermittent confinement, overnight, on weekends or at any other time or times
that will allow the offender to continue at the offender’s occupation or care
for the offender’s family;
         B.   Authorize the offender to be released so that the offender may
seek or maintain employment, receive education or training, receive treatment,
perform community service, or otherwise fulfill an obligation imposed by law or
by the court. A release pursuant to this division shall be only for the
duration of time that is needed to fulfill the purpose of the release and for
travel that reasonably is necessary to fulfill the purposes of release.
      (3)   The court may order that a reasonable portion of the income earned
by the offender upon a release pursuant to division (d)(2) of this section be
applied to any financial sanction imposed under division (f) of this section.
      (4)   No court shall sentence any person to a prison term for a
misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor, or to a jail term for a minor misdemeanor.
      (5)   If a court sentences a person who has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a misdemeanor to a community residential sanction as described in
division (d)(1) of this section, at the time of reception and at other times
the person in charge of the operation of the halfway house, community
alternative sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing
center, or other place at which the offender will serve the residential
sanction determines to be appropriate, the person in charge of the operation of
the halfway house, community alternative sentencing center, district community
alternative sentencing center, or other place may cause the convicted offender
to be examined and tested for tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis, including
but not limited to hepatitis A, B and C, and other contagious diseases. The
person in charge of the operation of the halfway house, community alternative
sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing center, or other
place at which the offender will serve the residential sanction may cause a
convicted offender in the halfway house, community alternative sentencing
center, district community alternative sentencing center, or other place who
refuses to be tested or treated for tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis,
including but not limited to hepatitis A, B and C, or another contagious
disease to be tested and treated involuntarily.
      (6)   The municipality may enter into a contract with a halfway house for
use of the halfway house to house misdemeanor offenders under a sanction
imposed under division (d)(1)A. of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.26)
   (e)   Nonresidential sanction where jail term is not mandatory.
      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may
impose upon the offender any nonresidential sanction or combination of
nonresidential sanctions authorized under this division. Nonresidential
sanctions include but are not limited to the following:
         A.   A term of day reporting;
         B.   A term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous
alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol
monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring
without house arrest, or a term of house arrest without electronic monitoring
or continuous alcohol monitoring;
         C.   A term of community service of up to 500 hours for misdemeanor of
the first degree or 200 hours for a misdemeanor of the second, third or fourth
degree;
         D.   A term in a drug treatment program with a level of security for
the offender as determined necessary by the court;
         E.   A term of intensive probation supervision;
         F.   A term of basic probation supervision;
         G.   A term of monitored time;
         H.   A term of drug and alcohol use monitoring, including random drug
testing;
         I.   A curfew term;
         J.   A requirement that the offender obtain employment;
         K.   A requirement that the offender obtain education or training;
         L.   Provided the court obtains the prior approval of the victim, a
requirement that the offender participate in victim-offender mediation;
         M.   If authorized by law, suspension of the offender’s privilege to
operate a motor vehicle, immobilization or forfeiture of the offender’s motor
vehicle, a requirement that the offender obtain a valid motor vehicle
operator’s license, or any other related sanction;
         N.   A requirement that the offender obtain counseling if the offense
is a violation of R.C. § 2919.25 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance or a violation of R.C. § 2903.13 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance involving a person who was a family or household member at
the time of the violation, if the offender committed the offense in the
vicinity of one or more children who are not victims of the offense, and if the
offender or the victim of the offense is a parent, guardian, custodian or
person in loco parentis of one or more of those children. This division does
not limit the court in requiring that the offender obtain counseling for any
offense or in any circumstance not specified in this division.
      (2)   If the court imposes a term of community service pursuant to
division (e)(1)C. of this section, the offender may request that the court
modify the sentence to authorize the offender to make a reasonable
contribution, as determined by the court, to the general fund of the county,
municipality, or other local entity that provides funding to the court. The
court may grant the request if the offender demonstrates a change in
circumstances from the date the court imposes the sentence or that the
modification would otherwise be in the interests of justice. If the court
grants the request, the offender shall make a reasonable contribution to the
court, and the clerk of the court shall deposit that contribution into the
general fund of the county, municipality, or other local entity that provides
funding to the court. If more than one entity provides funding to the court,
the clerk shall deposit a percentage of the reasonable contribution equal to
the percentage of funding the entity provides to the court in that entity’s
general fund.
      (3)   In addition to the sanctions authorized under division (e)(1) of
this section, the court imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a
minor misdemeanor, upon an offender who is not required to serve a mandatory
jail term may impose any other sanction that is intended to discourage the
offender or other persons from committing a similar offense if the sanction is
reasonably related to the overriding purposes and principles of misdemeanor
sentencing.
      (4)   The court imposing a sentence for a minor misdemeanor may impose a
term of community service in lieu of all or part of a fine. The term of
community service imposed for a minor misdemeanor shall not exceed 30 hours.
After imposing a term of community service, the court may modify the sentence
to authorize a reasonable contribution, as determined by the court, to the
appropriate general fund as provided in division (e)(2) of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.27)
   (f)   Financial sanctions.
      (1)   In addition to imposing court costs pursuant to R.C. § 2947.23, the
court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor, including a minor
misdemeanor, may sentence the offender to any financial sanction or combination
of financial sanctions authorized under this division (f) and, if the offender
is being sentenced for a criminal offense as defined in R.C. § 2930.01, shall
sentence the offender to make restitution pursuant to this division (f) and
R.C. § 2929.281. If the court, in its discretion or as required by this
division (f), imposes one or more financial sanctions, the financial sanctions
that may be imposed pursuant to this division (f) include, but are not limited
to, the following:
         A.   Restitution.
            1.   Unless the misdemeanor offense could be disposed of by the
traffic violations bureau serving the court under Traffic Rule 13, restitution
by the offender to the victim of the offender’s crime or the victim’s estate,
in an amount based on the victim’s economic loss. The court may not impose
restitution as a sanction pursuant to this division if the offense could be
disposed of by the traffic violations bureau serving the court under Traffic
Rule 13. If the court requires restitution, the court shall order that the
restitution be made to the victim in open court or to the adult probation
department that serves the jurisdiction or the clerk of the court on behalf of
the victim.
            2.   The court shall determine the amount of restitution to be paid
by the offender. The victim, victim’s representative, victim’s attorney, if
applicable, the prosecutor or the prosecutor’s designee, and the offender may
provide information relevant to the determination of the amount of restitution.
The amount the court orders as restitution shall not exceed the amount of the
economic loss suffered by the victim as a direct and proximate result of the
commission of the offense. If the court imposes restitution for the cost of
accounting or auditing done to determine the extent of economic loss, the court
may order restitution for any amount of the victim’s costs of accounting or
auditing provided that the amount of restitution is reasonable and does not
exceed the value of property or services stolen or damaged as a result of the
offense. If the court decides to or is required to impose restitution, the
court shall hold an evidentiary hearing on restitution if the offender, victim,
victim’s representative, victim’s attorney, if applicable, or victim’s estate
disputes the amount of restitution. The court shall determine the amount of
full restitution by a preponderance of the evidence.
            3.   All restitution payments shall be credited against any
recovery of economic loss in a civil action brought by the victim or the
victim’s estate against the offender. No person may introduce evidence of an
award of restitution under this division (f) in a civil action for purposes of
imposing liability against an insurer under R.C. § 3937.18.
            4.   The court may order that the offender pay a surcharge, of not
more than 5% of the amount of the restitution otherwise ordered, to the entity
responsible for collecting and processing restitution payments.
            5.   The victim, victim’s attorney, if applicable, or the attorney
for the victim’s estate may request that the prosecutor in the case file a
motion, or the offender may file a motion, for modification of the payment
terms of any restitution ordered. If the court grants the motion, it may modify
the payment terms as it determines appropriate but shall not reduce the amount
of restitution ordered, except as provided in R.C. § 2929.281(A).
         B.   Fines. A fine of the type described in divisions (f)(1)B.1. and
(f)(1)B.2. of this section payable to the appropriate entity as required by
law:
            1.   A fine in the following amount:
               a.   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than
$1,000;
               b.   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than $750;
               c.   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than $500;
               d.   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than $250;
               e.   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than $150.
            2.   A state fine or cost as defined in R.C. § 2949.111.
         C.   Reimbursement.
            1.   Reimbursement by the offender of any or all of the costs of
sanctions incurred by the government, including but not limited to the
following:
               a.   All or part of the costs of implementing any community
control sanction, including a supervision fee under R.C. § 2951.021 and the
costs of global positioning system device monitoring;
               b.   All or part of the costs of confinement in a jail or other
residential facility, including but not limited to a per diem fee for room and
board, the costs of medical and dental treatment, and the costs of repairing
property damaged by the offender while confined;
               c.   All or part of the cost of purchasing and using an
immobilizing or disabling device, including a certified ignition interlock
device, or a remote alcohol monitoring device that a court orders an offender
to use under R.C. § 4510.13.
            2.   The amount of reimbursement under division (f)(1)C.1. of this
section shall not exceed the total amount of reimbursement the offender is able
to pay and shall not exceed the actual cost of the sanctions. The court may
collect any amount of reimbursement the offender is required to pay under that
division. If the court does not order reimbursement under that division,
confinement costs may be assessed pursuant to a repayment policy adopted under
R.C. § 2929.37. In addition, the offender may be required to pay the fees
specified in R.C. § 2929.38 in accordance with that section.   
      (2)   A.   If the court determines a hearing is necessary, the court may
hold a hearing to determine whether the offender is able to pay the financial
sanction imposed pursuant to this division (f) or court costs or is likely in
the future to be able to pay the sanction or costs.
         B.   If the court determines that the offender is indigent and unable
to pay the financial sanction or court costs, the court shall consider imposing
and may impose a term of community service under division (e)(1) of this
section in lieu of imposing a financial sanction or court costs. If the court
does not determine that the offender is indigent, the court may impose a term
of community service under division (e)(1) of this section in lieu of or in
addition to imposing a financial sanction under this division (f) and in
addition to imposing court costs. The court may order community service for a
minor misdemeanor pursuant to division (e)(4) of this section in lieu of or in
addition to imposing a financial sanction under this section and in addition to
imposing court costs. If a person fails to pay a financial sanction or court
costs, the court may order community service in lieu of the financial sanction
or court costs.
      (3)   A.   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the
offender pursuant to division (f)(1)C. of this section to pay the costs
incurred by a county pursuant to any sanction imposed under division (d), (e)
or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d) of this section to the County
Treasurer. The County Treasurer shall deposit the reimbursements in the
county’s General Fund. The county shall use the amounts deposited in the Fund
to pay the costs incurred by the county pursuant to any sanction imposed under
division (d), (e) or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to
confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d) of this
section.
         B.   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the offender
pursuant to division (f)(1)C. of this section to pay the costs incurred by a
municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under division (d), (e)
or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d) of this section to the
Treasurer of the municipal corporation. The Treasurer shall deposit the
reimbursements in the municipal corporation’s General Fund. The municipal
corporation shall use the amounts deposited in the Fund to pay the costs
incurred by the municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under
division (d), (e) or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to
confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d) of this
section.
         C.   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed pursuant to
division (f)(1)C. of this section for the costs incurred by a private provider
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d), (e) or (f) of this section
to the provider.
      (4)   In addition to any other fine that is or may be imposed under this
division (f), the court imposing sentence upon an offender for misdemeanor
domestic violence or menacing by stalking may impose a fine of not less than
$70 nor more than $500, which shall be transmitted to the Treasurer of Ohio to
be credited to the address confidentiality program fund created by R.C. §
111.48.
      (5)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this division (f)(5), a
financial sanction imposed under division (f)(1) of this section is a judgment
in favor of the state or the political subdivision that operates the court that
imposed the financial sanction, and the offender subject to the financial
sanction is the judgment debtor. A financial sanction of reimbursement imposed
pursuant to division (f)(1)C.1.a. of this section upon an offender is a
judgment in favor of the entity administering the community control sanction,
and the offender subject to the financial sanction is the judgment debtor. A
financial sanction of reimbursement imposed pursuant to division (f)(1)C.1.b.
of this section upon an offender confined in a jail or other residential
facility is a judgment in favor of the entity operating the jail or other
residential facility, and the offender subject to the financial sanction is the
judgment debtor. A financial sanction of restitution imposed pursuant to
division (f)(1)A. of this section is an order in favor of the victim of the
offender’s criminal act that can be collected through a certificate of judgment
as described in division (f)(5)B.1. of this section, through execution as
described in division (f)(5)B.2. of this section or through an order as
described in division (f)(5)B.3. of this section and the offender shall be
considered for purposes of the collection as a judgment debtor.
         B.   Once a financial sanction is imposed as a judgment or order under
this division, the victim, private provider, state or political subdivision may
do any of the following:
            1.   Obtain from the clerk of the court in which the judgment was
entered, at no charge, a certificate of judgment that shall be in the same
manner and form as a certificate of judgment issued in a civil action;
            2.   Obtain execution of the judgment or order through any
available procedure, including any of the procedures identified in R.C. §
2929.18(D)(1) and (D)(2) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
            3.   Obtain an order for the assignment of wages of the judgment
debtor under R.C. § 1321.33 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (6)   The civil remedies authorized under division (f)(5) of this section
for the collection of the financial sanction supplement, but do not preclude,
enforcement of the criminal sentence.
      (7)   Each court imposing a financial sanction upon an offender under
this division (f) may designate the Clerk of the Court or another person to
collect the financial sanction. The Clerk, or another person authorized by law
or the court to collect the financial sanction may do the following:
         A.   Enter into contracts with one or more public agencies or private
vendors for the collection of amounts due under the sanction. Before entering
into a contract for the collection of amounts due from an offender pursuant to
any financial sanction imposed pursuant to this division (f), a court shall
comply with R.C. §§ 307.86 to 307.92.
         B.   Permit payment of all or any portion of the sanction in
installments, by financial transaction device if the court is a county court or
a municipal court operated by a county, or by any other reasonable method, in
any time, and on any terms that the court considers just, except that the
maximum time permitted for payment shall not exceed five years. If the court is
a county court or a municipal court operated by a county, the acceptance of
payments by any financial transaction device shall be governed by the policy
adopted by the Board of County Commissioners of the county pursuant to R.C. §
301.28. If the court is a municipal court not operated by a county, the Clerk
may pay any fee associated with processing an electronic transfer out of public
money or may charge the fee to the offender.
         C.   To defray administrative costs, charge a reasonable fee to an
offender who elects a payment plan rather than a lump sum payment of any
financial sanction.
      (8)   No financial sanction imposed under this division (f) shall
preclude a victim from bringing a civil action against the offender.
      (9)   If the court imposes restitution, fines, fees, or incarceration
costs on a business or corporation, it is the duty of the person authorized to
make disbursements from assets of the business or corporation to pay the
restitution, fines, fees, or incarceration costs from those assets.
      (10)   If an offender is sentenced to pay restitution, a fine, fee, or
incarceration costs, the clerk of the sentencing court, on request, shall make
the offender’s payment history available to the victim, victim’s
representative, victim’s attorney, if applicable, the prosecutor, the probation
department, and the court without cost.
(R.C. § 2929.28)
§ 698.03 IMPOSING SENTENCE FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   (a)   (1)   Unless a mandatory jail term is required to be imposed by R.C. §
1547.99(G), 4510.14(B) or 4511.19(G), or any other provision of the Revised
Code, or any municipal ordinance, a court that imposes a sentence under this
chapter upon an offender for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor has discretion
to determine the most effective way to achieve the purposes and principles of
sentencing set forth in §
698.02.
      (2)   Unless a specific sanction is required to be imposed or is
precluded from being imposed by the section setting forth an offense or the
penalty for an offense or by any provision of §
666.99 or
698.02 of this code or R.C. §§ 2929.23 to 2929.28, a court that imposes a
sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor may impose on the offender any
sanction or combination of sanctions under §
698.02(b) to (f). The court shall not impose a sentence that imposes an
unnecessary burden on local government resources.
   (b)   (1)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, the
court shall consider all of the following factors:
         A.   The nature and circumstances of the offense or offenses;
         B.   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender and the offense
or offenses indicate that the offender has a history of persistent criminal
activity and that the offender’s character and condition reveal a substantial
risk that the offender will commit another offense;
         C.   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender and the offense
or offenses indicate that the offender’s history, character and condition
reveal a substantial risk that the offender will be a danger to others and that
the offender’s conduct has been characterized by a pattern of repetitive,
compulsive or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to the
consequences;
         D.   Whether the victim’s youth, age, disability or other factor made
the victim particularly vulnerable to the offense or made the impact of the
offense more serious;
         E.   Whether the offender is likely to commit future crimes in
general, in addition to the circumstances described in divisions (b)(1)B. and
(b)(1)C. of this section;
         F.   Whether the offender has an emotional, mental, or physical
condition that is traceable to the offender’s service in the armed forces of
the United States and that was a contributing factor in the offender’s
commission of the offense or offenses;
         G.   The offender’s military service record.
      (2)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, if the
offender enters an Alford plea, the sentencing court shall not consider whether
the offender showed genuine remorse for the offense.
      (3)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, in
addition to complying with division (b)(1) of this section, the court may
consider any other factors that are relevant to achieving the purposes and
principles of sentencing set forth in §
698.02(a).
   (c)   Before imposing a jail term as a sentence for a misdemeanor, a court
shall consider the appropriateness of imposing a community control sanction or
a combination of community control sanctions under §
698.02(c), (d), (e), and (f). A court may impose the longest jail term
authorized under §
698.02(b) only upon offenders who commit the worst forms of the offense or upon
offenders whose conduct and response to prior sanctions for prior offenses
demonstrate that the imposition of the longest jail term is necessary to deter
the offender from committing a future criminal offense.
   (d)   (1)   A sentencing court shall consider any relevant oral and written
statement made by the victim, the victim’s representative, the victim’s
attorney, if applicable, the defendant, the defense attorney, and the
prosecuting authority regarding sentencing for a misdemeanor. This division
does not create any rights to notice other than those rights authorized by R.C.
Chapter 2930.
      (2)   At the time of sentencing for a misdemeanor or as soon as possible
after sentencing, the court shall notify the victim of the offense of the
victim’s right to file an application for an award of reparations pursuant to
R.C. §§ 2743.51 to 2743.72.
(R.C. § 2929.22)
§ 698.04 ORGANIZATIONAL PENALTIES.
   (a)   Regardless of the other penalties provided in §
698.02, an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to §
606.09 shall be fined by the court as follows:
      (1)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than $5,000;
      (2)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than $4,000;
      (3)   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than $3,000;
      (4)   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than $2,000;
      (5)   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than $1,000;
      (6)   For a misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more than
$2,000;
      (7)   For a minor misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more than
$1,000.
   (b)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically
classified, and the section defining the offense or penalty plainly indicates a
purpose to impose the penalty provided for violation upon organizations, then
that penalty shall be imposed in lieu of the penalty provided in this section.
   (c)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically
classified, and the penalty provided includes a higher fine than that provided
in this section, then the penalty imposed shall be pursuant to the penalty
provided for violation of the section defining the offense.
   (d)   This section does not prevent the imposition of available civil
sanctions against an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to §
606.09, either in addition to or in lieu of a fine imposed pursuant to this
section.
(R.C. § 2929.31)
§ 698.05 MULTIPLE SENTENCES.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, R.C. § 2929.14(C)
or 2971.03(D) or (E), a prison term, jail term or sentence of imprisonment
shall be served concurrently with any other prison term, jail term or sentence
of imprisonment imposed by a court of this municipality, the state, another
state or the United States. Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this
section, a jail term or sentence of imprisonment for misdemeanor shall be
served concurrently with a prison term or sentence of imprisonment for felony
served in a state or federal correctional institution.
   (b)   (1)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment for a misdemeanor shall
be served consecutively to any other prison term, jail term or sentence of
imprisonment when the trial court specifies that it is to be served
consecutively or when it is imposed for a misdemeanor violation of R.C. §
2907.322, 2921.34 or 2923.131. When consecutive sentences are imposed for
misdemeanors under this division, the term to be served is the aggregate of the
consecutive terms imposed, except that the aggregate term to be served shall
not exceed 18 months.
      (2)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment imposed for a misdemeanor
violation of R.C. § 4510.14, 4510.16, 4510.21 or 4511.19, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be served consecutively to a prison term
that is imposed for a felony violation of R.C. § 2903.06, 2903.08 or 4511.19 or
a felony violation of R.C. § 2903.04 involving the operation of a vehicle by
the offender and that is served in a state correctional institution when the
trial court specifies that it is to be served consecutively. When consecutive
jail terms or sentences of imprisonment and prison terms are imposed for one or
more misdemeanors and one or more felonies under this division, the term to be
served is the aggregate of the consecutive terms imposed, and the offender
shall serve all terms imposed for a felony before serving any term imposed for
a misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2929.41)
§ 698.06 SUSPENSION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4510.07 or in any other provision of
the Revised Code, whenever an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of any provision of this code of ordinances that is substantially
equivalent to a provision of the Revised Code, and a court is permitted or
required to suspend a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit for a violation of that provision, a court, in addition to any other
penalties authorized by law, may suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privileges for the period
of time the court determines appropriate, but the period of suspension imposed
for the violation of the provision of this code of ordinances shall not exceed
the period of suspension that is permitted or required to be imposed for the
violation of the provision of the Revised Code to which the provision of this
code of ordinances is substantially equivalent.
(R.C. § 4510.05) (Prior Code, § 698.07)
PART EIGHT - BUSINESS REGULATION AND TAXATION CODE
   TITLE TWO - Business Regulation
      
Chap. 810. Abortion Clinics.
      
Chap. 830. Lake Shore Businesses.
      
Chap. 840. Canvassing and Door-to-Door Solicitation.
      
Chap. 844. Scavengers.
      
Chap. 850. Private Investigators and Security Guards.
      
Chap. 856. Regulation of Mobile Food Vehicles.
   TITLE FOUR - Taxation
      
Chap. 882. Motor Vehicle License Tax.
      
Chap. 884. Lodging Excise Tax on Hotels and Short- Term Rentals.
      
Chap. 886. Earned Income Tax Regulations Effective Beginning
TITLE TWO - Business Regulation
      
Chap. 810. Abortion Clinics.
      
Chap. 830. Lake Shore Businesses.
      
Chap. 840. Canvassing and Door-to-Door Solicitation.
      
Chap. 844. Scavengers.
      
Chap. 850. Private Investigators and Security Guards.
      
Chap. 856. Regulation of Mobile Food Vehicles.
CHAPTER 810: ABORTION CLINICS
Section
810.01 Definitions
810.02 Standards and procedures
810.03 Abortion of viable fetus
 
810.99 Penalty
§ 810.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HOSPITAL. A general hospital or a special hospital devoted to gynecology and
obstetrics, which is accredited as a hospital by the Joint Commission on
Accreditation of Hospitals of the American College of Physicians, The American
College of Surgeons, The American Hospital Association and The American Medical
Association, or which is accredited as a hospital by The Accreditation
Committee of the Office of Hospital Affairs of the American Osteopathic
Association.
   PHYSICIAN. A person licensed to practice medicine and surgery or osteopathic
medicine and surgery pursuant to R.C. §§ 4731.14 or 4731.29.
(Ord. 7-75, passed 3-24-1975)
§ 810.02 STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES.
   An abortion otherwise permitted by law shall be performed only in a hospital
or by a licensed physician in a facility which provides the following standards
and procedures, which shall be met and adhered to:
   (a)   Written verification by two physicians, one of whom may be the
physician performing the abortion, of the diagnosis of pregnancy and the
duration of pregnancy, is required. Both physicians shall be qualified for
diagnosis of such condition and shall verify that they have thoroughly examined
the patient at least once prior to the performance of the abortion;
   (b)   Recorded pre-operative history and a physical examination,
particularly directed to the identification of pre-existing or concurrent
illnesses or drug sensitivities that may have a bearing on the operative
procedures or the anesthesia are required;
   (c)   Laboratory procedures, as usually required for a hospital admission,
including blood type and Rh factor, shall be followed;
   (d)   A receiving facility where the patient may be prepared and receive
necessary pre-operative medication and observation prior to the procedure is
required;
   (e)   An operating room properly equipped to safely conduct the abortion
procedure and the availability on the premises of adequate blood, oxygen,
anesthesia, resuscitation equipment and stand-by ambulance service to handle
complications and emergency situations which could occur during the procedure,
are required;
   (f)   Proper anesthesia service administered by a licensed physician is
required;
   (g)   (1)   A recovery facility staffed with at least one registered nurse
in attendance at all times, in which the patient shall be observed for a 24-
hour post-operative period, and adequate blood transfusion facilities so
available that an emergency transfusion can be given in this facility at any
time within such 24-hour period, are required.
      (2)   Such facility shall provide pre-operative and post-operative
psychological counseling by an individual appropriately qualified in the field
of psychology. Written verification of both the pre-operative and post-
operative counseling sessions shall be submitted and shall include the
patient’s reasons for desiring the abortion and alternatives presented to the
patient. Such report shall be kept in the permanent records.
   (h)   Written post-operative instructions shall be given and arrangements
for a post-operative follow-up examination within one month after the abortion
shall be made. Examination by a certified pathologist of all pathological
specimens shall be made and human remains shall be disposed of in a
humanitarian, legal and dignified manner;
   (i)   Adequate permanent records, including reports to the County Health
Department on the need for administration of antibiotics, blood transfusions,
prolongation of a patient’s stay, hospital admission and other complications,
shall be made. The physician performing the abortion shall submit to the
Department an abortion report form for each abortion, containing a pathological
diagnosis of the estimated age of gestation and the height and weight, in
grams, of the fetus. This registry shall be maintained by the Department and
shall include a record, by code numbers, of the patients who have been aborted
and complications which resulted, if any;
   (j)   The usual informed consent, including the operative permit, signed by
the pregnant woman and her parents if she is a legal minor, is required;
   (k)   The external identification and promotion of such facility shall
conform to the provisions of the code of ethics of the national professional
organizations of physicians performing services within such facility;
   (l)   All such facilities shall permit periodic inspections by the County
Health Department; and
   (m)   The facility shall meet the standards of the Joint Commission on
Accreditation of Hospitals which apply to the areas set forth in divisions (a)
through (l) of this section.
(Ord. 7-75, passed 3-24-1975)
§ 810.03 ABORTION OF VIABLE FETUS.
   No person shall perform or participate in the performance or induction of an
abortion of a viable fetus, unless such abortion is performed by a physician in
a hospital and unless two physicians, one of whom may be the physician
performing the abortion, certify, in writing, that the abortion is necessary to
preserve the life or health of the mother.
(Prior Code, § 810.03) (Ord. 7-75, passed 3-24-1975)
§ 810.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not
more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than six months, or both, for each
offense.
(Ord. 7-75, passed 3-24-1975)
CHAPTER 830: LAKE SHORE BUSINESSES
Section
830.01 Business and commercial activities prohibited
830.02 Permitted activities
 
830.99 Penalty
§ 830.01 BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall engage in any business or commercial undertaking, or moor,
anchor or in any way maintain in a stationary position any vessel or other
structure for the purpose of engaging thereon in any business or commercial
undertaking, or construct, maintain or operate any other obstruction or
encroachment, movable or immovable, upon any of the waters of Lake Erie, or
upon the soil beneath such waters, within two miles of that part of the natural
shore line of Lake Erie which constitutes the northern boundary of the city.
(Ord. 24-81, passed 3-23-1981)
§ 830.02 PERMITTED ACTIVITIES.
   Section
830.01 shall not be construed to prohibit the use of the waters of Lake Erie or
the soil beneath such waters by members of the public for purposes of
navigation and fishing, or the reasonable use thereof by littoral or shoreline
owners, the rights of whom are recognized by general law, or the construction,
operation, maintenance and use of piers, docks, wharves and other encroachments
under lease from the city as provided by R.C. § 721.04.
(Ord. 24-81, passed 3-23-1981)
§ 830.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than $500 or
imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both, for each offense. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
CHAPTER 840: CANVASSING AND DOOR-TO-DOOR SOLICITATION
Section
840.01 Definitions
840.02 Permit and registration required
840.03 Information required for registration
840.04 Issuance of permit; transfers; duration
840.05 Soliciting, canvassing, and peddling permitted only during certain hours
and places
840.06 Display of permit; return; exceptions
840.07 Revocation of permits
840.08 Notice prohibiting soliciting, canvassing, and peddling
840.09 “Do Not Knock” Registry
840.10 Soliciting, canvassing, or peddling in violation of notice or “Do Not
Knock” Registry
840.99 Penalty
Editor’s note:
   This chapter, previously titled Peddlers, was re-enacted in its entirety by
Ordinance 101-94, passed May 9, 1994. The chapter was re-enacted in its
entirety again by Ordinance 53-98, passed March 23, 1998 and subsequently re-
amended by Ord. 22-169, passed December 12, 2022.
§ 840.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CANVASSER. Any person traveling either by foot, automobile, truck or any
other type of conveyance from place to place, door to door or from street to
street who obtains or seeks to obtain or influences the opinions of the
residents of the city, upon the private residences including any house,
apartment or other dwelling in the city, who also may or may not obtain or seek
to obtain funds for any cause whatsoever;
   PEDDLER. Any person traveling either by foot, automobile, truck or any other
type of conveyance from place to place, door to door or from street to street,
taking or attempting to take orders for profit by the sale of goods, wares and
merchandise or personal property of any nature whatsoever for immediate
delivery.
   SOLICITOR. Any person traveling either by foot, automobile, truck or any
other type of conveyance from place to place, door to door or from street to
street, taking or attempting to take orders for profit by the sale of goods,
wares and merchandise or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future
delivery or for the services to be furnished or performed in the future;
(Ord. 53-98, passed 3-23-1998; Ord. 22-169, passed 12-12-2022)
§ 840.02 PERMIT AND REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (a)   No peddler or solicitor shall peddle or solicit within the city unless
he or she is registered pursuant to §
840.03 and the holder of a valid permit issued pursuant to §
840.04.
   (b)   Any canvasser is encouraged to notify the Division of Police before
obtaining, seeking to obtain, or influencing the opinions of the residents of
the city. Any canvasser is urged to provide the Division of Police in writing
with his or her name and address, the name and address of the organization
represented, and the dates, times and particular locations where canvassing is
to be performed. No fee shall be charged for the notification of any canvasser.
Canvassers are required to comply with the hours of restrictions listed in §
840.05. Canvassers are also required to comply with the restrictions listed in
§
840.10 related to the “Do Not Knock” Registry and residents posting notices
prohibiting soliciting, canvassing or peddling.
(Ord. 22-169, passed 12-12-2022)
§ 840.03 INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR REGISTRATION.
   Each applicant for a permit shall, within five days of application therefor,
furnish the Police Chief or his or her authorized representative with the
following information on forms provided by the city:
   (a)   The name, age, Social Security number and physical description of the
applicant;
   (b)   A complete permanent and local address of the applicant along with the
Social Security number or the tax identification number of the applicant’s
employer;
   (c)   The name and address of the person, firm, corporation or association
for whom or which the soliciting or peddling is presently being made and any
other person, firm, corporation or association for whom or which the applicant
has solicited during the past three years;
   (d)   A general description of the nature of the business and the goods,
services or wares to be sold, or a description that is otherwise sufficient to
identify the subject matter of the soliciting or peddling in which the
applicant will engage;
   (e)   The names of all other municipalities in which the applicant has
conducted canvassing, soliciting or peddling activities during the past 12
months;
   (f)   A statement as to whether the applicant has complied with the
requirements of R.C. Chapter 1716 pertaining to charitable solicitations, if
applicable;
   (g)   A statement as to whether the applicant has ever had a permit revoked,
including the time and place of such revocation;
   (h)   A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a
felony violation or a misdemeanor violation involving moral turpitude,
including the time and place of such conviction;
   (i)   The proposed dates and times of the solicitation or peddling;
   (j)   The make, model, year, color and license plate number of automobiles
used by the applicant during the period of solicitation or peddling within the
city, and the number of the applicant’s driver’s license and the state of
issuance of such license;
   (k)   Two photographs of the applicant of appropriate size (approximately
two inches by two inches), one of which shall be attached at all times to the
permit and the other of which shall be for the records of the Police
Department; and
   (l)   The city income tax form which shall be filled out and filed with the
application.
   (m)   A separate permit shall be required for each individual salesperson or
peddler even though there may be a single employer.
   (n)   The Police Chief may require an applicant to submit to an FBI
fingerprint background check.
(Ord. 53-98, passed 3-23-1998; Ord. 22-169, passed 12-12-2022)
§ 840.04 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; TRANSFERS; DURATION.
   (a)   Issuance of permit. Not more than ten working days after completion of
the application form provided for in §
840.03, and upon payment of a fee as follows:
 
For one day to one month $15
For one year             $60
 
except that no fee shall be required from those persons excluded herein or from
a charitable, religious or educational organization, as defined in R.C. §
2915.01, the Police Chief or his or her authorized representative shall, except
as otherwise provided herein, issue a permit to each applicant, unless it is
determined by the Police Chief or his or her authorized representative:
      (1)   That the applicant has misrepresented his or her identity or
intention, or made a false, misleading or deceptive statement in providing the
information required under §
840.03; or
      (2)   That the applicant has been convicted, during five years preceding
the date of application, of a felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude or force or violence.
   (b)   Transfers. The permit issued hereunder shall not be transferred or
assigned or used by any person other than the one to whom it is issued.
   (c)   Appeals. Any applicant who has applied for a permit in accordance with
this chapter and to whom the Division of Police has, after an investigation,
denied a license may appeal to the Public Safety Director. Notice of such
appeal shall be filed with the Director within 20 days after the denial by the
Division of Police. The Director, on appeal, may grant or reject the
application for a permit.
(Ord. 53-98, passed 3-23-1998; Ord. 22-169, passed 12-12-2022)
§ 840.05 SOLICITING, CANVASSING, AND PEDDLING PERMITTED ONLY DURING CERTAIN
HOURS AND PLACES.
   (a)   No person shall go upon any residential premises and ring the
doorbell, or rap or knock on the door, or create any sound in a manner
calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of the residence for the
purpose of engaging in or attempting to engage in soliciting, canvassing or
peddling before 9:00 a.m or after 30 minutes following sunset of any day, from
October 1 through March 31 and before 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. of any day,
from April 1 through September 30.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section shall not apply to a visit to the
premises as a result of a request or an appointment made by the occupant.
   (c) In this section, “sunset” means the time of day provided by the
Astronomical Applications Department of the U.S. Naval Observatory as the time
for sunset on that day in the city.
   (d)   No person shall solicit or peddle on city property without a valid
permit and the approval of the Public Works Director or their designee.
   (e)   No person shall solicit or peddle at a Recreation Department sponsored
event without a valid permit and the approval of the Recreation Director or
their designee.
(Ord. 53-98, passed 3-23-1998; Ord. 176-02, passed 9-9-2002; Ord. 29-2016,
passed 3-14-2016; Ord. 22-169, passed 12-12-2022)
§ 840.06 DISPLAY OF PERMIT; RETURN; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Each registrant shall prominently display on his or her person the
permit at all times when in the city and shall exhibit it to any resident or
municipal official upon request.
   (b)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to solicitations
conducted only among the members of the entity conducting the canvassing or to
solicitations in the form of collections or contributions at the regular
assemblies, meetings or services of any established charitable or religious
organization.
(Ord. 53-98, passed 3-23-1998; Ord. 22-169, passed 12-12-2022)
§ 840.07 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   A permit issued under this chapter shall be revoked by the Public Safety
Director or his or her designee for any of the following causes:
   (a)   It is subsequently determined that the registrant provided false,
misleading or deceptive information in completing the application set forth in
§
840.03, or has violated any of the provisions of this chapter;
   (b)   The registrant is convicted of a felony violation or a misdemeanor
violation involving moral turpitude; or
   (c)   The registrant is convicted of a violation of any provision of this
chapter.
    Written notice shall be given to the registrant in person or by certified
mail immediately upon such revocation.
(Ord. 53-98, passed 3-23-1998; Ord. 22-169, passed 12-12-2022)
§ 840.08 NOTICE PROHIBITING SOLICITING, CANVASSING, AND PEDDLING.
   The owners or occupants of any residence or place of business may indicate a
determination to refuse to receive any uninvited canvassers or solicitors by
displaying a card, decal or sign not less than two inches by three inches in
size, upon or near the main entrance door to the residence or place of
business, containing the words “No Soliciting”, “No Canvassing”, “No Peddling”
or words to that effect with the letters at least one-third of an inch in
height. Any such sign which complies with the requirements of this section
shall be exempt from any additional or different requirements contained in
Chapter 1236 of the Planning and Zoning Code.
(Ord. 53-98, passed 3-23-1998; Ord. 11-2019, passed 2-11-2019; Ord. 22-169,
passed 12-12-2022)
§ 840.09 “DO NOT KNOCK” REGISTRY.
   (a)   The Public Safety Director shall establish and maintain a “Do Not
Knock” Registry (in this chapter, the “Registry”).
   (b)   Any person in lawful possession and occupancy of any residence, house,
apartment or other dwelling in the city may require the city to place and
maintain his or her residence, house, apartment or other dwelling on the
Registry by submitting a request to be placed thereon on a form supplied by the
Public Safety Director. This form shall be made available at City Hall, the
Police Department and on the city’s website. The completed form must be turned
in at City Hall and must contain the following information:
      (1)   The name of the person completing the form;
      (2)   The complete address of the residence, house, apartment or other
dwelling to be placed on the Registry;
      (3)   The date the form was completed;
      (4)   A statement that no solicitor or peddler shall knock, ring the
doorbell or otherwise call at this address, or words of similar import; and
      (5)   Such information that verifies the identity of the person
completing the form as a lawful possessor and occupant as may be required by
the Public Safety Director.
   (c)   Any person in lawful possession and occupancy of any residence, house,
apartment or other dwelling in the city may require the city to remove his or
her residence, house, apartment or other dwelling from the Registry by
submitting a separate “Notice of Removal” on a form supplied by the Public
Safety Director. This form shall be made available at City Hall, the Police
Department and on the city’s website. The completed form must be turned in at
City Hall and must contain the following information:
      (1)   The name of the person completing the form;
      (2)   The complete address of the residence, house, apartment or other
dwelling to be removed from the Registry;
      (3)   The date the form was completed;
      (4)   A statement that the residence, home, apartment or other dwelling
be removed from the Registry, or words of similar import; and
      (5)   Such information that verifies the identity of the person
completing the form as a lawful possessor and occupant as may be required by
the Public Safety Director.
   (d)   A residence, house, apartment or other dwelling, after being lawfully
placed on the Registry shall remain on the Registry until the earliest of any
of the following:
      (1)   The city receives a Notice of Removal pursuant to division (c) of
this section; or
      (2)   The city receives notice that the person who submitted the form
pursuant to division (b) of this section is not or is no longer a lawful
possessor or occupant of the premises.
   (e)   The Public Safety Director or his or her designee shall update the
Registry on a weekly basis.
   (f)   A copy of the Registry shall be made available for public inspection
at all times on the internet website of the city and at the Police Department.
(Ord. 11-2019, passed 2-11-2019; Ord. 22-169, passed 12-12-2022)
§ 840.10 SOLICITING, CANVASSING, OR PEDDLING IN VIOLATION OF NOTICE OR “DO NOT
KNOCK” REGISTRY.
   (a)   No person shall act as a solicitor, canvasser or peddler, as defined
in §
840.01, and go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door,
or rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any other manner
calculated to attract the attention of any occupant of such premises for the
purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof, if there is
displayed at the premises a notice in accordance with the provisions of §
840.08.
   (b)   No solicitor or peddler, shall go upon any premises and ring the
doorbell upon or near any door, or rap or knock upon any door, create any sound
in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of any occupant of such
premises, or otherwise enter upon the premises to engage in canvassing if the
address of the premises is registered on the city’s Registry pursuant to §
840.09.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of trespass in violation of §
642.13.
(Ord. 53-98, passed 3-23-1998; Ord. 11-2019, passed 2-11-2019; Ord. 22-169,
passed 12-12-2022)
§ 840.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree and shall be fined not more than $250 or
imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both, for each offense. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(Ord. 53-98, passed 3-23-1998; Ord. 22-169, passed 12-12-2022)
CHAPTER 844: SCAVENGERS
Section
844.01 Definitions
844.02 License fee and conditions
 
844.99 Penalty
§ 844.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COLLECTION CONTRACTOR. The person who has contracted with the city to
provide trash collection services.
   PERSON. A natural person, corporation, partnership, limited liability
company or other entity.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Materials that have placed by the owner thereof for
collection by the city or the city trash collector and have been identified,
either by color of container or other means, as material offered for recycling.
   SCAVENGING. The removal of trash from private or public property for the
purpose of using, selling, relocating or disposing of such trash.
   TRASH. Discarded rubbish, refuse, paper, rags, appliances, furniture, scrap
metal or other similar discarded material.
(Ord. 5-2013, passed 1-28-2013; Ord. 25-2014, passed 2-24-2014)
§ 844.02 LICENSE FEE AND CONDITIONS.
   (a)   No person shall engage in scavenging unless such person first obtains
a license (the “scavenger license”) from the Safety Director or his or her
designated representative. The fee for a scavenger license shall be $15 per
year. All scavenger licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year of
issuance. There shall be no proration of the fee for a scavenger license issued
after the start of a calendar year.
   (b)   A condition of any scavenger license issued shall be that the licensee
agrees to collect, transport and dispose of trash in a sanitary manner so as
not to create a nuisance and to comply with all rules and regulations from time
to time promulgated by the Safety Director, which may include, but not be
limited to, times and days for collections and designation of areas.
   (c)   Before a vehicle may be used in scavenging, the holder of the
scavenger license shall register such vehicle with the office of the Safety
Director.
   (d)   Any person issued a scavenger license shall display on each vehicle
used by such person in scavenging one or more signs supplied by the Safety
Director identifying such person as a licensed scavenger and containing current
contact information for such person. The cost of such signs shall be paid to
the city by the licensee.
   (e)   Any vehicle conveying or carrying trash shall be so constructed and
operated that its contents shall not spill or scatter upon any public or
private property. Any person hauling or scavenging trash in or using an open
vehicle such as a truck or trailer shall cause the load to be covered with an
adequate tarpaulin or canvas so as to prevent any spilling or scattering of its
contents.
   (f)   After a person engaged in scavenging inspects and/or removes items of
trash, such person shall clean up any debris resulting from such person’s
activities, return any uncollected trash to the bags or containers from which
they were removed, and return the remaining trash to the condition existing
prior to such inspection and/or collection.
   (g)   No person shall remove or cause the removal of recyclable materials
from any lot, premises or public place that have been placed or deposited for
collection by the city or the collection contractor.
   (h)   This section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Any private individual removing or hauling trash from his or her
own premises;
      (2)   The city or the collection contractor;
      (3)   Any private or public school; or
      (4)   Any person who does not collect trash from more than three
properties in one week.
(Ord. 5-2013, passed 1-28-2013; Ord. 25-2014, passed 2-24-2014)
§ 844.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   The scavenger license of anyone who violates any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter may be
revoked by the Safety Director. Any person whose scavenger license has been
revoked pursuant to this section shall not be issued another scavenger license
for at least three years from the date of revocation.
   (b)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter or any rule or
regulation issued pursuant to this chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 5-2013, passed 1-28-2013)
CHAPTER 850: PRIVATE INVESTIGATORS AND SECURITY GUARDS
Section
850.01 Definitions
850.02 Registration
 
850.99 Penalty
§ 850.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, “private investigator”, “business of private
investigation”, “security guard provider” and “business of security services”
shall be defined as provided in R.C. § 4749.01, provided, however, that the
terms “private investigator”, “business of private investigation”, “security
guard provider” and “business of security services” shall not include a person
regularly employed as a full- or part-time officer or patrol officer in the
City Police Department.
(Ord. 119-92, passed 7-27-1992)
§ 850.02 REGISTRATION.
   No individual, corporation or partnership shall operate as a private
investigator or security guard provider or shall engage in the business of
private investigation or the business of security services within the city
until such individual, corporation or partnership has registered with the
Police Department and upon registration has provided the Police Department the
following:
   (a)   The name, current address and Social Security number, if an individual
or partnership, of the individual, partnership or corporation holding the Class
A, B or C license issued by the State of Ohio Department of Commerce pursuant
to R.C. § 4749.03, under which such individual, partnership or corporation is
operating. A copy of such license shall also be supplied to the Police
Department upon registration; and
   (b)   The names, current addresses and Social Security numbers of all
employees engaged in the business of private investigation, the business of
security services, or both, and copies of the identification cards furnished by
the State of Ohio Department of Commerce to such employees.
(Ord. 119-92, passed 7-27-1992)
§ 850.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree and shall be fined not more than $250 or
imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both, for each offense. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(Ord. 119-92, passed 7-27-1992)
CHAPTER 856: REGULATION OF MOBILE FOOD VEHICLES
Section
856.01 Purpose
856.02 Definitions
856.03 Mobile food vehicle permit required
856.04 Validity of permit
856.05 Application for a mobile food vehicle permit
856.06 Permit fees
856.07 Permit not transferrable
856.08 Operation of mobile food vehicles
856.09 Enforcement
856.10 Severability
856.99 Penalty
§ 856.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the public by requiring permits for mobile food vehicles and to establish
minimum requirements for the operation of such vehicles related to their
location, hours of operation, sanitation, and cleanliness.
(Ord. 98-2019, passed 7-8-2019)
§ 856.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIRE MARSHAL. The Fire Marshal of the Avon Lake Fire Department.
   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. A business operation that stores, prepares, packages,
serves, vends or otherwise provides food for human consumption.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the City of Avon Lake.
   MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE. A food establishment that consists of or is located in
or upon a vehicle, including cars, trucks, motorcycles and bicycles, or which
is pulled by a vehicle, where food or beverage is cooked, prepared or served
for individual portion service. This definition includes but is not limited to
mobile food kitchens, pushcarts, bicycle carts, mobile food trucks, canteen
trucks and coffee trucks. This definition does not include “meals on wheels”
program vehicles, food home delivery services, or a vehicle operated by a
peddler pursuant to a current license issued under this code of ordinances.
   PERMIT. A mobile food vehicle permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
   PRIVATE PARTY. A social gathering not open to the public on private property
or on public property reserved for such gathering.
   SPECIAL EVENT. Any outdoor activity or series of outdoor activities of the
type described in §
1224.02(f)(12) of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 98-2019, passed 7-8-2019; Ord. 21-70, passed 4-26-2021)
§ 856.03 MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person or entity, including a religious or charitable organization, shall
conduct business or dispense food or beverages from a mobile food vehicle
unless a permit for such vehicle is in effect.
(Ord. 98-2019, passed 7-8-2019)
§ 856.04 VALIDITY OF PERMIT.
   A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid from the date of
issuance and shall expire on the same date as the mobile food license issued by
the respective county health agency.
(Ord. 98-2019, passed 7-8-2019; Ord. 21-70, passed 4-26-2021)
§ 856.05 APPLICATION FOR A MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE PERMIT.
   (a)   Application. An application for a permit shall be made available by
the Fire Marshal.
   (b)   Information required. Each completed application must include or be
accompanied by the following:
      (1)   The name of the business and its owner or owners, the mailing
address of the business, and mobile telephone number of the operator;
      (2)   The types of food and beverages to be dispensed from the vehicle;
      (3)   A description of the vehicle and the vehicle identification number;
      (4)   Certification that the mobile food vehicle has passed all necessary
inspections required by the County Health Department with jurisdiction over
such mobile food vehicle;
      (5)   A certificate of insurance evidencing commercial general liability
coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 in the aggregate in a form
acceptable to the city;
      (6)   A valid vendors permit if any items being sold are considered
taxable; and
      (7)   A current inspection of their gas and piping system if unit is so
equipped.
   (c)   Approval process: appeals. The completed application must be submitted
to the Fire Prevention Department at the Avon Lake Fire Department. Within 30
days of the submission of a completed application, the Fire Marshal shall
either issue or deny the application for a permit. If the application is denied
in whole or in part, the Fire Marshal shall state the reasons for the denial.
Any applicant who has been denied a permit may appeal such denial by submitting
a written notice of appeal to the Code Administrator not later than ten days of
the date of the denial. The appeal shall be heard by the Zoning Board of
Appeals within 30 days of receipt of said appeal upon procedures established by
the Zoning Board of Appeals. The decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may be
appealed by either the applicant or the city to the Lorain County Common Pleas
Court in accordance with R.C. Chapter 2506.
(Ord. 98-2019, passed 7-8-2019; Ord. 21-70, passed 4-26-2021)
§ 856.06 PERMIT FEES.
   The fee for a permit shall be as set forth in Chapter 208 of the
Administration Code - the General Fee Schedule.
(Ord. 98-2019, passed 7-8-2019)
§ 856.07 PERMIT NOT TRANSFERRABLE.
   A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be transferable, and any
attempt to assign, sell, lend, lease or in any manner transfer such permit
shall be void.
(Ord. 98-2019, passed 7-8-2019)
§ 856.08 OPERATION OF MOBILE FOOD VEHICLES.
   (a)   The issuance of a permit does not grant or entitle the exclusive use
of a location to the permit holder.
   (b)   No mobile food vehicle shall provide or allow any dining area,
including, but not limited to, tables, chairs, booths, bar stools, benches and
standup counters, except at a private party or special event.
   (c)   Permit holders shall provide customers with single service articles,
such as plastic silverware and paper plates. All mobile food vehicles shall
offer a waste container for customer use that the operator shall empty at his
or her own expense if not provided by the organizer or sponsor of a special
event or private party.
   (d)   No mobile food vehicle shall make or cause to be made noise in
violation of any section of this code of ordinances.
   (e)   The permit holder shall notify the City Fire Department in writing at
least one week in advance of all times and locations within the city at which
food or beverages will be dispensed from the permit holder’s mobile food
vehicle.
   (f)   Except for operation at a private party or special event at which
mobile food vehicles are permitted, a mobile food vehicle may dispense food
only in an O-1, B-1, B-2, B-3, L-1 or I Zoning District.
   (g)   Except for operation at a private party or special event at which
mobile food vehicles are permitted, no mobile food vehicle shall dispense food
on the same street on more than one day in any seven-day period.
   (h)   Except for operation at a private party or special event at which
mobile food vehicles are permitted, no mobile food vehicle shall dispense food
at the same location for more than two hours in any 24-hour period.
   (i)   Mobile food vehicles must adhere to all applicable parking regulations
for commercial vehicles.
   (j)   A mobile food vehicle must be licensed by the health district in which
the home base or business headquarters is located. Such license must be
maintained on site for validation. Mobile food vehicles must comply with all
applicable governmental rules and regulations, including but not limited to
those of the Lorain County General Health District and the State of Ohio.
   (k)   No mobile food vehicle may be parked on the street overnight, or left
unattended and unsecured at any time food is kept in the mobile food vehicle.
   (l)   The permit and all other current licenses, permits and certificates
issued for the mobile food vehicle must be prominently displayed when business
is being conducted from the mobile food vehicle.
   (m)   Prior to operating within the city pursuant to a permit, a mobile food
vehicle must be inspected by the City Fire Department to ensure compliance with
all applicable federal, state and local fire safety and health statutes,
regulations, ordinances and codes. No mobile food vehicle shall operate within
the city unless it has been inspected and approved for operation by the City
Fire Department.
   (n)   The permit holder shall permit the City Fire Department to inspect the
mobile food vehicle as often as the Fire Chief may deem necessary to ensure
that the mobile food vehicle is in compliance with all applicable federal,
state and local fire safety and health statutes, regulations, ordinances and
codes.
(Ord. 98-2019, passed 7-8-2019)
§ 856.09 ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   Enforcement. The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by the
Mayor, the Avon Lake Police Department or the Avon Lake Fire Department.
   (b)   Revocation, suspension, modification. In addition to any other
penalties specified in §
856.99, once a permit has been issued it may be revoked or suspended, for
failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Anyone holding a permit
that has been revoked or suspended may, within ten days of notice of the same,
appeal as is provided in §
856.05(c). The Mayor may suspend a permit for no more than three days without
notice or hearing, if the Mayor notifies the permit holder in writing (email is
deemed an acceptable writing) that there is a probability of a violation of
public safety, health or order. In such a case, anyone holding a permit that
has been suspended may request a hearing within 72 hours of notice of the
suspension in order to determine whether the suspension is justified.
(Ord. 98-2019, passed 7-8-2019)
§ 856.10 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this chapter is held to be invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, then such provision shall be considered separately and
apart from the remaining provisions, which shall remain in full force and
effect.
(Ord. 98-2019, passed 7-8-2019)
§ 856.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during which or
on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
(Ord. 98-2019, passed 7-8-2019)
TITLE FOUR - Taxation
      
Chap. 882. Motor Vehicle License Tax.
      
Chap. 884. Lodging Excise Tax on Hotels and Short- Term Rentals.
      
Chap. 886. Earned Income Tax Regulations Effective Beginning
CHAPTER 882: MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSE TAX
Section
882.01 Levy of tax; purposes
882.02 Rate
882.03 Other taxes
882.04 Certification of chapter
882.05 Nonliability of city
§ 882.01 LEVY OF TAX; PURPOSES.
   There is hereby levied an annual license tax, in addition to the tax levied
by R.C. §§ 4503.02, 4503.07 and 4503.18, upon the operation of motor vehicles
on the public roads or highways, for purposes of paying costs and expenses of
enforcing and administering the tax provided for in this chapter; for planning,
constructing, improving, maintaining and repairing public roads, highways and
streets; for maintaining and repairing bridges and viaducts; for paying the
city’s portion of costs and expenses of cooperating with the Ohio Department of
Transportation in the planning, improvement and construction of state highways;
for paying the city’s portion of compensation, damages, costs and expenses of
planning, constructing, reconstructing, improving, maintaining and repairing
roads and streets; for paying any costs apportioned to the city under R.C. §
4907.47; for paying debt service charges on notes or bonds of the city issued
for such purposes; for purchasing, erecting and maintaining street and traffic
signs and markers; for purchasing, erecting and maintaining traffic lights and
signals; and to supplement revenue already available for such purposes.
(Ord. 90-78, passed 4-24-1978)
§ 882.02 RATE.
   The motor vehicle license tax levied by §
882.01 shall be at the rate of $5 per motor vehicle, for all motor vehicles
whose district of registration, as defined in R.C. § 4503.10, is in the city,
and which are not subject to a county motor vehicle license tax previously
levied by a resolution adopted pursuant to R.C. § 4504.02.
(Ord. 90-78, passed 4-24-1978)
§ 882.03 OTHER TAXES.
   The motor vehicle license tax shall be in addition to the tax at the rates
specified in R.C. §§ 4503.04 and 4503.16, subject to reductions in the manner
provided in R.C. § 4503.13 and exemptions provided in R.C. §§ 4503.101,
4503.16, 4503.17 and 4503.171.
(Ord. 90-78, passed 4-24-1978)
§ 882.04 CERTIFICATION OF CHAPTER.
   The Clerk of Council is hereby directed to certify a copy of this chapter to
the State Registrar of Motor Vehicles not later than August 1, 1978, in order
to comply with R.C. § 4504.08.
(Ord. 90-78, passed 4-24-1978)
§ 882.05 NONLIABILITY OF CITY.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing liability upon the
city for injury to persons or property as a result of any defect in a street or
road within the city.
(Ord. 90-78, passed 4-24-1978)
CHAPTER 884: LODGING EXCISE TAX ON HOTELS AND SHORT-TERM RENTALS
Section
884.01   Definitions
884.02   Tax imposed
884.03   Collection by lodging platforms and operators
884.04   Registration, returns and records
884.05   Penalties and interest
884.06   Use of revenue
884.07   Administration and agreements
884.08   Enforcement
§ 884.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Avon Lake, Ohio.
   GROSS RENT. The total amount charged to a transient guest for lodging,
including all cleaning, booking, and service fees charged in connection with
the lodging, but excluding the tax imposed under this chapter.
   LODGING. The furnishing of sleeping accommodations within the city to a
transient guest for a period of fewer than 30 consecutive days, for
consideration.
   LODGING PLATFORM. Any person, firm, corporation, or entity that provides a
means, whether through an online, digital, or other electronic platform, for
arranging, listing, or booking lodging accommodations and that either (1)
collects payment or fees from transient guests on behalf of an operator; or (2)
provides a means through which payment is processed for lodging.
   OPERATOR. Any person who owns, leases, manages, or otherwise controls
lodging and makes it available to transient guests, whether directly or through
a lodging platform.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL. A dwelling unit, or portion thereof, offered or provided
to transient guests for lodging for fewer than 30 consecutive days.
   TRANSIENT GUEST. Any person occupying lodging for fewer than 30 consecutive
days.
(Ord. 25-178, passed 12-8-2025)
§ 884.02 TAX IMPOSED.
   (a)   There is hereby levied an excise tax of 3% on the gross rent paid for
lodging furnished to a transient guest within the city.
   (b)   The tax shall be in addition to any other taxes imposed by law and
shall apply to all hotels, motels, inns, bed-and-breakfast establishments, and
short-term rentals located within the city.
(Ord. 25-178, passed 12-8-2025)
§ 884.03 COLLECTION BY LODGING PLATFORMS AND OPERATORS.
   (a)   When lodging is booked or paid for through a lodging platform, the
platform shall:
      (1)   Collect the lodging excise tax at the time the rent is charged to
the transient guest; and
      (2)   Remit the full amount of tax collected to the City of Avon Lake
Department of Finance; and
      (3)   File a monthly return identifying the total taxable rents received
for transactions within the city.
   (b)   The platform shall be considered the agent of the operator for
purposes of tax collection and remittance.
   (c)   An operator that exclusively uses one or more lodging platforms that
collect and remit the tax under this chapter shall not be required to
separately collect or remit the tax, provided the platform is in full
compliance.
   (d)   If a lodging platform fails to collect or remit tax for any
transaction, the operator shall remain jointly and severally liable for the
unpaid tax.
(Ord. 25-178, passed 12-8-2025)
§ 884.04 REGISTRATION, RETURNS, AND RECORDS.
   (a)   Each lodging platform and any operator not using a platform shall
register with the city prior to furnishing lodging subject to this tax.
   (b)   Lodging platforms and non-platform operators shall file returns and
remit the tax to the city on or before the twentieth day of each month for
lodging furnished during the preceding month.
   (c)   Returns shall include gross rents, tax collected, exempt transactions,
and such additional data as the city may require.
   (d)   The city may require that lodging platforms provide sufficient data to
verify the number of bookings, addresses of taxable properties, and amounts
collected.
   (e)   All records shall be retained for at least three years and shall be
made available to the city upon reasonable notice for audit.
(Ord. 25-178, passed 12-8-2025)
§ 884.05 PENALTIES AND INTEREST.
   If any person fails to remit the tax as required by this chapter, there
shall be added a penalty of 10% of the amount due, together with interest at 1%
per month until paid.
(Ord. 25-178, passed 12-8-2025)
§ 884.06 USE OF REVENUE.
   All revenue collected under this chapter shall be deposited into a separate
fund known as the Lodging Tax Fund. At least 50% of the revenue shall be used
for tourism, recreation, and visitor-related services, and the remainder shall
be used for general municipal purposes.
(Ord. 25-178, passed 12-8-2025)
§ 884.07 ADMINISTRATION AND AGREEMENTS.
   (a)   The Finance Director is authorized to promulgate rules, forms, and
procedures necessary to administer and enforce this chapter.
   (b)   The Finance Director may enter into agreements with lodging platforms
to facilitate collection and remittance, ensure confidentiality of taxpayer
data, and obtain periodic reports of lodging transactions within the city.
(Ord. 25-178, passed 12-8-2025)
§ 884.08 ENFORCEMENT.
   The city may assess unpaid taxes, penalties, and interest, file civil
actions for collection, or take such other enforcement measures as authorized
by law. The tax imposed by this chapter constitutes a debt owed to the city by
the transient guest, and the operator or lodging platform acts as trustee of
the funds for the city.
(Ord. 25-178, passed 12-8-2025)
CHAPTER 886: EARNED INCOME TAX REGULATIONS
Section
886.01 Authority to levy tax; purpose of tax
886.02 Definitions
886.03 Imposition of tax
886.04 Collection at source
886.05 Annual return; filing
886.06 Credit for tax paid to other municipalities
886.07 Estimated taxes
886.08 Rounding of amounts
886.09 Requests for refunds
886.10 Second municipality imposing tax after time period allowed for refund
886.11 Amended returns
886.12 Limitations
886.13 Audits
886.14 Service of assessment
886.15 Administration of claims
886.16 Tax information confidential
886.17 Fraud
886.18 Interest and penalties
886.19 Authority of Tax Administrator; verification of information
886.20 Request for opinion of the Tax Administrator
886.21 Board of Review
886.22 Authority to create rules and regulations
886.23 Rental and leased property
886.24 Savings clause
886.25 Collection of tax after termination of chapter
886.26 Adoption of RITA rules and regulations
886.99 Violations; penalties
§ 886.01 AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX; PURPOSE OF TAX.
   (a)   To provide funds for the purposes of general municipal operations,
maintenance, new equipment, extension and enlargement of municipal services and
facilities and capital improvements, the City of Avon Lake (the “city”) hereby
levies an annual municipal income tax on income, qualifying wages, commissions
and other compensation, and on net profits as hereinafter provided.
   (b)   (1)   The annual tax is levied at a rate of 1.5%. The tax is levied at
a uniform rate on all persons residing in or earning or receiving income in the
city. The tax is levied on income, qualifying wages, commissions and other
compensation, and on net profits as hereinafter provided in §
886.03 of this chapter and other sections of this chapter as they may apply.
      (2)   The funds collected under the provisions of this chapter shall be
applied for the following purposes, to wit:
         A.   Such part thereof as shall be necessary to defray all costs of
collecting the taxes levied by this chapter and the cost of administering and
enforcing the provisions thereof as authorized by Chapter 236 of the city’s
code of ordinances;
         B.   To provide for the operation and expenses of the General Fund,
Income Tax Capital Improvement Fund, Bond Retirement Fund, and Recreation Fund
in amounts determined annually and approved by Council; and
         C.   Any other expenses of the city as approved by Council.
   (c)   The tax on income and the withholding tax established by this
Chapter 886 are authorized by Article XVIII, § 3 of the Ohio Constitution. The
tax is levied in accordance with, and is intended to be consistent with, the
provisions and limitations of R.C. Chapter 718. This chapter is effective for
tax years beginning on and after January 1, 2016. municipal tax years beginning
on or before December 31, 2015, are subject to the income tax ordinance and
amendments thereto, and rules and regulations and amendments thereto, as the
existed before January 1, 2016.
(Ord. 163-2015, passed 12-21-2015; Ord. 21-185, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 886.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   Any term used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in this
chapter has the same meaning as when used in a comparable context in laws of
the United States relating to federal income taxation or in R.C. Title LVII,
unless a different meaning is clearly required. If a term used in this chapter
that is not otherwise defined in this chapter is used in a comparable context
in both the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax and in
R.C. Title LVII and the use is not consistent, then the use of the term in the
laws of the United States relating to federal income tax shall control over the
use of the term in R.C. Title LVII.
   (b)   The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the gender- neutral.
   (c)   As used in this chapter:
      (1)   “Adjusted federal taxable income,” for a person required to file as
a C corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C
corporation under division (c)(24)D. of this section, means a C corporation’s
federal taxable income before net operating losses and special deductions as
determined under the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as follows:
         A.   Deduct intangible income to the extent included in federal
taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the
intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held
for the production of income;
         B.   Add an amount equal to 5% of intangible income deducted under
division (c)(1)A. of this section, but excluding that portion of intangible
income directly related to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of property
described in § 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code;
         C.   Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of
federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange, or
other disposition of an asset described in §§ 1221 or 1231 of the Internal
Revenue Code;
         D.   1.   Except as provided in (c)(1)D.2. of this section, deduct
income and gain included in federal taxable income to the extent the income and
gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of an asset
described in §§ 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code;
            2.   Division (c)(1)D.1. of this section does not apply to the
extent the income or gain is income or gain described in §§ 1245 or 1250 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
         E.   Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction in
the computation of federal taxable income;
         F.   In the case of a real estate investment trust or regulated
investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions
to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and
allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income;
         G.   Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in
computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer agreement
or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under R.C. § 4313.02;
         H.   1.   Except as limited by divisions (c)(1)H.2., (c)(1)H.3. and
(c)(1)H.4. of this section, deduct any net operating loss incurred by the
person in a taxable year beginning on or after January 1, 2017.
            The amount of such net operating loss shall be deducted from net
profit that is reduced by exempt income to the extent necessary to reduce
municipal taxable income to zero, with any remaining unused portion of the net
operating loss carried forward to not more than five consecutive taxable years
following the taxable year in which the loss was incurred, but in no case for
more years than necessary for the deduction to be fully utilized.
            2.   No person shall use the deduction allowed by division (c)(1)H.
of this section to offset qualifying wages.
            3.   a.   For taxable years beginning in 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021 or
2022, a person may not deduct more than 50% of the amount of the deduction
otherwise allowed by division (c)(1)H.1. of this section.
               b.   For taxable years beginning in 2023 or thereafter, a person
may deduct the full amount allowed by (c)(1)H.1. of this section.
            4.   Any pre-2017 net operating loss carry-forward deduction that
is available must be utilized before a taxpayer may deduct any amount pursuant
to (c)(1)H. of this section.
            5.   Nothing in division (c)(1)H.3.a. of this section precludes a
person from carrying forward, use with respect to any return filed for a
taxable year beginning after 2018, any amount of net operating loss that was
not fully utilized by operation of division (c)(1)H.3.a. of this section. To
the extent that an amount of net operating loss that was not fully utilized in
one or more taxable years by operation of division (c)(1)H.3.a. of this section
is earned forward for use with respect to a return filed for a taxable year
beginning in 2019, 2020, 2021, or 2022, the limitation described in division
(c)(1)H.3.a. of this section shall apply to the amount carried forward.
         I.   Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer’s federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net profit in
the group’s federal taxable income in accordance with §
886.05(d)(5)C.2.
         J.   Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer’s federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss in the
group’s federal taxable income in accordance with §
886.05(d)(5)C.2.
         If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a disregarded entity
that has made an election described in division (c)(48)B. of this section, is
not a publicly traded partnership that has made the election described in
division (c)(24)D. of this section, and is not an individual, the taxpayer
shall compute adjusted federal taxable income under this section as if the
taxpayer were a C corporation, except guaranteed payments and other similar
amounts paid or accrued to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former
shareholder, member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deductible
expense unless such payments are in consideration for the use of capital and
treated as payment of interest under § 469 of the Internal Revenue Code or
United States Treasury Regulations. Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified
self-employed retirement plan with respect to a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member or former member of the taxpayer,
amounts paid or accrued to or for health insurance for a partner, former
partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member, and amounts
paid or accrued to or for life insurance for a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member or former member shall not be allowed
as a deduction.
         Nothing in division (c)(1) of this section shall be construed as
allowing the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall be
construed as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued for
purposes of federal self- employment tax.
      (2)   A.   “Assessment” means a written finding by the Tax Administrator
that a person has underpaid municipal income tax, or owes penalty and interest,
or any combination of tax, penalty, or interest, to the municipal corporation
that commences the person’s time limitation for making an appeal to the Board
of Review pursuant to §
886.21, and has “ASSESSMENT” written in all capital letters at the top of such
finding.
         B.   “Assessment” does not include a notice denying a request for
refund issued under §
886.09(c)(3), a billing statement notifying a taxpayer of current or past-due
balances owed to the municipal corporation, a Tax Administrator’s request for
additional information, a notification to the taxpayer of mathematical errors,
or a Tax Administrator’s other written correspondence to a person or taxpayer
that does not meet the criteria prescribed by division (c)(2)A. of this
section.
      (3)   “Audit” means the examination of a person or the inspection of the
books, records, memoranda or accounts of a person, ordered to appear before the
Tax Administrator, for the purpose of determining liability for a municipal
income tax.
      (4)   “Board of Review” means the entity created under §
886.21 constituted to hear appeals of municipal income tax matters.
      (5)   “Calendar quarter” means the three-month period ending on the last
day of March, June, September or December.
      (6)   “Casino operator” and “casino facility” have the same meanings as
in R.C. § 3772.01.
      (7)   “Certified mail”, “Express mail”, “United States mail”, “Postal
Service” and similar terms include any delivery service authorized pursuant to
R.C. § 5703.056.
      (8)   “Disregarded entity” means a single member limited liability
company, a qualifying subchapter S subsidiary, or another entity if the
company, subsidiary, or entity is a disregarded entity for federal income tax
purposes.
      (9)   “Domicile” means the true, fixed, and permanent home of a taxpayer
and to which, whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return. A taxpayer may
have more than one residence but not more than one domicile.
      (10)   “Employee” means an individual who is an employee for federal
income tax purposes.
      (11)   “Employer” means a person that is an employer for federal income
tax purposes.
      (12)   “Exempt income” means all of the following:
         A.   The military pay or allowances of members of the Armed Forces of
the United States or members of their reserve components, including the
national guard of any state;
         B.   Intangible income;
         C.   Social security benefits, railroad retirement benefits,
unemployment compensation, pensions, retirement benefit payments, payments from
annuities, and similar payments made to an employee or to the beneficiary of an
employee under a retirement program or plan, disability payments received from
private industry or local, state, or federal governments or from charitable,
religious or educational organizations, and the proceeds of sickness, accident
or liability insurance policies. As used in division (c)(12)C. of this section,
“unemployment compensation” does not include supplemental unemployment
compensation described in § 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code;
         D.   The income of religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific,
literary or educational institutions to the extent such income is derived from
tax-exempt real estate, tax-exempt tangible or intangible property, or tax-
exempt activities;
         E.   Compensation paid under R.C. §§ 3501.28 or 3501.36 to a person
serving as a precinct election official to the extent that such compensation
does not exceed $1,000 for the taxable year. Such compensation in excess of
$1,000 for the taxable year may be subject to taxation by a municipal
corporation. A municipal corporation shall not require the payer of such
compensation to withhold any tax from that compensation;
         F.   Dues, contributions, and similar payments received by charitable,
religious, educational, or literary organizations or labor unions, lodges, and
similar organizations;
         G.   Alimony and child support received;
         H.   Compensation for personal injuries or for damages to property
from insurance proceeds or otherwise, excluding compensation paid for lost
salaries or wages or compensation from punitive damages;
         I.   Income of a public utility when that public utility is subject to
the tax levied under R.C. §§ 5727.24 or 5727.30. Division (c)(12)I. of this
section does not apply for purposes of R.C. Chapter 5745;
         J.   Gains from involuntary conversions, interest on federal
obligations, items of income subject to a tax levied by the state and that a
municipal corporation is specifically prohibited by law from taxing, and income
of a decedent’s estate during the period of administration except such income
from the operation of a trade or business;
         K.   Compensation or allowances excluded from federal gross income
under § 107 of the Internal Revenue Code;
         L.   Employee compensation that is not qualifying wages as defined in
division (c)(35) of this section;
         M.   Compensation paid to a person employed within the boundaries of a
United States Air Force base under the jurisdiction of the United States Air
Force that is used for the housing of members of the United States Air Force
and is a center for Air Force operations, unless the person is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile. If the compensation is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile, tax on such income shall be payable
only to the municipal corporation of residence or domicile;
         N.   Intentionally left blank;
         O.   The income of a natural person under 18 years of age;
         P.   1.   Except as provided in divisions (c)(12)P.2., 3., and 4. of
this section, qualifying wages described in §
886.04(b)(1)B. or E. to the extent the qualifying wages are not subject to
withholding for the city under either of those divisions.
            2.   The exemption provided in division (c)(12)P.1. of this section
does not apply with respect to the municipal corporation in which the employee
resided at the time the employee earned the qualifying wages.
            3.   The exemption provided in division (c)(12)P.1. of this section
does not apply to qualifying wages that an employer elects to withhold under §
886.04(b)(1)D.1.
            4.   The exemption provided in division (c)(12)P.1. of this section
does not apply to qualifying wages if both of the following conditions apply:
               a.   For qualifying wages described in §
886.04(b)(1)B., the employee’s employer withholds and remits tax on the
qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employee’s principal
place of work is situated, or, for qualifying wages described in §
886.04(b)(1)E., the employee’s employer withholds and remits tax on the
qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employer’s fixed
location is located;
               b.   The employee receives a refund of the tax described in
division (c)(12)P.4.a. of this section on the basis of the employee not
performing services in that municipal corporation.
         Q.   1.   Except as provided in division (c)(12)Q.2. or (c)(12)Q.3. of
this section, compensation that is not qualifying wages paid to a nonresident
individual for personal services performed in the city on not more than 20 days
in a taxable year.
            2.   The exemption provided in division (c)(12)Q.1. of this section
does not apply under either of the following circumstances:
               a.   The individual’s base of operation is located in the
municipal corporation; or
               b.   The individual is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer, or public figure, and the compensation is paid for the performance
of services in the individual’s capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure. For purposes of division (c)
(12)Q.2.b. of this section, “professional athlete”, “professional entertainer”
and “public figure” have the same meanings as in § 886.04(b).
            3.   Compensation to which division (c)(12)Q. of this section
applies shall be treated as earned or received at the individual’s base of
operation. If the individual does not have a base of operation, the
compensation shall be treated as earned or received where the individual is
domiciled.
            4.   For purposes of division (c)(12)Q. of this section, “base of
operation” means the location where an individual owns or rents an office,
storefront or similar facility to which the individual regularly reports and at
which the individual regularly performs personal services for compensation.
         R.   Compensation paid to a person for personal services performed for
a political subdivision on property owned by the political subdivision,
regardless of whether the compensation is received by an employee of the
subdivision or another person performing services for the subdivision under a
contract with the subdivision, if the property on which services are performed
is annexed to a municipal corporation pursuant to R.C. § 709.023 on or after
March 27, 2013, unless the person is subject to such taxation because of
residence. If the compensation is subject to taxation because of residence,
municipal income tax shall be payable only to the municipal corporation of
residence; and
         S.   Income the taxation of which is prohibited by the constitution or
laws of the United States.
         Any item of income that is exempt income of a pass-through entity
under division (c) of this section is exempt income of each owner of the pass-
through entity to the extent of that owner’s distributive or proportionate
share of that item of the entity’s income.
      (13)   “Form 2106” means Internal Revenue Service Form 2106 filed by a
taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (14)   “Generic form” means an electronic or paper form that is not
prescribed by a particular municipal corporation and that is designed for
reporting taxes withheld by an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer,
estimated municipal income taxes, or annual municipal income tax liability or
for filing a refund claim.
      (15)   “Gross receipts” means the total revenue derived from sales, work
done, or service rendered.
      (16)   “Income” means the following:
         A.   1.   For residents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages,
commissions and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by
the resident, including the resident’s distributive share of the net profit of
pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by the resident and any net
profit of the resident, except as provided in (c)(24)D. of this division.
            2.   For the purposes of division (c)(16)A.1. of this section:
               a.   Any net operating loss of the resident incurred in the
taxable year and the resident’s distributive share of any net operating loss
generated in the same taxable year and attributable to the resident’s ownership
interest in a pass- through entity shall be allowed as a deduction, for that
taxable year and the following five taxable years, against any other net profit
of the resident or the resident’s distributive share of any net profit
attributable to the resident’s ownership interest in a pass-through entity
until fully utilized, subject to division (c)(16)A.4. of this section;
               b.   The resident’s distributive share of the net profit of each
pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the resident shall be
calculated without regard to any net operating loss that is carried forward by
that entity from a prior taxable year and applied to reduce the entity’s net
profit for the current taxable year.
            3.   Division (c)(16)A.2. of this section does not apply with
respect to any net profit or net operating loss attributable to an ownership
interest in an S corporation unless shareholders’ shares of net profits from S
corporations are subject to tax in the municipal corporation as provided in
division (c)(12)N. or (c)(16)E. of this section.
            4.   Any amount of a net operating loss used to reduce a taxpayer’s
net profit for a taxable year shall reduce the amount of net operating loss
that may be carried forward to any subsequent year for use by that taxpayer. In
no event shall the cumulative deductions for all taxable years with respect to
a taxpayer’s net operating loss exceed the original amount of that net
operating loss available to that taxpayer.
         B.   In the case of nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying
wages, commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or
received by the nonresident for work done, services performed or rendered, or
activities conducted in the municipal corporation, including any net profit of
the nonresident, but excluding the nonresident’s distributive share of the net
profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by
the nonresident.
         C.   For taxpayers that are not individuals, net profit of the
taxpayer.
         D.   Lottery, sweepstakes, gambling and sports winnings, winnings from
games of chance, and prizes and awards. If the taxpayer is a professional
gambler for federal income tax purposes, the taxpayer may deduct related
wagering losses and expenses to the extent authorized under the Internal
Revenue Code and claimed against such winnings.
         E.   In accordance with a ballot issue, regarding S corporation
language, approved by the voters in the election on November 2, 2004, a
shareholder’s share of net profits of an S corporation are taxable to city to
the extent such shares would be so allocated or apportioned to this state.
      (17)   “Intangible income” means income of any of the following types:
income yield, interest, capital gains, dividends, or other income arising from
the ownership, sale, exchange, or other disposition of intangible property
including, but not limited to, investments, deposits, money, or credits as
those terms are defined in R.C. Chapter 5701, and patents, copyrights,
trademarks, tradenames, investments in real estate investment trusts,
investments in regulated investment companies and appreciation on deferred
compensation. “Intangible income” does not include prizes, awards or other
income associated with any lottery winnings, gambling winnings, or other
similar games of chance.
      (18)   “Internal Revenue Code” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5747.01.
      (19)   “Limited liability company” means a limited liability company
formed under R.C. Chapter 1705 or under the laws of another state.
      (20)   “Municipal corporation” includes a joint economic development
district or joint economic development zone that levies an income tax under
R.C. §§ 715.691, 715.70, 715.71, or 715.74.
      (21)   A.   “Municipal taxable income” means the following:
            1.   For a person other than an individual, income reduced by
exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then, as
applicable, apportioned or sitused to the city under § 886.03, and further
reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carry-forward available to the
person for the city.
            2.   a.   For an individual who is a resident of the city, income
reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income, then
reduced as provided in division (c)(21)B. of this section, and further reduced
by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the individual for
the municipal corporation.
               b.   For an individual who is a nonresident of the city, income
reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then,
as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the municipal corporation under §
886.03, then reduced as provided in division (c)(21)B. of this section, and
further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carry-forward available to
the individual for the city.
         B.   In computing the municipal taxable income of a taxpayer who is an
individual, the taxpayer may subtract, as provided in division (c)(21)A.2.a. or
(c)(21)B. of this section, the amount of the individual’s employee business
expenses reported on the individual’s Form 2106 that the individual deducted
for federal income tax purposes for the taxable year, subject to the limitation
imposed by § 67 of the Internal Revenue Code. For the municipal corporation in
which the taxpayer is a resident, the taxpayer may deduct all such expenses
allowed for federal income tax purposes, but only to the extent the expenses do
not relate to exempt income. For a municipal corporation in which the taxpayer
is not a resident, the taxpayer may deduct such expenses only to the extent the
expenses are related to the taxpayer’s performance of personal services in that
nonresident municipal corporation and are not related to exempt income.
      (22)   “Municipality” means the same as the City of Avon Lake. If the
terms are capitalized in the chapter they are referring to Avon Lake.
      (23)   “Net operating loss” means a loss incurred by a person in the
operation of a trade or business. “Net operating loss” does not include
unutilized losses resulting from basis limitations, at- risk limitations, or
passive activity loss limitations.
      (24)   A.   “Net profit” for a person other than an individual means
adjusted federal taxable income.
         B.   “Net profit” for a person who is an individual means the
individual’s net profit required to be reported on Schedule C, Schedule E or
Schedule F reduced by any net operating loss carried forward. For the purposes
of division (c)(24)B. of this section, the net operating loss carried forward
shall be calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in division (c)
(1)H. of this section.
         C.   For the purposes of this chapter, and notwithstanding division
(c)(24)A. of this section, net profit of a disregarded entity shall not be
taxable as against that disregarded entity, but shall instead be included in
the net profit of the owner of the disregarded entity.
         D.   A publicly traded partnership that is treated as a partnership
for federal income tax purposes, and that is subject to tax on its net profits
by the city, may elect to be treated as a C corporation for the city. The
election shall be made on the annual return for the city. The city will treat
the publicly traded partnership as a C corporation if the election is so made.
      (25)   “Nonresident” means an individual that is not a resident.
      (26)   “Ohio Business Gateway” means the online computer network system,
created under R.C. § 125.30, that allows persons to electronically file
business reply forms with state agencies and includes any successor electronic
filing and payment system.
      (27)   “Other payer” means any person, other than an individual’s
employer or the employer’s agent, that pays an individual any amount included
in the federal gross income of the individual. “Other payer” includes casino
operators and video lottery terminal sales agents.
      (28)   “Pass-through entity” means a partnership not treated as an
association taxable as a C corporation for federal income tax purposes, a
limited liability company not treated as an association taxable as a C
corporation for federal income tax purposes, an S corporation, or any other
class of entity from which the income or profits of the entity are given pass-
through treatment for federal income tax purposes. “Pass-through entity” does
not include a trust, estate, grantor of a grantor trust, or disregarded entity.
      (29)   “Pension” means any amount paid to an employee or former employee
that is reported to the recipient on an IRS Form 1099-R, or successor form.
Pension does not include deferred compensation, or amounts attributable to
nonqualified deferred compensation plans, reported as FICA/Medicare wages on an
IRS Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement, or successor form.
      (30)   “Person” includes individuals, firms, companies, joint stock
companies, business trusts, estates, trusts, partnerships, limited liability
partnerships, limited liability companies, associations, C corporations, S
corporations, governmental entities, and any other entity.
      (31)   “Postal service” means the United States Postal Service.
      (32)   “Postmark date”, “date of postmark” and similar terms include the
date recorded and marked in the manner described in R.C. § 5703.056(B)(3).
      (33)   A.   “Pre-2017 net operating loss carry-forward” means any net
operating loss incurred in a taxable year beginning before January 1, 2017, to
the extent such loss was permitted, by a resolution or ordinance of the city
that was adopted by the city before January 1, 2016, to be carried forward and
utilized to offset income or net profit generated in the city in future taxable
years.
         B.   For the purpose of calculating municipal taxable income, any pre-
2017 net operating loss carry-forward may be earned forward to any taxable
year, including taxable years beginning in 2017 or thereafter, for the number
of taxable years provided in the resolution or ordinance or until fully
utilized, whichever is earlier.
      (34)   “Publicly traded partnership” means any partnership, an interest
in which is regularly traded on an established securities market. A “publicly
traded partnership” may have any number of partners.
      (35)   “Qualifying wages” means wages, as defined in § 3121(a) of the
Internal Revenue Code, without regard to any wage limitations, adjusted as
follows:
         A.   Deduct the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes
compensation attributable to a plan or program described in § 125 of the
Internal Revenue Code;
            2.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes payment
on account of a disability related to sickness or an accident paid by a party
unrelated to the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer;
            3.   Intentionally left blank;
            4.   Intentionally left blank; and
            5.   Any amount included in wages that is exempt income.
         B.   Add the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount not included in wages solely because the employee
was employed by the employer before April 1, 1986;
            2.   Any amount not included in wages because the amount arises
from the sale, exchange, or other disposition of a stock option, the exercise
of a stock option, or the sale, exchange, or other disposition of stock
purchased under a stock option. Division (c)(35)B.2. of this section applies
only to those amounts constituting ordinary income;
            3.   Any amount not included in wages if the amount is an amount
described in §§ 401(k), 403(b), or 457 of the Internal Revenue Code. Division
(c)(35)B.3. of this section applies only to employee contributions and employee
deferrals;
            4.   Any amount that is supplemental unemployment compensation
benefits described in § 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code and not
included in wages;
            5.   Any amount received that is treated as self-employment income
for federal tax purposes in accordance with § 1402(a)(8) of the Internal
Revenue Code; and
            6.   Any amount not included in wages if all of the following
apply:
               a.   For the taxable year the amount is employee compensation
that is earned outside the United States and that either is included in the
taxpayer’s gross income for federal income tax purposes or would have been
included in the taxpayer’s gross income for such purposes if the taxpayer did
not elect to exclude the income under § 911 of the Internal Revenue Code;
               b.   For no preceding taxable year did the amount constitute
wages as defined in § 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code;
               c.   For no succeeding taxable year will the amount constitute
wages; and
               d.   For any taxable year the amount has not otherwise been
added to wages pursuant to either division (c)(35)B. of this section or R.C. §
718.03, as that section existed before the effective date of H.B. 5 of the
130th General Assembly, March 23, 2015.
      (36)   “Related entity” means any of the following:
         A.   An individual stockholder, or a member of the stockholder’s
family enumerated in § 318 of the Internal Revenue Code, if the stockholder and
the members of the stockholder’s family own directly, indirectly, beneficially,
or constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50% of the value of the
taxpayer’s outstanding stock;
         B.   A stockholder, or a stockholder’s partnership, estate, trust or
corporation, if the stockholder and the stockholder’s partnerships, estates,
trusts or corporations own directly, indirectly, beneficially, or
constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50% of the value of the taxpayer’s
outstanding stock;
         C.   A corporation, or a party related to the corporation in a manner
that would require an attribution of stock from the corporation to the party or
from the party to the corporation under division (c)(36)D. of this section,
provided the taxpayer owns directly, indirectly, beneficially, or
constructively, at least 50% of the value of the corporation’s outstanding
stock; and
         D.   The attribution rules described in § 318 of the Internal Revenue
Code apply for the purpose of determining whether the ownership requirements in
divisions (c)(36)A. to C. of this section have been met.
      (37)   “Related member” means a person that, with respect to the taxpayer
during all or any portion of the taxable year, is either a related entity, a
component member as defined in § 1563(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, or a
person to or from whom there is attribution of stock ownership in accordance
with § 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code except, for purposes of determining
whether a person is a related member under this division, “20%” shall be
substituted for “5%” wherever “5%” appears in § 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue
Code.
      (38)   “Resident” means an individual who is domiciled in the municipal
corporation as determined under §
886.03(c).
      (39)   “S corporation” means a person that has made an election under
subchapter S of Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code for its
taxable year.
      (40)   “Schedule C” means Internal Revenue Service Schedule C (Form 1040)
filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (41)   “Schedule E” means Internal Revenue Service Schedule E (Form 1040)
filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (42)   “Schedule F” means Internal Revenue Service Schedule F (Form 1040)
filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (43)   “Single member limited liability company” means a limited
liability company that has one direct member.
      (44)   “Small employer” means any employer that had total revenue of less
than $500,000 during the preceding taxable year. For purposes of this division,
“total revenue” means receipts of any type or kind, including, but not limited
to, sales receipts; payments; rents; profits; gains, dividends, and other
investment income; compensation; commissions; premiums; money; property;
grants; contributions; donations; gifts; program service revenue; patient
service revenue; premiums; fees, including premium fees and service fees;
tuition payments; unrelated business revenue; reimbursements; any type of
payment from a governmental unit, including grants and other allocations; and
any other similar receipts reported for federal income tax purposes or under
generally accepted accounting principles. “Small employer” does not include the
federal government; any state government, including any state agency or
instrumentality; any political subdivision; or any entity treated as a
government for financial accounting and reporting purposes.
      (45)   “Tax Administrator” means the individual charged with direct
responsibility for administration of an income tax levied by the city in
accordance with this chapter.
      (46)   “Tax return preparer” means any individual described in § 7701(a)
(36) of the Internal Revenue Code and 26 C.F.R. 301.7701-15.
      (47)   “Taxable year” means the corresponding tax reporting period as
prescribed for the taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code.
      (48)   A.   “Taxpayer” means a person subject to a tax levied on income
by a municipal corporation in accordance with this chapter. “Taxpayer” does not
include a grantor trust or, except as provided in division (c)(48)B.1. of this
section, a disregarded entity.
         B.   1.   A single member limited liability company that is a
disregarded entity for federal tax purposes may be a separate taxpayer from its
single member in all Ohio municipal corporations in which it either filed as a
separate taxpayer or did not file for its taxable year ending in 2003, if all
of the following conditions are met:
               a.   The limited liability company’s single member is also a
limited liability company;
               b.   The limited liability company and its single member were
formed and doing business in one or more Ohio municipal corporations for at
least five years before January 1, 2004;
               c.   Not later than December 31, 2004, the limited liability
company and its single member each made an election to be treated as a separate
taxpayer under R.C. § 718.01(L) as that section existed on December 31, 2004;
               d.   The limited liability company was not formed for the
purpose of evading or reducing Ohio municipal corporation income tax liability
of the limited liability company or its single member; and
               e.   The Ohio municipal corporation that was the primary place
of business of the sole member of the limited liability company consented to
the election.
            2.   For purposes of division (c)(48)B.1.e. of this section, a
municipal corporation was the primary place of business of a limited liability
company if, for the limited liability company’s taxable year ending in 2003,
its income tax liability was greater in that municipal corporation than in any
other municipal corporation in Ohio, and that tax liability to that municipal
corporation for its taxable year ending in 2003 was at least $400,000.
      (49)   “Taxpayers’ rights and responsibilities” means the rights provided
to taxpayers in §§
886.09,
886.12,
886.13,
886.19(b),
886.20,
886.21, and R.C. §§ 5717.011 and 5717.03, and the responsibilities of taxpayers
to file, report, withhold, remit and pay municipal income tax and otherwise
comply with R.C. Chapter 718 and resolutions, ordinances, and rules and
regulations adopted by the city for the imposition and administration of a
municipal income tax.
      (50)   “Video lottery terminal” has the same meaning as in R.C. §
3770.21.
      (51)   “Video lottery terminal sales agent” means a lottery sales agent
licensed under R.C. Chapter 3770 to conduct video lottery terminals on behalf
of the state pursuant to R.C. § 3770.21.
(Ord. 163-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 886.03 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   The income tax levied by the city at a rate of 1.5% is levied on the
municipal taxable income of every person residing in and/or earning and/or
receiving income in the city.
   (a)   Individuals.
      (1)   For residents of the city, the income tax levied herein shall be on
all income, salaries, qualifying wages, commissions, and other compensation
from whatever source earned or received by the resident, including the
resident’s distributive share of the net profit of pass- through entities owned
directly or indirectly by the resident and any net profit of the resident. This
is further detailed in the definition of income in §
886.02(c)(16).
      (2)   For nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages,
commissions and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by
the nonresident for work done, services performed or rendered, or activities
conducted in the municipal corporation, including any net profit of the
nonresident, but excluding the nonresident’s distributive share of the net
profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by
the nonresident.
      (3)   For residents and nonresidents, income can be reduced to “municipal
taxable income” as defined in §
886.02(c)(21). Exemptions which may apply are specified in §
886.02(c)(12).
   (b)   Refundable credit for nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
      (1)   As used in this division:
         A.    “Nonqualified deferred compensation plan” means a compensation
plan described in § 3121(v)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         B.   “Qualifying loss” means the amount of compensation attributable
to a taxpayer’s nonqualified deferred compensation plan, less the receipt of
money and property attributable to distributions from the nonqualified deferred
compensation plan. Full loss is sustained if no distribution of money and
property is made by the nonqualified deferred compensation plan. The taxpayer
sustains a qualifying loss only in the taxable year in which the taxpayer
receives the final distribution of money and property pursuant to that
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
         C.   1.   “Qualifying tax rate” means the applicable tax rate for the
taxable year for which the taxpayer paid income tax to the city with respect to
any portion of the total amount of compensation the payment of which is
deferred pursuant to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
            2.   If different tax rates applied for different taxable years,
then the “qualifying tax rate” is a weighted average of those different tax
rates. The weighted average shall be based upon the tax paid to the city each
year with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
         D.   “Refundable credit” means the amount of city income tax that was
paid on the non- distributed portion, if any, of a nonqualified deferred
compensation plan.
      (2)   If, in addition to the city, a taxpayer has paid tax to other
municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation
plan, the amount of the credit that a taxpayer may claim from each municipal
corporation shall be calculated on the basis of each municipal corporation’s
proportionate share of the total municipal corporation income tax paid by the
taxpayer to all municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified
deferred compensation plan.
      (3)   In no case shall the amount of the credit allowed under this
section exceed the cumulative income tax that a taxpayer has paid to the city
for all taxable years with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation
plan.
      (4)   The credit allowed under this division is allowed only to the
extent the taxpayer’s qualifying loss is attributable to:
         A.   The insolvency or bankruptcy of the employer who had established
the nonqualified deferred compensation plan; or
         B.   The employee’s failure or inability to satisfy all of the
employer’s terms and conditions necessary to receive the nonqualified deferred
compensation.
   (c)   Domicile.
      (1)   A.   1.   An individual is presumed to be domiciled in the city for
all or part of a taxable year if the individual was domiciled in the city on
the last day of the immediately preceding taxable year or if the Tax
Administrator reasonably concludes that the individual is domiciled in the city
for all or part of the taxable year.
      2.   An individual may rebut the presumption of domicile described in
division (c)(1)A.1. of this section if the individual establishes by a
preponderance of the evidence that the individual was not domiciled in the city
for all or part of the taxable year.
         B.   For the purpose of determining whether an individual is domiciled
in the city for all or part of a taxable year, factors that may be considered
include, but are not limited to, the following:
            1.   The individual’s domicile in other taxable years;
            2.   The location at which the individual is registered to vote;
            3.   The address on the individual’s driver’s license;
            4.   The location of real estate for which the individual claimed a
property tax exemption or reduction allowed on the basis of the individual’s
residence or domicile;
            5.   The location and value of abodes owned or leased by the
individual;
            6.   Declarations, written or oral, made by the individual
regarding the individual’s residency;
            7.   The primary location at which the individual is employed;
            8.   The location of educational institutions attended by the
individual’s dependents as defined in § 152 of the Internal Revenue Code, to
the extent that tuition paid to such educational institution is based on the
residency of the individual or the individual’s spouse in the municipal
corporation where the educational institution is located; and
            9.   The number of contact periods the individual has with the
city. For the purposes of this division, an individual has one “contact period”
with the city if the individual is away overnight from the individual’s abode
located outside of the city and while away overnight from that abode spends at
least some portion, however minimal, of each of two consecutive days in the
city.
      (2)   All additional applicable factors are provided in these rules and
regulations.
   (d)   Businesses.
      (1)   This division applies to any taxpayer engaged in a business or
profession in the city, unless the taxpayer is an individual who resides in the
city or the taxpayer is an electric company, combined company, or telephone
company that is subject to and required to file reports under R.C. Chapter
5745.
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (d)(1)B. of this
section, net profit from a business or profession conducted both within and
without the boundaries of the city shall be considered as having a taxable
situs in the city for purposes of municipal income taxation in the same
proportion as the average ratio of the following:
            1.   The average original cost of the real property and tangible
personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession
in the city during the taxable period to the average original cost of all of
the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the
business or profession during the same period, wherever situated.
            As used in the preceding division, tangible personal or real
property shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value
of such property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon
by eight;
            2.   Wages, salaries and other compensation paid during the taxable
period to individuals employed in the business or profession for services
performed in the city to wages, salaries and other compensation paid during the
same period to individuals employed in the business or profession, wherever the
individual’s services are performed, excluding compensation from which taxes
are not required to be withheld under §
886.04(b); and
            3.   Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales
and rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in the city
to total gross receipts of the business or profession during the same period
from sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or performed.
         B.   1.   If the apportionment factors described in division (d)(1)A.
of this section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer’s business
activity in the city, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax Administrator of the
city may require, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any portion of
the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method involving one
or more of the following:
               a.   Separate accounting;
               b.   The exclusion of one or more of the factors;
               c.   The inclusion of one or more additional factors that would
provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to the
municipal corporation; and
               d.   A modification of one or more of the factors.
            2.   A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method
shall be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an
assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the
requested alternative method unless the Tax Administrator denies the request in
an assessment issued within the period prescribed by §
886.12(a).
            3.   The Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer to use an
alternative apportionment method as described in division (d)(1)B.1. of this
section, but only by issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period
prescribed by §
886.12(a).
            4.   Nothing in division (d)(1)B. of this section nullifies or
otherwise affects any alternative apportionment arrangement approved by the Tax
Administrator or otherwise agreed upon by both the Tax Administrator and
taxpayer before January 1, 2016.
         C.   As used in division (d)(1)A.2. of this section, “wages, salaries,
and other compensation” includes only wages, salaries, or other compensation
paid to an employee for services performed at any of the following locations:
            1.   A location that is owned, controlled, or used by, rented to,
or under the possession of one of the following:
               a.   The employer;
               b.   A vendor, customer, client or patient of the employer, or a
related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient; or
               c.   A vendor, customer, client or patient of a person described
in division (d)(1)C.1.b. of this section, or a related member of such a vendor,
customer, client, or patient.
            2.   Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation,
inquiry, review, court- martial, or similar administrative, judicial, or
legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided that the
compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of, the employer
or that the employee’s presence at the location directly or indirectly benefits
the employer; and
            3.   Any other location, if the Tax Administrator determines that
the employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other
location in lieu of a location described in division (d)(1)C.1. or (d)(1)C.2.
of this section solely in order to avoid or reduce the employer’s municipal
income tax liability. If the Tax Administrator makes such a determination, the
employer may dispute the determination by establishing, by a preponderance of
the evidence, that the Tax Administrator’s determination was unreasonable.
         D.   For the purposes of division (d)(1)A.3. of this section, receipts
from sales and rentals made and services performed shall be sitused to a
municipal corporation as follows:
            1.   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property
shall be sitused to the municipal corporation in which the sale originated. For
the purposes of this division, a sale of property originates in the city if,
regardless of where title passes, the property meets any of the following
criteria.
               a.   The property is shipped to or delivered within the city
from a stock of goods located within the city.
               b.   The property is delivered within the city from a location
outside the city, provided the taxpayer is regularly engaged through its own
employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales within the city and the
sales result from such solicitation or promotion.
               c.   The property is shipped from a place within the city to
purchasers outside the city, provided that the taxpayer is not, through its own
employees, regularly engaged in the solicitation or promotion of sales at the
place where delivery is made.
            2.   Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be sitused to
the city to the extent that such services are performed in the city.
            3.   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale
of real property located in the city shall be sitused to the city.
            4.   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents
and royalties from real property located in the city shall be sitused to the
city.
            5.   Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal
property shall be sitused to the city based upon the extent to which the
tangible personal property is used in the city.
         E.   The net profit received by an individual taxpayer from the rental
of real estate owned directly by the individual, or by a disregarded entity
owned by the individual, shall be subject to the city’s tax only if the
property generating the net profit is located in the city or if the individual
taxpayer that receives the net profit is a resident of the city. The city shall
allow such taxpayers to elect to use separate accounting for the purpose of
calculating net profit sitused under this division to the municipal corporation
in which the property is located.
         F.   1.   Commissions received by a real estate agent or broker
relating to the sale, purchase or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the
municipal corporation in which the real estate is located. Net profit reported
by the real estate agent or broker shall be allocated to the city, if
applicable, based upon the ratio of the commissions the agent or broker
received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate located in the city
to the commissions received from the sale, purchase or lease of real estate
everywhere in the taxable year.
            2.   An individual who is a resident of the city shall report the
individual’s net profit from all real estate activity on the individual’s
annual tax return for the city. The individual may claim a credit for taxes the
individual paid on such net profit to another municipal corporation to the
extent that such a credit is allowed under the city’s income tax ordinance.
         G.   When calculating the ratios described in division (d)(1)A. of
this section for the purposes of that division or division (d)(1)A. of this
section, the owner of a disregarded entity shall include in the owner’s ratios
the property, payroll, and gross receipts of such disregarded entity.
         H.   Intentionally left blank.
      (2)   Intentionally left blank.
(Ord. 163-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 886.04 COLLECTION AT SOURCE.
   (a)   Withholding provisions.
      (1)   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer located or
doing business in the city shall withhold an income tax from the qualifying
wages earned and/or received by each employee in the city. Except for
qualifying wages for which withholding is not required under §
886.03 or division (a)(2)D. or F. of this section, the tax shall be withheld at
the rate, specified in §
886.03 of this chapter, of 1.5%. An employer, agent of an employer, or other
payer shall deduct and withhold the tax from qualifying wages on the date that
the employer, agent, or other payer directly, indirectly, or constructively
pays the qualifying wages to, or credits the qualifying wages to the benefit
of, the employee.
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in division (a)(2)B. of this section, an
employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall remit to the Tax
Administrator of the city the greater of the income taxes deducted and withheld
or the income taxes required to be deducted and withheld by the employer,
agent, or other payer according to the following schedule:
            1.   Taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall be remitted
monthly to the Tax Administrator if the total taxes deducted and withheld or
required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent or other payer on
behalf of the city in the preceding calendar year exceeded $2,399, or if the
total amount of taxes deducted and withheld or required to be deducted and
withheld on behalf of the city in any month of the preceding calendar quarter
exceeded $200.
            Payment under division (a)(2)A.1. of this section shall be made so
that the payment is received by the Tax Administrator not later than 15 days
after the last day of each month for which the tax was withheld.
            2.   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer not
required to make payments under division (a)(2)A.1. of this section of taxes
required to be deducted and withheld shall make quarterly payments to the Tax
Administrator not later than the fifteenth day of the month following the end
of each calendar quarter.
            3.   Intentionally left blank.
         B.   If the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is required
to make payments electronically for the purpose of paying federal taxes
withheld on payments to employees under § 6302 of the Internal Revenue Code, 26
C.F.R. 31.6302-1 or any other federal statute or regulation, the payment shall
be made by electronic funds transfer to the Tax Administrator of all taxes
deducted and withheld on behalf of the city. The payment of tax by electronic
funds transfer under this division does not affect an employer’s, agent’s or
other payer’s obligation to file any return as required under this section.
         C.   An employer, agent of an employer or other payer shall make and
file a return showing the amount of tax withheld by the employer, agent or
other payer from the qualifying wages of each employee and remitted to the Tax
Administrator. A return filed by an employer, agent or other payer under this
division shall be accepted by Tax Administrator and the city as the return
required of an nonresident employee whose sole income subject to the tax under
this chapter is the qualifying wages reported by the employee’s employer, agent
of an employer, or other payer.
         D.   An employer, agent of an employer or other payer is not required
to withhold city income tax with respect to an individual’s disqualifying
disposition of an incentive stock option if, at the time of the disqualifying
disposition, the individual is not an employee of either the corporation with
respect to whose stock the option has been issued or of such corporation’s
successor entity.
         E.   1.   An employee is not relieved from liability for a tax by the
failure of the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to withhold the
tax as required under this chapter or by the employer’s, agent’s, or other
payer’s exemption from the requirement to withhold the tax.
            2.   The failure of an employer, agent of an employer, or other
payer to remit to the city the tax withheld relieves the employee from
liability for that tax unless the employee colluded with the employer, agent,
or other payer in connection with the failure to remit the tax withheld.
         F.   Compensation deferred before June 26, 2003, is not subject to
city income tax or income tax withholding requirement to the extent the
deferred compensation does not constitute qualifying wages at the time the
deferred compensation is paid or distributed.
         G.   Each employer, agent of an employer or other payer required to
withhold taxes is liable for the payment of that amount required to be
withheld, whether or not such taxes have been withheld, and such amount shall
be deemed to be held in trust for the city until such time as the withheld
amount is remitted to the Tax Administrator.
         H.   On or before the last day of February of each year, an employer
shall file a withholding reconciliation return with the Tax Administrator
listing:
            1.   The names, addresses, and Social Security numbers of all
employees from whose qualifying wages tax was withheld or should have been
withheld for the city during the preceding calendar year;
            2.   The amount of tax withheld, if any, from each such employee,
the total amount of qualifying wages paid to such employee during the preceding
calendar year;
            3.   The name of every other municipal corporation for which tax
was withheld or should have been withheld from such employee during the
preceding calendar year;
            4.   Any other information required for federal income tax
reporting purposes on Internal Revenue Service Form W-2 or its equivalent form
with respect to such employee; and
            5.   Other information as may be required by the Tax Administrator.
         I.   The officer or the employee of the employer, agent of an
employer, or other payer with control or direct supervision of or charged with
the responsibility for withholding the tax or filing the reports and making
payments as required by this section, shall be personally liable for a failure
to file a report or pay the tax due as required by this section. The
dissolution of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer does not
discharge the officer’s or employee’s liability for a failure of the employer,
agent of an employer, or other payer to file returns or pay any tax due.
         J.   An employer is required to deduct and withhold city income tax on
tips and gratuities received by the employer’s employees and constituting
qualifying wages, but only to the extent that the tips and gratuities are under
the employer’s control. For the purposes of this division, a tip or gratuity is
under the employer’s control if the tip or gratuity is paid by the customer to
the employer for subsequent remittance to the employee, or if the customer pays
the tip or gratuity by credit card, debit card or other electronic means.
         K.   The Tax Administrator shall consider any tax withheld by an
employer at the request of an employee, when such tax is not otherwise required
to be withheld by this chapter, to be tax required to be withheld and remitted
for the purposes of this section.
   (b)   Occasional entrant - withholding.
      (1)   A.   As used in this division:
            1.   “Employer” includes a person that is a related member to or of
an employer.
            2.   “Fixed location” means a permanent place of doing business in
this state, such as an office, warehouse, storefront, or similar location owned
or controlled by an employer.
            3.   “Principal place of work” means the fixed location to which an
employee is required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary
basis. If the employee is not required to report for employment duties on a
regular and ordinary basis to a fixed location, “principal place of work” means
the worksite location in this state to which the employee is required to report
for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis. If the employee is not
required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a
fixed location or worksite location, “principal place of work” means the
location in this state at which the employee spends the greatest number of days
in a calendar year performing services for or on behalf of the employee’s
employer.
            If there is not a single municipal corporation in which the
employee spent the “greatest number of days in a calendar year” performing
services for or on behalf of the employer, but instead there are two or more
municipal corporations in which the employee spent an identical number of days
that is greater than the number of days the employee spent in any other
municipal corporation, the employer shall allocate any of the employee’s
qualifying wages subject to division (b)(1)B.1.a. of this section among those
two or more municipal corporations. The allocation shall be made using any fair
and reasonable method, including, but not limited to, an equal allocation among
such municipal corporations or an allocation based upon the time spent or sales
made by the employee in each such municipal corporation. A municipal
corporation to which qualifying wages are allocated under this division shall
be the employee’s “principal place of work” with respect to those qualifying
wages for the purposes of this section.
            For the purposes of this division, the location at which an
employee spends a particular day shall be determined in accordance with
division (b)(1)B.2. of this section, except that “location” shall be
substituted for “municipal corporation” wherever “municipal corporation”
appears in that division.
            4.   “Professional athlete” means an athlete who performs services
in a professional athletic event for wages or other remuneration.
            5.   “Professional entertainer” means a person who performs
services in the professional performing arts for wages or other remuneration on
a per-event basis.
            6.   “Public figure” means a person of prominence who performs
services at discrete events, such as speeches, public appearances, or similar
events, for wages or other remuneration on a per-event basis.
            7.   “Worksite location” means a construction site or other
temporary worksite in this state at which the employer provides services for
more than 20 days during the calendar year. “Worksite location” does not
include the home of an employee.
         B.   1.   Subject to divisions (b)(1)C., (b)(1)E., and (b)(2) of this
section, an employer is not required to withhold city income tax on qualifying
wages paid to an employee for the performance of personal services in the city
if the employee performed such services in the city on 20 or fewer days in a
calendar year, unless one of the following conditions applies:
               a.   The employee’s principal place of work is located in the
city;
               b.   The employee performed services at one or more presumed
worksite locations in the city. For the purposes of this division, “presumed
worksite location” means a construction site or other temporary worksite in the
city at which the employer provides or provided services that can reasonably
be, or would have been, expected by the employer to last more than 20 days in a
calendar year. Services can “reasonably be expected by the employer to last
more than 20 days” if either of the following applies at the time the services
commence:
                  i.   The nature of the services are such that it will require
more than 20 days of the services to complete the services; or
                  ii.   The agreement between the employer and its customer to
perform services at a location requires the employer to perform the services at
the location for more than 20 days.
               c.   The employee is a resident of the city and has requested
that the employer withhold tax from the employee’s qualifying wages as provided
in § 886.04; and
               d.   The employee is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer, or public figure, and the qualifying wages are paid for the
performance of services in the employee’s capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure.
            2.   For the purposes of division (b)(1)B.1. of this section, an
employee shall be considered to have spent a day performing services in the
city only if the employee spent more time performing services for or on behalf
of the employer in the city than in any other municipal corporation on that
day. For the purposes of determining the amount of time an employee spent in a
particular location, the time spent performing one or more of the following
activities shall be considered to have been spent at the employee’s principal
place of work:
               a.   Traveling to the location at which the employee will first
perform services for the employer for the day;
               b.   Traveling from a location at which the employee was
performing services for the employer to any other location;
               c.   Traveling from any location to another location in order to
pick up or load, for the purpose of transportation or delivery, property that
has been purchased, sold, assembled, fabricated, repaired, refurbished,
processed, remanufactured or improved by the employee’s employer;
               d.   Transporting or delivering property described in division
(b)(1)B.2.c. of this section, provided that, upon delivery of the property, the
employee does not temporarily or permanently affix the property to real estate
owned, used, or controlled by a person other than the employee’s employer; and
               e.   Traveling from the location at which the employee makes the
employee’s final delivery or pick-up for the day to either the employee’s
principal place of work or a location at which the employee will not perform
services for the employer.
         C.   If the principal place of work of an employee is located in
another Ohio municipal corporation that imposes an income tax, the exception
from withholding requirements described in division (b)(1)B.1. of this section
shall apply only if, with respect to the employee’s qualifying wages described
in that division, the employer withholds and remits tax on such qualifying
wages to that municipal corporation.
         D.   1.   Except as provided in division (b)(1)D.2. of this section,
if, during a calendar year, the number of days an employee spends performing
personal services in the city exceeds the 20-day threshold, the employer shall
withhold and remit tax to the city for any subsequent days in that calendar
year on which the employer pays qualifying wages to the employee for personal
services performed in the city.
            2.   An employer required to begin withholding tax for the city
under division (b)(1)D.1. of this section may elect to withhold tax for the
city for the first 20 days on which the employer paid qualifying wages to the
employee for personal services performed in the city.
         E.   If an employer’s fixed location is the city and the employer
qualifies as a small employer as defined in §
886.02, the employer shall withhold municipal income tax on all of the
employee’s qualifying wages for a taxable year and remit that tax only to the
city, regardless of the number of days which the employee worked outside the
corporate boundaries of the city.
         To determine whether an employer qualifies as a small employer for a
taxable year, the employer will be required to provide the Tax Administrator
with the employer’s federal income tax return for the preceding taxable year.
      (2)   Divisions (b)(1)B.1. and (b)(1)D. of this section shall not apply
to the extent that the Tax Administrator and an employer enter into an
agreement regarding the manner in which the employer shall comply with the
requirements of §
886.04.
(Ord. 163-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 886.05 ANNUAL RETURN; FILING.
   (a)   (1)   An annual city income tax return shall be completed and filed by
every individual taxpayer and any taxpayer that is not an individual for each
taxable year for which the taxpayer is subject to the tax, whether or not a tax
is due thereon.
         A.   The Tax Administrator may accept on behalf of all nonresident
individual taxpayers a return filed by an employer, agent of an employer or
other payer under § 886.04 of this chapter when the nonresident individual
taxpayer’s sole income subject to the tax is the qualifying wages reported by
the employer, agent of an employer or other payer, and no additional tax is due
the city.
         B.   Retirees having no municipal taxable income for the city income
tax purposes may file with the Tax Administrator a written exemption from these
filing requirements on a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator. The written
exemption shall indicate the date of retirement and the entity from which
retired. The exemption shall be in effect until such time as the retiree
receives municipal taxable income taxable to the city, at which time the
retiree shall be required to comply with all applicable provisions of this
chapter.
      (2)   If an individual is deceased, any return or notice required of that
individual shall be completed and filed by that decedent’s executor,
administrator or other person charged with the property of that decedent.
      (3)   If an individual is unable to complete and file a return or notice
required by the city, the return or notice required of that individual shall be
completed and filed by the individual’s duly authorized agent, guardian,
conservator, fiduciary or other person charged with the care of the person or
property of that individual.
      (4)   Returns or notices required of an estate or a trust shall be
completed and filed by the fiduciary of the estate or trust.
      (5)   The city shall permit spouses to file a joint return.
      (6)   A.   Each return required to be filed under this division shall
contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer’s duly authorized agent
and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer. The return shall
include the taxpayer’s Social Security number or taxpayer identification
number. Each return shall be verified by a declaration under penalty of
perjury.
         B.   The Tax Administrator shall require a taxpayer who is an
individual to include, with each annual return; and amended return, copies of
the following documents: all of the taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service Form W-
2, “Wage and Tax Statements,” including all information reported on the
taxpayer’s federal W-2, as well as taxable wages reported or withheld for any
municipal corporation; the taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service Form 1040; and,
with respect to an amended tax return, any other documentation necessary to
support the adjustments made in the amended return. An individual taxpayer who
files the annual return required by this section electronically is not required
to provide paper copies of any of the foregoing to the Tax Administrator unless
the Tax Administrator requests such copies after the return has been filed.
         C.   The Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer that is not an
individual to include, with each annual net profit return, amended net profit
return, or request for refund required under this section, copies of only the
following documents: the taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service Form 1041, Form
1065, Form 1120, Form 1120-REIT, Form 1120F or Form 1120S, and, with respect to
an amended tax return or refund request, any other documentation necessary to
support the refund request or the adjustments made in the amended return.
         A taxpayer that is not an individual and that files an annual net
profit return electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway or in some other
manner shall either mail the documents required under this division to the Tax
Administrator at the time of filing or, if electronic submission is available,
submit the documents electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway.
         D.   After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax Administrator may
request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements or
documents required by the city to determine and verify the taxpayer’s municipal
income tax liability. The requirements imposed under division (a)(6) of this
section apply regardless of whether the taxpayer files on a generic form or on
a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
      (7)   A.   1.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each
individual income tax return required to be filed under this section shall be
completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator on or before the date
prescribed for the filing of state individual income tax returns under R.C. §
5747.08(G). The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or notice on forms
prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms, together with
remittance made payable to the city. No remittance is required if the net
amount due is $10 or less.
            2.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each annual net
profit return required to be filed under this section by a taxpayer that is not
an individual shall be completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator
on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the end of the
taxpayer’s taxable year. The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or
notice on forms prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms,
together with remittance made payable to the city. No remittance is required if
the net amount due is $10 or less.
         B.   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of the city’s income tax
return. The extended due date of the city’s income tax return shall be the
fifteenth day of the tenth month after the last day of the taxable year to
which the return relates. An extension of time to file under this division is
not an extension of the time to pay any tax due unless the Tax Administrator
grants an extension of that date.
            1.   A copy of the federal extension request shall be included with
the filing of the city’s income tax return.
            2.   A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return may submit a
written request that the Tax Administrator grant the taxpayer a six-month
extension of the date for filing the taxpayer’s city income tax return. If the
request is received by the Tax Administrator on or before the date the city
income tax return is due, the Tax Administrator shall grant the taxpayer’s
requested extension.
         C.   If the Tax Commissioner extends for all taxpayers the date for
filing state income tax returns under R.C. § 5747.08(G), a taxpayer shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of the city’s income tax
return. The extended due date of the city’s income tax return shall be the same
as the extended due date of the state income tax return.
         D.   If the Tax Administrator considers it necessary in order to
ensure the payment of the tax imposed by the city, the Tax Administrator may
require taxpayers to file returns and make payments otherwise than as provided
in this division, including taxpayers not otherwise required to file annual
returns.
         E.   To the extent that any provision in this division (a)(7)
conflicts with any provision in division (c) of this section, the provisions in
division (c) prevail.
      (8)   A.   For taxable years beginning after 2015, the city shall not
require a taxpayer to remit tax with respect to net profits if the net amount
due is $10 or less.
         B.   Any taxpayer not required to remit tax to the city for a taxable
year pursuant to division (a)(8)A. of this section shall file with the city an
annual net profit return under division (a)(6)C. of this section.
      (9)   If a payment is required to be made by electronic funds transfer,
the payment is considered to be made when the payment is credited to an account
designated by the Tax Administrator for the receipt of tax payments, except
that, when a payment made by electronic funds transfer is delayed due to
circumstances not under the control of the taxpayer, the payment is considered
to be made when the taxpayer submitted the payment. This division shall not
apply to payments required to be made under §
886.04(a)(2)A.1. or provisions for semi- monthly withholding.
      (10)   Taxes withheld for the city by an employer, the agent of an
employer, or other payer as described in §
886.04 shall be allowed to the taxpayer as credits against payment of the tax
imposed on the taxpayer by the city, unless the amounts withheld were not
remitted to the city and the recipient colluded with the employer, agent, or
other payer in connection with the failure to remit the amounts withheld.
      (11)   Each return required by the city to be filed in accordance with
this division shall include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize
another person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to
communicate with the Tax Administrator about matters pertaining to the return.
      (12)   The Tax Administrator shall accept for filing a generic form of
any income tax return, report or document required by the city, provided that
the generic form, once completed and filed, contains all of the information
required by ordinance, resolution or rules and regulations adopted by the city
or the Tax Administrator, and provided that the taxpayer or tax return preparer
filing the generic form otherwise complies with the provisions of this chapter
and of the city’s ordinance, resolution, or rules and regulations governing the
filing of returns, reports, or documents.
   (b)   Filing via Ohio Business Gateway.
      (1)   Any taxpayer subject to municipal income taxation with respect to
the taxpayer’s net profit from a business or profession may file the city’s
income tax return, estimated municipal income tax return or extension for
filing a municipal income tax return, and may make payment of amounts shown to
be due on such returns, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (2)   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer may report the
amount of municipal income tax withheld from qualifying wages, and may make
remittance of such amounts, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (3)   Nothing in this section affects the due dates for filing employer
withholding tax returns.
   (c)   Extension for service in or for the Armed Forces.
      (1)   Each member of the national guard of any state and each member of a
reserve component of the Armed Forces of the United States called to active
duty pursuant to an executive order issued by the President of the United
States or an act of the Congress of the United States, and each civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the Armed Forces, may apply to the Tax Administrator of the city for
both an extension of time for filing of the return and an extension of time for
payment of taxes required by the city during the period of the member’s or
civilian’s duty service, and for 180 days thereafter. The application shall be
filed on or before the one hundred eightieth day after the member’s or
civilian’s duty terminates. An applicant shall provide such evidence as the Tax
Administrator considers necessary to demonstrate eligibility for the extension.
      (2)   A.   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is
qualified for an extension under this section, the Tax Administrator shall
enter into a contract with the applicant for the payment of the tax in
installments that begin on the one hundred eighty-first day after the
applicant’s active duty or service terminates. The Tax Administrator may
prescribe such contract terms as the Tax Administrator considers appropriate.
However, taxes pursuant to a contract entered into under this division are not
delinquent, and the Tax Administrator shall not require any payments of
penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the extension period.
         B.   If the Tax Administrator determines that an applicant is
qualified for an extension under this section, the applicant shall neither be
required to file any return, report or other tax document nor be required to
pay any tax otherwise due to the city before the one hundred eighty-first day
after the applicant’s active duty or service terminates.
         C.   Taxes paid pursuant to a contract entered into under division (c)
(2)A. of this section are not delinquent. The Tax Administrator shall not
require any payments of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes
for the extension period.
      (3)   A.   Nothing in this division denies to any person described in
this division the application of divisions (c)(1) and (c)(2) of this section.
         B.   1.   A qualifying taxpayer who is eligible for an extension under
the Internal Revenue Code shall receive both an extension of time in which to
file any return, report or other tax document and an extension of time in which
to make any payment of taxes required by the city in accordance with this
chapter. The length of any extension granted under this division (c)(3)B.1. of
this section shall be equal to the length of the corresponding extension that
the taxpayer receives under the Internal Revenue Code. As used in this
division, “qualifying taxpayer” means a member of the national guard or a
member of a reserve component of the Armed Forces of the United States called
to active duty pursuant to either an executive order issued by the President of
the United States or an act of the Congress of the United States, or a civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the Armed Forces.
            2.   Taxes whose payment is extended in accordance with division
(c)(3)B.1. of this section are not delinquent during the extension period. Such
taxes become delinquent on the first day after the expiration of the extension
period if the taxes are not paid prior to that date. The Tax Administrator
shall not require any payment of penalties or interest in connection with those
taxes for the extension period. The Tax Administrator shall not include any
period of extension granted under division (c)(3)B.1. of this section in
calculating the penalty or interest due on any unpaid tax.
      (4)   For each taxable year to which division (c)(1), (c)(2) or (c)(3) of
this section applies to a taxpayer, the provisions of divisions (c)(2)B. and
(c)(2)C. of this section, as applicable, apply to the spouse of that taxpayer
if the filing status of the spouse and the taxpayer is married filing jointly
for that year.
   (d)   Consolidated municipal income tax return.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         A.   “Affiliated group of corporations” means an affiliated group as
defined in § 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that, if such a group
includes at least one incumbent local exchange carrier that is primarily
engaged in the business of providing local exchange telephone service in this
state, the affiliated group shall not include any incumbent local exchange
carrier that would otherwise be included in the group.
         B.   “Consolidated federal income tax return” means a consolidated
return filed for federal income tax purposes pursuant to § 1501 of the Internal
Revenue Code.
         C.   “Consolidated federal taxable income” means the consolidated
taxable income of an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the
purposes of filing a consolidated federal income tax return, before
consideration of net operating losses or special deductions. “Consolidated
federal taxable income” does not include income or loss of an incumbent local
exchange carrier that is excluded from the affiliated group under division (d)
(1)A. of this section.
         D.   “Incumbent local exchange carrier” has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 4927.01.
         E.   “Local exchange telephone service” has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 5727.01.
      (2)   A.   For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016, a
taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations may elect to
file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year if at least
one member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to the city’s
income tax in that taxable year, and if the affiliated group of corporations
filed a consolidated federal income tax return with respect to that taxable
year. The election is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first
taxable year of the initial election unless a change in the reporting method is
required under federal law. The election continues to be binding for each
subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing
consolidated municipal income tax returns under division (d)(2)B. of this
section or a taxpayer receives permission from the Tax Administrator. The Tax
Administrator shall approve such a request for good cause shown.
         B.   An election to discontinue filing consolidated municipal income
tax returns under this section must be made in the first year following the
last year of a five-year consolidated municipal income tax return election
period in effect under division (d)(2)B. of this section. The election to
discontinue filing a consolidated municipal income tax return is binding for a
five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the election.
         C.   An election made under division (d)(2)A. or (d)(2)B. of this
section is binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations
subject to a municipal income tax.
      (3)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations
that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a taxable year shall
file a consolidated city income tax return for that taxable year if the Tax
Administrator determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that intercompany
transactions have not been conducted at arm’s length and that there has been a
distortive shifting of income or expenses with regard to allocation of net
profits to the city. A taxpayer that is required to file a consolidated city
income tax return for a taxable year shall file a consolidated city income tax
return for all subsequent taxable years, unless the taxpayer requests and
receives written permission from the Tax Administrator to file a separate
return or a taxpayer has experienced a change in circumstances.
      (4)   A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated city income tax return in
the same manner as is required under the United States Department of Treasury
regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the consolidated
federal income tax return required to be filed by the common parent of the
affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member.
      (5)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (d)(5)B., (d)(5)C.
or (d)(5)D. of this section, corporations that file a consolidated municipal
income tax return shall compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined in
§
886.02, by substituting “consolidated federal taxable income” for “federal
taxable income” wherever “federal taxable income” appears in that division and
by substituting “an affiliated group of corporation’s” for “a C corporation’s”
wherever “a C corporation’s” appears in that division.
         B.   No corporation filing a consolidated city income tax return shall
make any adjustment otherwise required under §
886.02(c)(1) to the extent that the item of income or deduction otherwise
subject to the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in the
computation of consolidated federal taxable income.
         C.   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at
least 80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly
or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group’s consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, the
corporation filing a consolidated city income tax return shall do one of the
following with respect to that pass-through entity’s net profit or loss for
that taxable year:
            1.   Exclude the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in this division (d), exclude the
property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the
computation of the affiliated group’s net profit sitused to the city. If the
entity’s net profit or loss is so excluded, the entity shall be subject to
taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the entity’s net profits that
would otherwise be included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the
affiliated group.
            2.   Include the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in this division (d), include the
property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the
computation of the affiliated group’s net profit sitused to the city. If the
entity’s net profit or loss is so included, the entity shall not be subject to
taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the entity’s net profits that
are included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated
group.
         D.   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less
than 80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly
or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group’s consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, all
of the following shall apply:
            1.   The corporation filing the consolidated municipal income tax
return shall exclude the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purposes of making the computations required in this division (d), exclude the
property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the
computation of the affiliated group’s net profit sitused to the city; and
            2.   The pass-through entity shall be subject to city income
taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with this chapter on the basis of
the entity’s net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
         (6)   Corporations filing a consolidated city income tax return shall
make the computations required under this division (d) by substituting
“consolidated federal taxable income attributable to” for “net profit from”
wherever “net profit from” appears in that section and by substituting
“affiliated group of corporations” for “taxpayer” wherever “taxpayer” appears
in that section.
         (7)   Each corporation filing a consolidated city income tax return is
jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines, charges
or other amounts imposed by the city in accordance with this chapter on the
corporation, an affiliated group of which the corporation is a member for any
portion of the taxable year, or any one or more members of such an affiliated
group.
         (8)   Corporations and their affiliates that made an election or
entered into an agreement with the city before January 1, 2016, to file a
consolidated or combined tax return with the city may continue to file
consolidated or combined tax returns in accordance with such election or
agreement for taxable years beginning on and after January 1, 2016.
(Ord. 163-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 886.06 CREDIT FOR TAX PAID TO OTHER MUNICIPALITIES.
   (a)   Every individual taxpayer domiciled in the city who is required to and
does pay, or has acknowledged liability for, a municipal tax to another
municipality on or measured by the same income, qualifying wages, commissions,
net profits or other compensation taxable under this chapter may claim a non-
refundable credit upon satisfactory evidence of the tax paid to the other
municipality. Subject to division (c) of this section, the credit shall not
exceed the tax due the city under this chapter. If the tax rate of the other
municipality is less than 1.5%, the credit shall be limited to the tax due at
the lower rate.
   (b)   The city shall grant a credit against its tax on income to a resident
of the city who works in a joint economic development zone created under R.C. §
715.691 or a joint economic development district created under R.C. §§ 715.70,
715.71, or 715.72 to the same extent that it grants a credit against its tax on
income to its residents who are employed in another municipal corporation.
   (c)   If the amount of tax withheld or paid to the other municipality is
less than the amount of tax required to be withheld or paid to the other
municipality, then for purposes of division (a) of this section, “the income,
qualifying wages, commissions, net profits or other compensation” subject to
tax in the other municipality shall be limited to the amount computed by
dividing the tax withheld or paid to the other municipality by the tax rate for
that municipality.
   (d)   Intentionally left blank.
(Ord. 163-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 886.07 ESTIMATED TAXES.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Estimated taxes” means the amount that the taxpayer reasonably
estimates to be the taxpayer’s tax liability for the city’s income tax for the
current taxable year.
      (2)   “Tax liability” means the total taxes due to the city for the
taxable year, after allowing any credit to which the taxpayer is entitled, and
after applying any estimated tax payment, withholding payment, or credit from
another taxable year.
   (b)   (1)   Every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for
the current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the Tax Administrator, if
the amount payable as estimated taxes is at least $200. For the purposes of
this section:
         A.   Taxes withheld for the city from qualifying wages shall be
considered as paid to the city in equal amounts on each payment date unless the
taxpayer establishes the dates on which all amounts were actually withheld, in
which case they shall be considered as paid on the dates on which the amounts
were actually withheld; and
         B.   An overpayment of tax applied as a credit to a subsequent taxable
year is deemed to be paid on the date of the postmark stamped on the cover in
which the payment is mailed or, if the payment is made by electronic funds
transfer, the date the payment is submitted. As used in this division, “date of
the postmark” means, in the event there is more than one date on the cover, the
earliest date imprinted on the cover by the Postal Service.
      (2)   Taxpayers filing joint returns shall file joint declarations of
estimated taxes. A taxpayer may amend a declaration under rules prescribed by
the Tax Administrator. A taxpayer having a taxable year of less than 12 months
shall make a declaration under rules prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
      (3)   The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before the
date prescribed for the filing of municipal income tax returns under § 886.05
(a)(7) or on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the taxpayer
becomes subject to tax for the first time.
      (4)   Taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a declaration
on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the beginning of each
fiscal year or period.
      (5)   The original declaration or any subsequent amendment may be
increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment day as
provided in this section.
   (c)   (1)   The required portion of the tax liability for the taxable year
that shall be paid through estimated taxes made payable to the city, including
the application of tax refunds to estimated taxes and withholding on or before
the applicable payment date, shall be as follows:
         A.   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 22.5% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         B.   On or before the fifteenth day of the sixth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 45% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         C.   On or before the fifteenth day of the ninth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 67.5% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
and
         D.   On or before the fifteenth day of the twelfth month of the
taxable year, 90% of the tax liability for the taxable year.
      (2)   When an amended declaration has been filed, the unpaid balance
shown due on the amended declaration shall be paid in equal installments on or
before the remaining payment dates.
      (3)   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of the year
following that for which the declaration or amended declaration was filed, an
annual return shall be filed and any balance which may be due shall be paid
with the return in accordance with § 886.05.
   (d)   (1)   In the case of any underpayment of any portion of a tax
liability, penalty and interest may be imposed pursuant to §
886.18 upon the amount of underpayment for the period of underpayment, unless
the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described in division (e) of
this section. The amount of the underpayment shall be determined as follows:
         A.   For the first payment of estimated taxes each year, 22.5% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         B.   For the second payment of estimated taxes each year, 45% of the
tax liability; less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         C.   For the third payment of estimated taxes each year, 67.5% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment; and
         D.   For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each year, 90% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment.
      (2)   The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the estimated
payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is made. For
purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before any payment
date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment only to the
extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the payment
presently required to be paid to avoid any penalty.
   (e)   An underpayment of any portion of tax liability determined under
division (d) of this section shall be due to reasonable cause and the penalty
imposed by this section shall not be added to the taxes for the taxable year if
any of the following apply.
      (1)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 90% of
the tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by annualizing the
income received during the year up to the end of the month immediately
preceding the month in which the payment is due.
      (2)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 100%
of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the preceding
taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable year reflected a
period of 12 months and the taxpayer filed a return with the city under §
886.05 for that year.
      (3)   The taxpayer is an individual who resides in the city but was not
domiciled there on the first day of January of the calendar year that includes
the first day of the taxable year.
(Ord. 163-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 886.08 ROUNDING OF AMOUNTS.
   A person may round to the nearest whole dollar all amounts the person is
required to enter on any return, report, voucher or other document required
under this chapter. Any fractional part of a dollar that equals or exceeds
$0.50 shall be rounded to the next whole dollar, and any fractional part of a
dollar that is less than $0.50 shall be dropped. If a person chooses to round
amounts entered on a document, the person shall round all amounts entered on
the document.
(Ord. 163-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 886.09 REQUESTS FOR REFUNDS.
   (a)   As used in this section, “withholding tax” has the same meaning as in
§
886.18.
   (b)   Upon receipt of a request for a refund, the Tax Administrator, in
accordance with this section, shall refund to employers, agents of employers,
other payers, or taxpayers, with respect to any income or withholding tax
levied by the city:
      (1)   Overpayments of $10 or more; and
      (2)   Amounts paid erroneously if the refund requested is $10 or more.
   (c)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, requests for
refund shall be filed with the Tax Administrator, on the form prescribed by the
Tax Administrator within three years after the tax was due or paid, whichever
is later. The Tax Administrator may require the requestor to file with the
request any documentation that substantiates the requestor’s claim for a
refund.
      (2)   On filing of the refund request, the Tax Administrator shall
determine the amount of refund due and certify such amount for payment. Except
as provided in division (c)(3) of this section, the Tax Administrator shall
issue an assessment to any taxpayer whose request for refund is fully or
partially denied. The assessment shall state the amount of the refund that was
denied, the reasons for the denial, and instructions for appealing the
assessment.
      (3)   If the Tax Administrator denies in whole or in part a refund
request included within the taxpayer’s originally filed annual income tax
return, the Tax Administrator shall notify the taxpayer, in writing, of the
amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the denial, and
instructions for requesting an assessment that may be appealed under §
886.21.
   (d)   A request for a refund that is received after the last day for filing
specified in division (c) of this section shall be considered to have been
filed in a timely manner if any of the following situations exist.
      (1)   The request is delivered by the postal service, and the earliest
Postal Service postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed is not
later than the last day for filing the request.
      (2)   The request is delivered by the Postal Service, the only postmark
on the cover in which the request is enclosed was affixed by a private postal
meter, the date of that postmark is not later than the last day for filing the
request, and the request is received within seven days of such last day.
      (3)   The request is delivered by the Postal Service, no postmark date
was affixed to the cover in which the request is enclosed or the date of the
postmark so affixed is not legible, and the request is received within seven
days of the last day for making the request.
   (e)   Interest shall be allowed and paid on any overpayment by a taxpayer of
any municipal income tax obligation from the date of the overpayment until the
date of the refund of the overpayment, except that if any overpayment is
refunded within 90 days after the final filing date of the annual return or 90
days after the completed return is filed, whichever is later, no interest shall
be allowed on the refund. For the purpose of computing the payment of interest
on amounts overpaid, no amount of tax for any taxable year shall be considered
to have been paid before the date on which the return on which the tax is
reported is due, without regard to any extension of time for filing that
return. Interest shall be paid at the interest rate described in §
886.18(a)(4).
(Ord. 163-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 886.10 SECOND MUNICIPALITY IMPOSING TAX AFTER TIME PERIOD ALLOWED FOR REFUND.
   (a)   Income tax that has been deposited with the city, but should have been
deposited with another municipality, is allowable by the city as a refund but
is subject to the three-year limitation on refunds.
   (b)   Income tax that was deposited with another municipality but should
have been deposited with the city is subject to recovery by the city. If the
city’s tax on that income is imposed after the time period allowed for a refund
of the tax or withholding paid to the other municipality, the city shall allow
a non- refundable credit against the tax or withholding the city claims is due
with respect to such income or wages, equal to the tax or withholding paid to
the first municipality with respect to such income or wages.
   (c)   If the city’s tax rate is less than the tax rate in the other
municipality, then the non-refundable credit shall be calculated using the
city’s tax rate. However, if the city’s tax rate is greater than the tax rate
in the other municipality, the tax due in excess of the non-refundable credit
is to be paid to the city, along with any penalty and interest that accrued
during the period of nonpayment.
   (d)   Nothing in this section permits any credit carry-forward.
(Ord. 163-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 886.11 AMENDED RETURNS.
   (a)   (1)   If a taxpayer’s tax liability shown on the annual tax return for
the city changes as a result of an adjustment to the taxpayer’s federal or
state income tax return, the taxpayer shall file an amended return with the
city. The amended return shall be filed on a form required by the Tax
Administrator.
      (2)   If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated municipal
income tax return, or to amend its type of return from a separate return to a
consolidated return, based on the taxpayer’s consolidated federal income tax
return, the taxpayer shall notify the Tax Administrator before filing the
amended return.
   (b)   (1)   In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be
accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due, together with any
penalty and interest thereon. If the combined tax shown to be due is $10 or
less, no payment need be made. The amended return shall reopen those facts,
figures, computations or attachments from a previously filed return that are
not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the
taxpayer’s federal or state income tax return only:
         A.   To determine the amount of tax that would be due if all facts,
figures, computations, and attachments were reopened; or
         B.   If the applicable statute of limitations for civil actions or
prosecutions under §
886.12 has not expired for a previously filed return.
      (2)   The additional tax to be paid shall not exceed the amount of tax
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were
reopened; i.e., the payment shall be the lesser of the two amounts.
   (c)   (1)   In the case of an overpayment, a request for refund may be filed
under this division within the period prescribed by division (d) of this
section for filing the amended return, even if it is filed beyond the period
prescribed in that division if it otherwise conforms to the requirements of
that division. If the amount of the refund is less than $10, no refund need be
paid by the city. A request filed under this division shall claim refund of
overpayments resulting from alterations only to those facts, figures,
computations or attachments required in the taxpayer’s annual return that are
affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer’s
federal or state income tax return, unless it is also filed within the time
prescribed in §
886.09.
      (2)   The amount to be refunded shall not exceed the amount of refund
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations and attachments were
reopened. All facts, figures, computations and attachments may be reopened to
determine the refund amount due by inclusion of all facts, figures,
computations, and attachments.
   (d)   Within 60 days after the final determination of any federal or state
tax liability affecting the taxpayer’s city tax liability, that taxpayer shall
make and file an amended city return showing income subject to city income tax
based upon such final determination of federal or state tax liability. The
taxpayer shall pay any additional city income tax shown due thereon or make a
claim for refund of any overpayment, unless the tax or overpayment is less than
$10.
(Ord. 163-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 886.12 LIMITATIONS.
   (a)   (1)   A.   Civil actions to recover municipal income taxes and
penalties and interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought within the
later of:
            1.   Three years after the tax was due or the return was filed,
whichever is later; or
            2.   One year after the conclusion of the qualifying deferral
period, if any.
         B.   The time limit described in division (a)(1)A. of this section may
be extended at any time if both the Tax Administrator and the employer, agent
of the employer, other payer or taxpayer consent in writing to the extension.
Any extension shall also extend for the same period of time the time limit
described in division (c) of this section.
      (2)   As used in this section, “qualifying deferral period” means a
period of time beginning and ending as follows:
         A.   Beginning on the date a person who is aggrieved by an assessment
files with the Board of Review the request described in §
886.21. That date shall not be affected by any subsequent decision, finding, or
holding by any administrative body or court that the Board of Review did not
have jurisdiction to affirm, reverse, or modify the assessment or any part of
that assessment; and
         B.   Ending the later of the sixtieth day after the date on which the
final determination of the Board of Review becomes final or, if any party
appeals from the determination of the Board of Review, the sixtieth day after
the date on which the final determination of the Board of Review is either
ultimately affirmed in whole or in part or ultimately reversed and no further
appeal of either that affirmation, in whole or in part, or that reversal is
available or taken.
   (b)   Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under a resolution or
ordinance imposing an income tax shall be commenced within three years after
the commission of the offense, provided that in the case of fraud, failure to
file a return, or the omission of 25% or more of income required to be
reported, prosecutions may be commenced within six years after the commission
of the offense.
   (c)   A claim for a refund of municipal income taxes shall be brought within
the time limitation provided in §
886.09.
   (d)   (1)   Notwithstanding the fact that an appeal is pending, the
petitioner may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject of
the appeal. The acceptance of a payment by the city does not prejudice any
claim for refund upon final determination of the appeal.
      (2)   If upon final determination of the appeal an error in the
assessment is corrected by the Tax Administrator, upon an appeal so filed or
pursuant to a final determination of the of Board of Review, of the Ohio Board
of Tax Appeals, or any court to which the decision of the Ohio Board of Tax
Appeals has been appealed, so that the resultant amount due is less than the
amount paid, a refund will be paid in the amount of the overpayment as provided
by § 886.09, with interest on that amount as provided by §
886.09(e).
   (e)   No civil action to recover city income tax or related penalties or
interest shall be brought during either of the following time periods:
      (1)   The period during which a taxpayer has a right to appeal the
imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties; and
      (2)   The period during which an appeal related to the imposition of that
tax or interest or those penalties is pending.
(Ord. 163-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 886.13 AUDITS.
   (a)   At or before the commencement of an audit, the Tax Administrator shall
provide to the taxpayer a written description of the roles of the Tax
Administrator and of the taxpayer during the audit and a statement of the
taxpayer’s rights, including any right to obtain a refund of an overpayment of
a tax. At or before the commencement of an audit, the Tax Administrator shall
inform the taxpayer when the audit is considered to have commenced.
   (b)   Except in cases involving suspected criminal activity, the Tax
Administrator shall conduct an audit of a taxpayer during regular business
hours and after providing reasonable notice to the taxpayer. A taxpayer who is
unable to comply with a proposed time for an audit on the grounds that the
proposed time would cause inconvenience or hardship must offer reasonable
alternative dates for the audit.
   (c)   At all stages of an audit by the Tax Administrator, a taxpayer is
entitled to be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant, bookkeeper,
or other tax practitioner. The Tax Administrator shall prescribe a form by
which a taxpayer may designate such a person to assist or represent the
taxpayer in the conduct of any proceedings resulting from actions by the Tax
Administrator. If a taxpayer has not submitted such a form, the Tax
Administrator may accept other evidence, as the Tax Administrator considers
appropriate, that a person is the authorized representative of a taxpayer.
   A taxpayer may refuse to answer any questions asked by the person conducting
an audit until the taxpayer has an opportunity to consult with the taxpayer’s
attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner.
   This division does not authorize the practice of law by a person who is not
an attorney.
   (d)   A taxpayer may record, electronically or otherwise, the audit
examination.
   (e)   The failure of the Tax Administrator to comply with a provision of
this section shall neither excuse a taxpayer from payment of any taxes owed by
the taxpayer nor cure any procedural defect in a taxpayer’s case.
   (f)   If the Tax Administrator fails to substantially comply with the
provisions of this section, the Tax Administrator, upon application by the
taxpayer, shall excuse the taxpayer from penalties and interest.
(Ord. 163-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 886.14 SERVICE OF ASSESSMENT.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Last known address” means the address the Tax Administrator has at
the time a document is originally sent by certified mail, or any address the
Tax Administrator can ascertain using reasonable means such as the use of a
change of address service offered by the Postal Service or an authorized
delivery service under R.C. § 5703.056.
      (2)   “Undeliverable address” means an address to which the Postal
Service or an authorized delivery service under R.C. § 5703.056 is not able to
deliver an assessment of the Tax Administrator, except when the reason for non-
delivery is because the addressee fails to acknowledge or accept the
assessment.
   (b)   Subject to division (c) of this section, a copy of each assessment
shall be served upon the person affected thereby either by personal service, by
certified mail, or by a delivery service authorized under R.C. § 5703.056. With
the permission of the person affected by an assessment, the Tax Administrator
may deliver the assessment through alternative means as provided in this
section, including, but not limited to, delivery by secure electronic mail.
   (c)   (1)   A.   If certified mail is returned because of an undeliverable
address, the Tax Administrator shall utilize reasonable means to ascertain a
new last known address, including the use of a change of address service
offered by the Postal Service or an authorized delivery service under R.C. §
5703.056. If the Tax Administrator is unable to ascertain a new last known
address, the assessment shall be sent by ordinary mail and considered served.
If the ordinary mail is subsequently returned because of an undeliverable
address, the assessment remains appealable within 60 days after the
assessment’s postmark.
         B.   Once the Tax Administrator or other city official, or the
designee of either, serves an assessment on the person to whom the assessment
is directed, the person may protest the ruling of that assessment by filing an
appeal with the Board of Review within 60 days after the receipt of service.
The delivery of an assessment of the Tax Administrator under division (c)(1)A.
of this section is prima facie evidence that delivery is complete and that the
assessment is served.
      (2)   If mailing of an assessment by the Tax Administrator by certified
mail is returned for some cause other than an undeliverable address, the Tax
Administrator shall resend the assessment by ordinary mail. The assessment
shall show the date the Tax Administrator sends the assessment and include the
following statement:
“This assessment is deemed to be served on the addressee under applicable law
ten days from the date this assessment was mailed by the Tax Administrator as
shown on the assessment, and all periods within which an appeal may be filed
apply from and after that date.”
   Unless the mailing is returned because of an undeliverable address, the
mailing of that information is prima facie evidence that delivery of the
assessment was completed ten days after the Tax Administrator sent the
assessment by ordinary mail and that the assessment was served.
   If the ordinary mail is subsequently returned because of an undeliverable
address, the Tax Administrator shall proceed under division (c)(1)A. of this
section. A person may challenge the presumption of delivery and service under
this division in accordance with division (d) of this section.
   (d)   (1)   A person disputing the presumption of delivery and service under
division (c) of this section bears the burden of proving by a preponderance of
the evidence that the address to which the assessment was sent by certified
mail was not an address with which the person was associated at the time the
Tax Administrator originally mailed the assessment. For the purposes of this
section, a person is associated with an address at the time the Tax
Administrator originally mailed the assessment if, at that time, the person was
residing, receiving legal documents, or conducting business at the address; or
if, before that time, the person had conducted business at the address and,
when the assessment was mailed, the person’s agent or the person’s affiliate
was conducting business at the address. For the purposes of this section, a
person’s affiliate is any other person that, at the time the assessment was
mailed, owned or controlled at least 20%, as determined by voting rights, of
the addressee’s business.
      (2)   If a person elects to appeal an assessment on the basis described
in division (d)(1) of this section, and if that assessment is subject to
collection and is not otherwise appealable, the person must do so within 60
days after the initial contact by the Tax Administrator or other city official,
or the designee of either, with the person. Nothing in this division prevents
the Tax Administrator or other official from entering into a compromise with
the person if the person does not actually file such an appeal with the Board
of Review.
   (e)   Nothing in this section prohibits the Tax Administrator or the Tax
Administrator’s designee from delivering an assessment by personal service.
   (f)   Collection actions taken upon any assessment being appealed under
division (c)(1)B. of this section, including those on which a claim has been
delivered for collection, shall be stayed upon the pendency of an appeal under
this section.
   (g)   Additional regulations as detailed in the rules and regulations shall
apply.
(Ord. 163-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 886.15 ADMINISTRATION OF CLAIMS.
   (a)   As used in this section, “claim” means a claim for an amount payable
to the city that arises pursuant to the city’s income tax imposed in accordance
with this chapter.
   (b)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from doing
either of the following if such action is in the best interests of the city:
      (1)   Compromise a claim; or
      (2)   Extend for a reasonable period the time for payment of a claim by
agreeing to accept monthly or other periodic payments.
   (c)   The Tax Administrator’s rejection of a compromise or payment-over-time
agreement proposed by a person with respect to a claim shall not be appealable.
   (d)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be binding upon and shall be to the benefit of only the parties to the
compromise or agreement, and shall not eliminate or otherwise affect the
liability of any other person.
   (e)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be void if the taxpayer defaults under the compromise or agreement or if
the compromise or agreement was obtained by fraud or by misrepresentation of a
material fact. Any amount that was due before the compromise or agreement and
that is unpaid shall remain due, and any penalties or interest that would have
accrued in the absence of the compromise or agreement shall continue to accrue
and be due.
(Ord. 163-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 886.16 TAX INFORMATION CONFIDENTIAL.
   (a)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings or verifications required or authorized by this chapter is
confidential, and no person shall access or disclose such information except in
accordance with a proper judicial order or in connection with the performance
of that person’s official duties or the official business of the city as
authorized by this chapter. The Tax Administrator or a designee thereof may
furnish copies of returns filed or otherwise received under this chapter and
other related tax information to the Internal Revenue Service, the Tax
Commissioner, and tax administrators of other municipal corporations.
   (b)   This section does not prohibit the city from publishing or disclosing
statistics in a form that does not disclose information with respect to
particular taxpayers.
(Ord. 163-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 886.17 FRAUD.
   No person shall knowingly make, present, aid or assist in the preparation or
presentation of a false or fraudulent report, return, schedule, statement,
claim, or document authorized or required by the city ordinance or state law to
be filed with the Tax Administrator, or knowingly procure, counsel or advise
the preparation or presentation of such report, return, schedule, statement,
claim or document, or knowingly change, alter or amend, or knowingly procure,
counsel or advise such change, alteration or amendment of the records upon
which such report, return, schedule, statement, claim or document is based with
intent to defraud the city or the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 163-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 886.18 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Applicable law” means this chapter, the resolutions, ordinances,
codes, directives, instructions, and rules adopted by the city provided they
impose or directly or indirectly address the levy, payment, remittance, or
filing requirements of the city.
      (2)   “Federal short-term rate” means the rate of the average market
yield on outstanding marketable obligations of the United States with remaining
periods to maturity of three years or less, as determined under § 1274 of the
Internal Revenue Code, for July of the current year.
      (3)   “Income tax,” “estimated income tax,” and “withholding tax” means
any income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax imposed by the city
pursuant to applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016.
      (4)   “Interest rate as described in division (a) of this section” means
the federal short-term rate, rounded to the nearest whole number percent, plus
5%. The rate shall apply for the calendar year next following the July of the
year in which the federal short-term rate is determined in accordance with
division (a)(2) of this section.
      (5)   “Return” includes any tax return, report, reconciliation, schedule,
and other document required to be filed with the Tax Administrator or the city
by a taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer, or any other payer pursuant
to applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016.
      (6)   “Unpaid estimated income tax” means estimated income tax due but
not paid by the date the tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (7)   “Unpaid income tax” means income tax due but not paid by the date
the income tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (8)   “Unpaid withholding tax” means withholding tax due but not paid by
the date the withholding tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (9)   “Withholding tax” includes amounts an employer, any agent of an
employer, or any other payer did not withhold in whole or in part from an
employee’s qualifying wages, but that, under applicable law, the employer,
agent, or other payer is required to withhold from an employee’s qualifying
wages.
   (b)   (1)   This section applies to the following:
         A.   Any return required to be filed under applicable law for taxable
years beginning on or after January 1, 2016; or
         B.   Income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax required to
be paid or remitted to the city on or after January 1, 2016.
      (2)   This section does not apply to returns required to be filed or
payments required to be made before January 1, 2016, regardless of the filing
or payment date. Returns required to be filed or payments required to be made
before January 1, 2016, but filed or paid after that date shall be subject to
the ordinances or rules and regulations, as adopted before January 1, 2016, of
the city to which the return is to be filed or the payment is to be made.
   (c)   Should any taxpayer, employer, agent of the employer or other payer
for any reason fails, in whole or in part, to make timely and full payment or
remittance of income tax, estimated income tax, or withholding tax or to file
timely with the city any return required to be filed, the following penalties
and interest shall apply.
      (1)   Interest shall be imposed at the rate described in division (a) of
this section, per annum, on all unpaid income tax, unpaid estimated income tax,
and unpaid withholding tax.
      (2)   A.   With respect to unpaid income tax and unpaid estimated income
tax, the city may impose a penalty equal to 15% of the amount not timely paid.
         B.   With respect to any unpaid withholding tax, the city may impose a
penalty equal to 50% of the amount not timely paid.
      (3)   With respect to returns other than estimated income tax returns,
the city may impose a penalty of $25 for each failure to timely file each
return, regardless of the liability shown thereon for each month, or any
fraction thereof, during which the return remains unfiled regardless of the
liability shown thereon. The penalty shall not exceed $150 for each failure.
   (d)   Nothing in this section requires the city to refund or credit any
penalty, amount of interest, charges, or additional fees that the city has
properly imposed or collected before January 1, 2016.
   (e)   Nothing in this section limits the authority of the city to abate or
partially abate penalties or interest imposed under this section when the Tax
Administrator determines, in the Tax Administrator’s sole discretion, that such
abatement is appropriate.
   (f)   By the thirty-first day of October of each year the city shall publish
the rate described in division (a) of this section applicable to the next
succeeding calendar year.
   (g)   The city may impose on the taxpayer, employer, any agent of the
employer, or any other payer the city’s post-judgment collection costs and
fees, including attorney’s fees.
(Ord. 163-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 886.19 AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; VERIFICATION OF INFORMATION.
   (a)   Authority. Nothing in this chapter shall limit the authority of the
Tax Administrator to perform any of the following duties or functions, unless
the performance of such duties or functions is expressly limited by a provision
of the Ohio Revised Code:
      (1)   A.   Exercise all powers whatsoever of an query nature as provided
by law, including, the right to inspect books, accounts, records, memorandums,
and federal and state income tax returns, to examine persons under oath, to
issue orders or subpoenas for the production of books, accounts, papers,
records, documents, and testimony, to take depositions, to apply to a court for
attachment proceedings as for contempt, to approve vouchers for the fees of
officers and witnesses, and to administer oaths.
         B.   The powers referred to in this division of this section shall be
exercised by the Tax Administrator only in connection with the performance of
the duties respectively assigned to the Tax Administrator under the city’s
income tax ordinance;
      (2)   Appoint agents and prescribe their powers and duties;
      (3)   Confer and meet with officers of other municipal corporations and
states and officers of the United States on any matters pertaining to their
respective official duties as provided by law;
      (4)   Exercise the authority provided by law, including orders from
bankruptcy courts, relative to remitting or refunding taxes, including
penalties and interest thereon, for any reason overpaid. In addition, the Tax
Administrator may investigate any claim of overpayment and, if the Tax
Administrator finds that there has been an overpayment, make a written
statement of the Tax Administrator’s findings, and approve and issue a refund
payable to the taxpayer, the taxpayer’s assigns, or legal representative as
provided in this chapter;
      (5)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to consenting to
the compromise and settlement of tax claims;
      (6)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to the use of
alternative apportionment methods by taxpayers in accordance with §
886.03;
      (7)   A.   Make all tax findings, determinations, computations and orders
the Tax Administrator is by law authorized and required to make and, pursuant
to time limitations provided by law, on the Tax Administrator’s own motion,
review, re-determine or correct any tax findings, determinations, computations
or orders the Tax Administrator has made.
         B.   If an appeal has been filed with the Board of Review or other
appropriate tribunal, the Tax Administrator shall not review, re-determine or
correct any tax finding, determination, computation, or order which the Tax
Administrator has made, unless such appeal or application is withdrawn by the
appellant or applicant, is dismissed, or is otherwise final;
      (8)   Destroy any or all returns or other tax documents in the manner
authorized by law; and
      (9)   Enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to simplify the withholding
obligations described in §
886.04.
   (b)   Verification of accuracy of returns and determination of liability.
      (1)   The Tax Administrator, or any authorized agent or employee thereof
may examine the books, papers, records and federal and state income tax returns
of any employer, taxpayer or other person that is subject to, or that the Tax
Administrator believes is subject to, the provisions of this chapter for the
purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if no return was
filed, to ascertain the tax due under this chapter. Upon written request by the
Tax Administrator or a duly authorized agent or employee thereof, every
employer, taxpayer or other person subject to this section is required to
furnish the opportunity for the Tax Administrator, authorized agent or employee
to investigate and examine such books, papers, records, and federal and state
income tax returns at a reasonable time and place designated in the request.
      (2)   The records and other documents of any taxpayer, employer or other
person that is subject to, or that the Tax Administrator believes is subject
to, the provisions of this chapter shall be open to the Tax Administrator’s
inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a period of six
years following the end of the taxable year to which the records or documents
relate, unless the Tax Administrator, in writing, consents to their destruction
within that period, or by order requires that they be kept longer. The Tax
Administrator may require any person, by notice served on that person, to keep
such records as the Tax Administrator determines necessary to show whether or
not that person is liable, and the extent of such liability, for the income tax
levied by the city or for the withholding of such tax.
      (3)   The Tax Administrator may examine under oath any person that the
Tax Administrator reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that
was or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to
affect such income. The Tax Administrator may, for this purpose, compel any
such person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books,
papers, records and federal and state income tax returns in such person’s
possession or control. The person may be assisted or represented by an
attorney, accountant, bookkeeper or other tax practitioner at any such hearing
or examination. This division does not authorize the practice of law by a
person who is not an attorney.
      (4)   No person issued written notice by the Tax Administrator compelling
attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers,
records or federal or state income tax returns under this section shall fail to
comply.
   (c)   Identification information.
      (1)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from
requiring any person filing a tax document with the Tax Administrator to
provide identifying information, which may include the person’s social security
number, federal employer identification number, or other identification number
requested by the Tax Administrator. A person required by the Tax Administrator
to provide identifying information that has experienced any change with respect
to that information shall notify the Tax Administrator of the change before, or
upon, filing the next tax document requiring the identifying information.
      (2)   A.   If the Tax Administrator makes a request for identifying
information and the Tax Administrator does not receive valid identifying
information within 30 days of making the request, nothing in this chapter
prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty upon the person to whom
the request was directed pursuant to §
886.18, in addition to any applicable penalty described in §
886.99.
         B.   If a person required by the Tax Administrator to provide
identifying information does not notify the Tax Administrator of a change with
respect to that information as required under this division (c) within 30 days
after filing the next tax document requiring such identifying information,
nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty
pursuant to §
886.18.
         C.   The penalties provided for under divisions (c)(2)A. and (c)(2)B.
of this section may be billed and imposed in the same manner as the tax or fee
with respect to which the identifying information is sought and are in addition
to any applicable criminal penalties described in §
886.99 for a violation of §
886.17 and any other penalties that may be imposed by the Tax Administrator by
law.
(Ord. 163-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 886.20 REQUEST FOR OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
   (a)   An “opinion of the Tax Administrator” means an opinion issued under
this section with respect to prospective municipal income tax liability. It
does not include ordinary correspondence of the Tax Administrator.
   (b)   The taxpayer may submit a written request for an opinion of the Tax
Administrator in accordance with the rules and regulations.
   (c)   A taxpayer is not relieved of tax liability for any activity or
transaction related to a request for an opinion that contained any
misrepresentation or omission of one or more material facts.
   (d)   The Tax Administrator may refuse to offer an opinion on any request
received under this section. Such refusal is not subject to appeal.
   (e)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator binds the Tax Administrator only
with respect to the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and does not
bind the Tax Administrator of any other municipal corporation.
   (f)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator issued under this section is not
subject to appeal.
(Ord. 163-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 886.21 BOARD OF REVIEW.
   (a)   (1)   The Board of Review shall consist of three members. Two members
shall be appointed by the legislative authority of the city, but such
appointees may not be employees, elected officials, or contractors with the
city at any time during their term or in the five years (which applies only to
these two appointments) immediately preceding the date of appointment. One
member shall be appointed by the Mayor of the city. This member may be an
employee of the city, but may not be the Finance Director or equivalent
officer, or the Tax Administrator or other similar official or an employee
directly involved in municipal tax matters, or any direct subordinate thereof.
      (2)   The term for members of the Board of Review shall be two years.
There is no limit on the number of terms that a member may serve if the member
is reappointed by the legislative authority. The Board member appointed by the
Mayor of the city shall serve at the discretion of the administrative official.
      (3)   Members of the Board of Review appointed by the legislative
authority may be removed by the legislative authority by majority vote for
malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance in office. To remove such a member,
the legislative authority must give the member a copy of the charges against
the member and afford the member an opportunity to be publicly heard in person
or by counsel in the member’s own defense upon not less than ten days’ notice.
The decision by the legislative authority on the charges is final and not
appealable.
      (4)   A member of the Board of Review who, for any reason, ceases to meet
the qualifications for the position prescribed by this section shall resign
immediately by operation of law.
      (5)   A vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled in the same manner
as the original appointment within 60 days of when the vacancy was created. Any
member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the
term for which the member’s predecessor was appointed shall hold office for the
remainder of such term. No vacancy on the Board of Review shall, impair the
power and authority of the remaining members to exercise all the powers of the
Board of Review.
      (6)   If a member is temporarily unable to serve on the Board of Review
due to a conflict of interest, illness, absence or similar reason, the
legislative authority or top administrative official that appointed the member
shall appoint another individual to temporarily serve on the Board of Review in
the member’s place. The appointment of such an individual shall be subject to
the same requirements and limitations as are applicable to the appointment of
the member temporarily unable to serve.
   (b)   Whenever the Tax Administrator issues an assessment, the Tax
Administrator shall notify the taxpayer in writing at the same time of the
taxpayer’s right to appeal the assessment, the manner in which
the taxpayer may appeal the assessment, and the address to which the appeal
should be directed.
   (c)   Any person who has been issued an assessment may appeal the assessment
to the Board of Review by filing a request with the Board of Review. The
request shall be in writing, shall specify the reason or reasons why the
assessment should be deemed incorrect or unlawful, and shall be filed within 60
days after the taxpayer receives the assessment.
   (d)   The Board of Review shall schedule a hearing to be held within 60 days
after receiving an appeal of an assessment under division (c) of this section,
unless the taxpayer requests additional time to prepare or waives a hearing. If
the taxpayer does not waive the hearing, the taxpayer may appear before the
Board of Review and may be represented by an attorney at law, certified public
accountant, or other representative. The Board of Review may allow a hearing to
be continued as jointly agreed to by the parties. In such a case, the hearing
must be completed within 120 days after the first day of the hearing unless the
parties agree otherwise.
   (e)   The Board of Review may affirm, reverse or modify the Tax
Administrator’s assessment or any part of that assessment. The Board of Review
shall issue a final determination on the appeal within 90 days after the Board
of Review’s final hearing on the appeal, and send a copy of its final
determination by ordinary mail to all of the parties to the appeal within 15
days after issuing the final determination. The taxpayer or the Tax
Administrator may appeal the Board of Review’s final determination as provided
in R.C. § 5717.011.
   (f)   The Board of Review created pursuant to this section shall adopt rules
governing its procedures and shall keep a record of its transactions. Such
records are not public records available for inspection under R.C. § 149.43.
Hearings requested by a taxpayer before a Board of Review created pursuant to
this section are not meetings of a public body subject to R.C. § 121.22.
(Ord. 163-2015, passed 12-21-2015; Ord. 7-2016, passed 1-11-2016)
§ 886.22 AUTHORITY TO CREATE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the legislative authority of the city, or
the Tax Administrator pursuant to authority granted to the Tax Administrator by
resolution or ordinance, to adopt rules to administer an income tax imposed by
the city in accordance with this chapter. Such rules shall not conflict with or
be inconsistent with any provision of this chapter. Taxpayers are hereby
required to comply not only with the requirements of this chapter, but also to
comply with the rules and regulations.
   All rules adopted under this section shall be published and posted on the
internet.
(Ord. 163-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 886.23 RENTAL AND LEASED PROPERTY.
   (a)   All property owners of real property located in the city, who rent or
otherwise lease the same, or any part thereof, to any person for residential
dwelling purposes, including apartments, rooms and other rental accommodations,
during any calendar year, or part thereof, commencing with the effective date
of this section, shall file with the Tax Administrator on or before the January
31 first following such calendar year a written report disclosing the name,
address and also telephone number, if available, of each tenant known to have
occupied on December 31 during such calendar year such apartment, room or other
residential dwelling rental property.
   (b)   The Tax Administrator may order the appearance before him or her, or
his or her duly authorized agent, of any person whom he or she believes to have
any knowledge of the name, address and telephone number of any tenant of
residential rental real property in the city. The Tax Administrator, or his or
her duly authorized agent, is authorized to examine any person, under oath,
concerning the name, address and telephone number of any tenant of residential
real property located in the city. The Tax Administrator, or his or her duly
authorized agent, may compel the production of papers and records and the
attendance of all personal before him or her, whether as parties or witnesses,
whenever he or she believes such person has knowledge of the name, address and
telephone number of any tenant of residential real property in the city.
   (c)   Any property owner or person that violates one or more of the
following shall be subject to §
886.99 of this chapter:
      (1)   Fails, refuses or neglects to timely file a written report required
by division (a) of this section;
      (2)   Makes an incomplete or intentionally false written report required
by division (a) of this section;
      (3)   Fails to appear before the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized
agent and to produce and disclose any tenant information pursuant to any order
or subpoena of the Tax Administrator as authorized in this section; or
      (4)   Fails to comply with the provisions of this section or any order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 163-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 886.24 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   This chapter shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation, or to any
property as to whom or which it is beyond the power of Council to impose the
tax herein provided for. Any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter
or any tax against or exception granted any individual or any of the several
groups of persons, or forms of income specified herein if found to be
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or
invalidity shall affect only such clause, sentence, section or part of this
chapter and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or other parts of this chapter. It is hereby
declared to be the intention of Council that this chapter would have been
adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, or part hereof,
not been included therein.
(Ord. 163-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 886.25 COLLECTION OF TAX AFTER TERMINATION OF CHAPTER.
   (a)   This chapter shall continue effective insofar as the levy of taxes is
concerned until repealed, and insofar as the collection of taxes levied
hereunder and actions or proceedings for collecting any tax so levied or
enforcing any provisions of this chapter are concerned, it shall continue
effective until all of said taxes levied hereunder in the aforesaid periods are
fully paid and any and all suits and prosecutions for the collection of said
taxes or for the punishment of violations of this chapter shall have been fully
terminated, subject to the limitations contained in §
886.12 and §
886.99 of this section.
   (b)   Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective year of
this chapter shall be due on the date provided in §§
886.04 and
886.05 of this chapter as though the same were continuing.
(Ord. 163-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 886.26 ADOPTION OF RITA RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The city hereby adopts the Regional Income Tax Agency (RITA) Rules and
Regulations, including amendments that may be made from time to time, for use
as the city’s income tax rules and regulations. In the event of a conflict with
any provision(s) of the city income tax ordinance and the RITA Rules and
Regulations, this chapter will supersede. Until and if the contractual
relationship between the city and RITA ceases, §
886.26 will supersede all other provisions within this chapter regarding
promulgation of rules and regulations by the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 163-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 886.99 VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.
   (a)   Whoever violates §§
886.04,
886.16 or
886.17(a) by failing to remit city income taxes deducted and withheld from an
employee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term of up to
six months, or both. If the individual that commits the violation is an
employee, or official, of the city, the individual is subject to discharge from
employment or dismissal from office.
   (b)   Any person who discloses information received from the Internal
Revenue Service in violation of §
886.16(a) shall be guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law. If the individual that commits the violation is an employee, or official,
of the city, the individual is subject to discharge from employment or
dismissal from office.
   (c)   Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of §
886.16(a) constitutes a separate offense.
   (d)   If not otherwise specified herein, no person shall:
      (1)   Fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or declaration required
by this chapter;
      (2)   File any incomplete or false return;
      (3)   Fail, neglect or refuse to pay the tax, penalties or interest
imposed by this chapter;
      (4)   Refuse to permit the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized agent
or employee to examine his or her books, records, papers and federal and state
income tax returns relating to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
      (5)   Fail to appear before the Tax Administrator and to produce his or
her books, records, papers or federal and state income tax returns relating to
the income or net profits of a taxpayer upon order or subpoena of the Tax
Administrator;
      (6)   Refuse to disclose to the Tax Administrator any information with
respect to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
      (7)   Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator authorized hereby;
      (8)   Give to an employer false information as to his or her true name,
correct social security number, and residence address, or fail to promptly
notify an employer of any change in residence address and date thereof; or
      (9)   Attempt to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment of the whole
or any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this chapter.
   (e)   Any person who violates any of the provisions in division (d) of this
section shall be subject to the penalties provided for in division (a) of this
section.
(Ord. 163-2015, passed 12-21-2015) , Utilities and Public Service Code
PART TEN - STREETS, UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICES CODE
   TITLE TWO - Street and Sidewalk Areas
      
Chap. 1010. Streets, Curbs and Sidewalks Generally.
      
Chap. 1014. Gutters, Ditches and Drains.
      
Chap. 1018. City Tree Ordinance.
      
Chap. 1022. Street and House Numbering.
      
Chap. 1024. Emergency Access Gates.
   TITLE FOUR - Utilities
      
Chap. 1040. Municipal Utilities Generally.
      
Chap. 1048. Water.
      
Chap. 1052. Sewers Generally.
      
Chap. 1056. Sewer Rental Charges.
      
Chap. 1058. Erosion and Sediment Control.
      
Chap. 1060. Comprehensive Stormwater Management.
      
Chap. 1061. Illicit Discharge and Stormwater Pollution Connection Regulation.
      
Chap. 1065. Licensing of Landscape Contractors.
   TITLE SIX - Recreation Facilities
      
Chap. 1070. Avon Lake Parks and Assembly Hall.
      
Chap. 1078. Swimming Pool.
   TITLE EIGHT - Other Public Services
      
Chap. 1090. Garbage and Rubbish Collection and Disposal.
      
Chap. 1096. Cemeteries.
      
Chap. 1098. Emergency Alarm Systems.
      
Chap. 1099. City Jail.
TITLE TWO - Street and Sidewalk Areas
      
Chap. 1010. Streets, Curbs and Sidewalks Generally.
      
Chap. 1014. Gutters, Ditches and Drains.
      
Chap. 1018. City Tree Ordinance.
      
Chap. 1022. Street and House Numbering.
      
Chap. 1024. Emergency Access Gates.
CHAPTER 1010: STREETS, CURBS AND SIDEWALKS GENERALLY
Section
1010.01 Compliance with sidewalk specifications
1010.02 Right-of-way permits
1010.03 Liability insurance
1010.04 Permit fees
1010.05 Conformity of sidewalks to street grade; exception
1010.06 Sidewalk widths
1010.07 Sidewalk materials
1010.08 Driveway walks
1010.09 Nonconforming work
1010.10 Curb cuts
1010.11 Tree lawns
1010.12 Certain tolerated tree lawn items
1010.13 Municipal utilities exceptions
1010.99 Penalty
Editor’s note:
   
Chapter 1010, previously a codification of Ordinance 111-63, passed November
25, 1963, Ordinance 94-74, passed June 10, 1974, and new matter, was repealed
and re-enacted in its entirety by Ordinance 56-90, passed March 26, 1990.
§ 1010.01 COMPLIANCE WITH SIDEWALK SPECIFICATIONS.
   In order to have all sidewalks on streets in the city constructed and
repaired in a reasonable and uniform manner, all sidewalks repaired or replaced
hereafter in a city right-of-way or on city property shall be done in
conformity with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 56-90, passed 3-26-1990; Ord. 222-04, passed 10-25-2004)
§ 1010.02 RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS.
   All work done by private citizens in the public right-of-way shall be done
only after a permit has been issued by the Public Works Director and required
proof of insurance has been furnished. Permits are required for any category of
work that follows:
   (a)   Construction, removal or repair of any sidewalk in the right-of-way;
   (b)   Excavation, tunneling or grading for the purpose of constructing,
repairing or removing any sewer or drain in the right-of-way;
   (c)   Excavating, widening, filling, obstructing or materially changing any
street or roadway drainage channel; or
   (d)   Cutting or otherwise changing, altering or constructing any curb.
(Ord. 56-90, passed 3-26-1990; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014)
§ 1010.03 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   The required permit shall not be issued unless the permit applicant deposits
with the Public Works Department required proof of insurance providing coverage
for the city, as well as the party doing the work, against any loss or damage
to any person or property resulting from any act performed before completion of
the work proposed. The amount of insurance coverage required shall be
determined by the following guidelines: the extent of work involved in the
proposed project; the manner in which the proposed project is to be completed;
and the total approximate gross cost of the proposed construction project.
   A homeowner permit applicant not employing highway use equipment or
vehicles, and proposing to perform all of the work completely on his or her
own, and for his or her own residential realty, shall present a copy of the
policy with a minimum limit of liability for property damage in the amount of
at least $100,000 per loss, and for bodily injury and wrongful death in the
amount of at least $150,000 per person, plus at least $300,000 total aggregate
loss. A homeowner permit applicant employing highway use equipment or vehicles
and/or a contractor applicant shall present a policy having a minimum limit of
liability for property damage in the amount of at least $100,000 per loss, and
for bodily injury and wrongful death in the amount of at least $300,000 per
person, plus at least $1,000,000 total aggregate loss.
   In the event the Public Works Director determines, under the guidelines set
forth herein, that the minimum coverages required are insufficient to
adequately cover the probable risks involved for a particular proposed
construction project, then higher minimum limits shall be required in such
insurance policy commensurate with the probable risks involved.
(Ord. 56-90, passed 3-26-1990; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014)
§ 1010.04 PERMIT FEES.
   Right-of-way permit fees are as set forth in
Chapter 208 of the Administration Code - the General Fee Schedule.
(Ord. 56-90, passed 3-26-1990)
§ 1010.05 CONFORMITY OF SIDEWALKS TO STREET GRADE; EXCEPTION.
   All sidewalks shall be laid to conform to the established grade of the
street and shall slope so as to coincide with the following described line:
beginning at the top of the curb at the established grade and extending thence
to the fence line or property line at an incline upward from such curb at the
rate of three- eighths of an inch for each foot. At street intersections where
the grade of streets renders such slope impracticable, the sidewalks shall be
laid under the direction and to the acceptance of the Municipal Engineer.
   For the replacement or repair of segments of sidewalk where the abutting
sidewalk does not have the prescribed incline, the sidewalks shall be laid
under the direction and to the acceptance of the Municipal Engineer.
(Ord. 56-90, passed 3-26-1990)
§ 1010.06 SIDEWALK WIDTHS.
   (a)   Philosophy. The city will adopt a comprehensive plan to address the
needs and concerns of the residents with respect to pedestrian traffic.
Sidewalks shall be installed in the city rights-of-way to ensure safety and
security to persons walking. The sidewalks shall be free of hazards and
nuisances, such as uneven sections, large cracks, standing water and
overhanging vegetation. The sidewalks shall also be a safe distance from the
roadways and meet all ADA requirements for width and grade.
   (b)   Goals.
      (1)   Safety of residents walking.
      (2)   Prioritize need.
      (3)   Ensure uniformity.
      (4)   All new city streets will have sidewalks in accordance with
divisions (c)(1) and (c)(2) of this section and §
1010.07.
   (c)   Standards.
      (1)   Minimum of four feet in width.
      (2)   Walks to be a minimum of eight feet from the edge of the road
pavement.
      (3)   Walks to be installed in the city right-of-way or highway easement.
      (4)   Walks shall run parallel to the roadway.
      (5)   Consideration shall be given to trees and other unmovable objects
in the right-of-way. However, walks shall be installed with as few curves and
variations as possible.
      (6)   When walks are not feasible on both sides of the street for safety,
clear distance and right-of- way issues, then the walks shall be installed only
on one side of the street and the walk shall be increased in width to a minimum
of five feet to accommodate traffic in both directions. When this instance
occurs the walk shall be uniform and extend a minimum distance of one city
block, or 740 feet. Also, a cross-over shall be installed to reflect the walk
if only on one side of the street.
      (7)   A sidewalk plan shall be in place for the entire city block, or 750
feet prior to any installation of sidewalks, to ensure uniformity.
      (8)   Sufficient right-of-way shall be required to accommodate sidewalks.
If sufficient right-of-way is not possible, then alternatives such as walks on
one side of the street shall be considered.
      (9)   If right-of-way is not sufficient for sidewalks on either side of
the street, then sidewalks shall not be required. Sufficient right-of-way shall
be determined by the City Engineer.
      (10)   The installation of new sidewalks should include flexibility in
design when considering topography and existing trees
   (d)   Prioritization.
      (1)   Main streets in residential districts shall be given top priority.
      (2)   Connector streets in residential districts shall be considered
next.
      (3)   Streets that feed to shopping centers, commercial districts,
schools and parks shall be considered next.
   (e)   Special prioritization. Council at its discretion may consider
construction of new sidewalks outside of the area priorities established by the
pavement management plan. In such instances priority shall be given to:
      (1)   Locations where safety can be improved, particularly safety of
children.
      (2)   Locations with a demonstrated pedestrian need.
      (3)   Completion of sidewalk continuity in residential and commercial
neighborhoods.
      (4)   Locations responding to a petition of neighbors representing 50% of
the owners within a block.
   (f)   Planning.
      (1)   The Public Works Department will develop a list based upon the
priority list in division (d) of this section.
      (2)   The Public Works Department will develop a comprehensive sidewalk
plan to address each street in the city, including streets deemed not to need
sidewalks.
      (3)   The Public Works Department will make recommended plan to the City
Council. The plan will include:
         A.   Priorities.
         B.   Right-of-way acquisition.
         C.   Total cost estimate.
         D.   Time frame necessary to implement and complete the plan.
      (4)   The installation of sidewalks will be approved by the Public Works
Department to ensure continuity and conformity to the comprehensive plan.
Adjustments to horizontal locations may be made by the Municipal Engineer.
(Ord. 222-04, passed 10-25-2004; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014)
§ 1010.07 SIDEWALK MATERIALS.
   In the right-of-way, sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete on two
inches of limestone base per the following specifications and under the
direction of the Municipal Engineer.
   Concrete shall be continuously deposited between bulkheads to a uniform
thickness of four inches to the full depth and width of the walk. The concrete,
after being placed, shall be thoroughly compacted and brought to the proper
pitch and grade with a template or straight edge. Immediately prior to the
finishing of the surface, the walk shall be cut into slabs not longer than four
feet on any one side, with one-half inch expansion joints at intervals not to
exceed 30 feet. The finish of the walk shall immediately follow the placing and
compacting of the concrete. The concrete shall have a minimum of six sacks of
cement per cubic yard, 6% air entrained following ODOT specifications and the
following on two inches of limestone base. Unless otherwise ordered, the finish
shall be the same as that produced with wood floats. After the concrete has
been properly placed and finished as heretofore specified, the surface of the
concrete shall be covered with waterproof membrane as soon as the concrete has
hardened sufficiently to prevent the material from excessively marring the
surface. The concrete shall be protected to insure that the concrete
temperatures will not go below 40°F. The contractor shall erect suitable
barricades and take adequate precautions to keep all traffic or other
operations off the newly-laid walks for a period of not less than 48 hours from
the completion of construction. No walks will be accepted where foot marks,
depressions or other irregularities exist.
(Ord. 56-90, passed 3-26-1990)
§ 1010.08 DRIVEWAY WALKS.
   On driveways, the specifications for concrete sidewalks shall be adhered to,
except that in all concrete driveways there must be at least six inches in
thickness of concrete on two inches of limestone base. In addition, all
driveways must be constructed to the satisfaction of the Municipal Engineer,
who is hereby given discretion where emergencies require. An expansion joint
shall be placed between the driveway walk and the drive apron.
(Ord. 56-90, passed 3-26-1990)
§ 1010.09 NONCONFORMING WORK.
   (a)   With respect to sidewalks heretofore laid within the city not in
conformity with the requirements of this chapter, there is reserved to the city
such rights as are granted to the city by the statutes of the state to require
such walks to be relaid or repaired in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (b)   The installation and repair of sidewalks in city rights-of-way are the
responsibility of abutting property owners. Existing sidewalk slabs that are
uneven or out of alignment with adjacent slabs by one inch or more must be
repaired. If an existing sidewalk slab is cracked, and the crack is more than
one inch in width or results in a difference in elevation of one inch or more
on each side of the crack, the slab must be replaced. Existing sidewalk slabs
that slope more than one inch per foot toward the street or toward the abutting
property must be repaired.
(Ord. 103-99, passed 6-14-1999)
§ 1010.10 CURB CUTS.
   Except for the State of Ohio, Lorain County, or a contractor, pursuant to an
agreement with the city, no person shall cut a curb within the city to provide
access to a piece of land without securing the proper right-of-way permit.
   When the cut is made by the owner, a two-foot wide area beyond the line set
up by the face of the curb toward the centerline shall be removed. A steel
driveway underdrain pipe shall be placed at the back of the curb, as required
by the Municipal Engineer.
   Newly-formed curb section shall be doweled into the existing concrete
paving, using standard five- eighths inch hook tie bars.
(Ord. 56-90, passed 3-26-1990)
§ 1010.11 TREE LAWNS.
   (a)   No walk shall be installed in the right-of-way from the curb to the
city sidewalk. No walk shall be installed behind the curb unless it is
authorized sidewalk, as approved by the Municipal Engineer. All areas in the
right-of-way not covered by authorized sidewalk or drive apron shall be covered
by grass, as approved by the Municipal Engineer. Exceptions and approvals to
this section shall be limited to the following:
      (1)   Street trees shall be allowed to be planted and maintained in tree
lawns only as they may be approved by the Urban Forester pursuant to
Chapter 1018;
      (2)   Sprinkler heads within the city tree lawn shall only be permitted
along the edge of the sidewalk as authorized by the Building Department and
Public Works Department pursuant to § 608.16.5 of the 2007 Ohio Plumbing Code
and §
1010.12 respectively. A right-of-way permit shall be required from the Public
Works Department for all sprinklers installed within the right-of-way.
      (3)   Mailbox posts shall conform to the standards established by the
Ohio Department of Transportation Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices
(ODOT MUTCD) § 803.11 Mailbox Supports, shall be limited to four inches by four
inches wood posts or two inch diameter steel pipes, and shall not require
permit approval for installation.
      (4)   Certain items in the city tree lawns that are otherwise in
violation of the foregoing provisions of this section may be permitted to
remain in their current locations in accordance with and subject to the terms
and conditions of §
1010.12.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter or Chapter 1018 to
the contrary, upon application of a property owner, the Urban Forester may
allow trees, shrubs, grasses, vegetation and other plants or landscape features
not specifically permitted by division (a) of this section to be planted,
installed and maintained in the tree lawn abutting such owner’s property if the
Urban Forester determines that:
      (1)   Such trees, shrubs, grasses, vegetation or other plants will not
violate §
668.01 of this code of ordinances;
      (2)   The vegetation or plants are not considered noxious weeds or
undesirable vegetation under §
668.01(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(4) of this code of ordinances;
      (3)   Such trees, shrubs, grasses, vegetation, other plants, or landscape
features will not constitute an obstruction or a nuisance;
      (4)   Any utility appurtenance i.e., valve covers, manhole covers, water
meters, and valve boxes cannot be covered; and
      (5)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any tree lawn for
which the owner of the tree lawn has obtained a pollinator planting permit.
   All trees, shrubs, grasses, vegetation or other plants or landscape features
planted, installed or maintained pursuant to this division (b) shall be subject
to the applicable provisions of §
668.01 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 56-90, passed 3-26-1990; Ord. 133-2011, passed 12-12-2011; Ord. 43-2014,
passed 4-14-2014; Ord. 110-2015, passed 9-14-2015; Ord. 9-2020, passed 2-10-
2020; Ord. 23-84, passed 5-9-2023)
§ 1010.12 CERTAIN TOLERATED TREE LAWN ITEMS.
   (a)   Until the Mayor orders it to be removed, an item or structure within a
city tree lawn that is otherwise in violation of §
1010.11 may remain in its current location if it is a tolerated item (as
hereinafter defined) and if the tree lawn is not part of the right-of-way of a
state route, arterial street or street the posted speed limit of which exceeds
25 miles per hour. The owner(s) of the tolerated item shall, at the cost of
such owner(s), promptly remove the tolerated item when ordered by the Mayor to
do so, and in default thereof, the city may remove the tolerated item and
charge the owner(s) for the cost of such removal.
   (b)   Until the Mayor orders it to be removed, an item or structure within a
city tree lawn that is otherwise in violation of §
1010.11 and that is not permitted by division (a) of this section, may be
permitted to remain in its current location if it is a state tolerated item (as
hereinafter defined) and if the owner(s) of the state tolerated item executes
and delivers to the city a revocable license agreement and such other
instruments as the city may request, all in form and substance acceptable to
the Public Works Director and Law Director.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, TOLERATED ITEM means a structure or item
that is in violation of §
1010.11, but satisfies all of the following:
      (1)   It existed in its current location in the city tree lawn as of
January 1, 2013;
      (2)   It is owned by the owner(s) of the lot adjoining such section of
the city tree lawn;
      (3)   It is an item that cannot be removed from the city tree lawn
without significant cost or substantial damage to the item; and
      (4)   It is not a rock or boulder.
   (d)   For purposes of this section, STATE TOLERATED ITEM means a structure
or item that is in violation of §
1010.11, but satisfies all of the following:
      (1)   It existed in its current location in the city tree lawn as of
January 1, 2013;
      (2)   It is more than four feet from the edge of the pavement of the
street right-of-way;
      (3)   It is owned by the owner(s) of the lot adjoining such section of
the city tree lawn;
      (4)   It is an item that cannot be removed from the city tree lawn
without significant cost or substantial damage to the item; and
      (5)   It is not a rock or boulder.
   (e)   The determination as to whether an item is a tolerated item or state
tolerated item shall be made by the Public Works Director. An owner of an item
or structure within a tree lawn may request a determination as to whether that
item is a tolerated item or state tolerated item. If such owner is dissatisfied
with the determination of the Public Works Director, then such owner may appeal
such determination by making a demand in writing to the Building Inspector for
a hearing before the Demolition Board of Appeal established pursuant to §
1468.05 of this code of ordinances (the “Board”). Such demand must be served
upon the Building Inspector within 14 days after the Public Works Director
issues a determination that the item or structure is not a tolerated item or
state tolerated item. The hearing shall be held within 30 days from the receipt
of the written demand, and at least five days’ notice of the hearing shall be
given to the owner. A majority of the Board may reverse the determination of
the Public Works Director. The owner shall be promptly notified of the decision
of the Board. The decision of the Board shall be final and conclusive.
   (f)   Until January 1, 2017, no fee shall be payable for requesting a
determination as to whether an item is a tolerated item or state tolerated item
or appealing the decision of the Public Works Director to the Board. On and
after January 1, 2017, the fees shall be as specified in the General Fee
Schedule set forth in §
208.01 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1010.111) (Ord. 110-2015, passed 9-14-2015)
§ 1010.13 MUNICIPAL UTILITIES EXCEPTIONS.
   No provision of this chapter shall be interpreted so as to require permits
for the construction and repair of sewer, water or gas mains, telephone and
electric equipment, or sidewalks done by city personnel or by contractors for
the city.
(Prior Code, § 1010.12) (Ord. 56-90, passed 3-26-1990)
§ 1010.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any provision of this chapter is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 for each
offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
(Ord. 56-90, passed 3-26-1990)
CHAPTER 1014: GUTTERS, DITCHES AND DRAINS
Section
1014.01 Obstructions prohibited
1014.02 Conduits required
1014.03 Conduit regulations
1014.04 Violations
1014.99 Penalty
§ 1014.01 OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall obstruct or maintain an obstruction of any established
gutter, ditch, sewer or other drain which is located upon any established
thoroughfare, or which serves as a means or facility for public drainage within
the city.
(Ord. 456, passed 9-23-1940)
§ 1014.02 CONDUITS REQUIRED.
   No road, driveway, walk, bridge or other construction shall be placed or
maintained that extends over or across any gutter, ditch, sewer or other drain
located upon any public thoroughfare within the city, unless an adequate
conduit to ensure the free passage of drainage water in and along such gutter,
ditch, sewer or other drain is placed and maintained at such grade and place in
or under such road, walk, bridge or other construction as to ensure the free
and unobstructed passage of drainage water.
(Ord. 1101, passed 7-9-1956)
§ 1014.03 CONDUIT REGULATIONS.
   All conduit pipe placed in or under a road, driveway, bridge or other
construction extending over or across any gutter, ditch, sewer or other drain
upon or along any public highway or thoroughfare within the city, shall be
subject to the approval of the Municipal Engineer. No conduit shall be placed
in any road, driveway, bridge or other construction over or across a gutter,
ditch, sewer or other drain providing for local drainage on or along a public
highway or thoroughfare within the city, unless such conduit is constructed of
corrugated iron or concrete, is not less than eight inches in diameter and is
not less than 16 feet in length if designed for the passage of vehicles and not
less than six feet in length if designed for foot traffic.
(Ord. 1101, passed 7-9-1956)
§ 1014.04 VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   Any person owning or having charge of lands where or adjacent to where
a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is found to exist, or who
is responsible for the existence of such violation, who fails or refuses, after
30 days notice in person or by mail, to cease and correct such violation and
abate the nuisance created thereby, is guilty of a violation of this chapter.
The giving or failing to give such notice shall not limit, in any manner, the
authority of the city, its agents and employees to correct such a violation in
the interests of the public welfare or to abate a nuisance.
   (b)   The Public Works Director is hereby authorized and directed to proceed
by such means and in such manner as he or she considers best to summarily
correct a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter if, after the
giving of the 30 days’ notice, the violation has not ceased or been corrected.
The Public Works Director is further authorized and directed to proceed
forthwith to summarily correct such a violation if an emergency involving the
public welfare or a nuisance is found to exist.
(Ord. 456, passed 9-23-1940; Ord. 1101, passed 7-9-1956; Ord. 114-2014, passed
9-8-2014)
§ 1014.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100
for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
(Ord. 94-74, passed 6-10-1974)
CHAPTER 1018: CITY TREE ORDINANCE
Section
1018.01 Purpose; title
1018.02 Definitions
1018.03 Urban Forester
1018.031   Master Tree Plan
1018.04 Planting of trees, shrubs, and hedges; permit required
1018.05 Replacement of trees
1018.06 Pruning of trees
1018.07 Pruning or removal of trees on private property
1018.08 Abuse and/or mutilation of public trees
1018.09 Protection of trees near construction work
1018.10 Placing of material injurious to trees on public property
1018.11 Noticed to correct; service; noncompliance; remedy of city
1018.12 Emergencies
1018.13 Interference with Urban Forester or agent
 
1018.99 Enforcement and penalty
Editor’s note:
   This chapter, previously titled Trees, Shrubs and Hedges, was repealed and
re-enacted in its entirety by Ordinance 199-94, passed October 24, 1994 and
amended in its entirety by Ordinance 23-84, passed May 9, 2023.
§ 1018.01 PURPOSE; TITLE.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a framework for the
development and sustainability of the city’s urban forest to maximize the
benefits for all residents through the orderly planting, maintaining, care and
preservation of trees, shrubs and hedges in the public ways and on all city
property.
   (b)   This chapter shall be known as the Avon Lake City Tree Ordinance.
(Ord. 199-94, passed 10-24-1994; Ord. 23-84, passed 5-9-2023; Ord. 25-134,
passed 9-8-2025)
§ 1018.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in
the plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural.
The word “shall” is mandatory and not merely directory.
   ADMINISTRATIVE COMMUNICATION. A written, typed or printed document.
   ANSI A300. The Tree Care standards, as amended, that have been developed and
promulgated by the American National Standards Institute.
   ARBORIST. One who, by possession of a recognized degree, certificate, or
professional standing, or by extensive knowledge, training, and experience, has
demonstrated the ability to deal with the subject matter.
   BOARD CONTROLLED PUBLIC PLACES. All current and future grounds placed under
board control by the Charter, such as the Board of Utilities and the Board of
Education in the city.
   CALIPER. The diameter of a tree trunk six inches above the existing grade or
proposed planted grade. This measurement is only used for replacement when
using nursery stock trees in this chapter.
   CITY. The City of Avon Lake, Lorain County, State of Ohio.
   CRITICAL ROOT ZONE. The area inscribed by an imaginary line on the ground
beneath a tree having its center point at the center of the trunk of the tree
and having a radius equal to one and one-half feet for every one inch of
diameter breast height.
   DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (DBH). The diameter of a tree measured at four and
one-half feet above the existing grade. This measurement is an industry
standard measurement used for existing trees.
   EMERGENCY. The immediate necessity for the preservation of public peace,
health and safety.
   HEDGE. A row of closely planted shrubs or low-growing trees forming a fence
or boundary.
   INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY OF ARBOR/CULTURE (ISA). The professional organization
who governs the accreditation of tree care professionals and adopts standards
for arboriculture implementation.
   LARGE TREES. Those trees attaining a height of 45 feet or more.
   MASTER TREE PLAN. The plan shall specify the species of tree to be planted
on each of the streets in the city.
   MEDIUM TREES. Those trees attaining a height of 30 to 45 feet.
   PARK. All public parks having individual names.
   PARK AND STREET TREES DEPARTMENT. The Public Works Department, which is the
designated department of the city under whose jurisdiction park and/or street
trees fall.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
   PRINCIPAL THOROUGHFARE. Any street upon which trucks are not prohibited.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. All grounds not owned by the city.
   PROPERTY LINE. The border where a property begins and ends.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The person owning such property as shown by the County
Auditor’s Plat of Lorain County, Ohio.
   PROTECTED TREE. Any tree in good health having a diameter of eight inches
DBH or larger or having an aggregate diameter of twenty inches DBH for multi-
stemmed trees. Trees less than eight inches DBH may be given protected status,
if determined to be of high value by the Urban Forester based on species,
health, and history.
   PUBLIC PLACES. All non-board-controlled grounds owned by the city.
   PUBLIC TREES. All shade and ornamental trees now or hereafter growing on a
tree lawn or any public place where otherwise indicated.
   REMOVE OR REMOVAL. The causing or accomplishing of the actual physical
removal of a tree, or the effective removal through damaging, poisoning, or
other direct or indirect action resulting in, or likely to result in, the death
of a tree.
   SHRUB. A woody plant of relatively low height, distinguished from a tree by
having several stems protruding from the ground.
   SMALL TREES. Those attaining a height of 20 to 30 feet.
   STREET and HIGHWAY. The entire width of every public way or right-of-way
when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right,
for purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
   STREET TREE PROGRAM. Per
Chapter 1214, developers deposit funds during the final plat phase of
development into a program to pay for trees planted in tree lawns on public
streets.
   TOPPING. Topping is the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than
three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to
remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
   TREE. A tall, woody plant, distinguished from a shrub by having
comparatively greater height and, characteristically, a single trunk with
multiple branches rather than several stems protruding from the ground.
   TREE LAWN. That part of a street or highway, not covered by a sidewalk or
other paving, lying between the property line and that portion of the street or
highway usually used for vehicular traffic.
   TREE MAINTENANCE. The planting, caring for and protection of trees adhering
to ANSI A300 standards to reduce the prevalence of issues, including
establishment failure and the possible spread of oak wilt, that stems from poor
management practices.
   TREE PRESERVATION PLAN. A proposal that includes a tree survey of a site,
including a construction site or a site where trees may be impacted by
temporary equipment, vehicles, or events, and a written plan with text and/or
graphic illustrations indicating the methods used to preserve existing trees
during construction and/or temporary events, and methods for ongoing
maintenance, including replacement, fertilizing, and pruning following ANSI
A300 standards. The Tree Preservation Plan shall contain specific penalties for
damaging trees designated for protection including replacement definitions and
monetary reimbursement.
   TREE SELECTION. For residents, city, and contractors registered with the
city, that they follow ANSI A300 standards and the Avon Lake Master Street Plan
by not planting invasive species as published by the Ohio Department of Natural
Resources.
   TREE SURVEY. A graphic display drawn to scale by a landscape architect or
certified arborist, not to exceed one inch equals 50 feet, showing all existing
protected trees on the site. The tree survey shall include species, DBH, and
contain the outline of the critical root zone of each such tree.
   URBAN FORESTER. The Urban Forester of the city, manages and implements the
goals of this chapter.
(Ord. 199-94, passed 10-24-1994; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014; Ord. 23-84,
passed 5-9-2023; Ord. 25-134, passed 9-8-2025)
§ 1018.03 URBAN FORESTER.
   There is hereby established the position of Urban Forester in and for the
city, and the city hereby adopts the Avon Lake Arboricultural Specifications
and Standards of Practice.
   (a)   Duties. The Urban Forester shall abide by and have the authority to
promulgate and enforce the rules and regulations of this chapter under
authority of the Avon Lake Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of
Practice, which shall be based on ANSI A300 standards and in collaboration with
the Tree Commission. In the absence of the Urban Forester, these duties shall
be the responsibility of a qualified person designated by the city.
   (b)   Authority.
      (1)   In general. The Urban Forester shall have the authority and
jurisdiction to regulate the planting, maintenance, removal, mulching,
fertilization, pruning and bracing of trees in tree lawns and public places to
ensure safety and preserve the aesthetics of such public sites.
      (2)   Supervision. The Urban Forester or a person designated thereby,
shall inspect all work done under a permit issued in accordance with the terms
of this chapter.
      (3)   Condition of permit. The Urban Forester shall have the authority to
affix reasonable conditions to the granting of a permit in accordance with the
terms of this chapter.
      (4)   Master Tree Plan. The Urban Forester shall have the authority to
formulate or modify the Master Tree Plan with the advice, a hearing, and the
approval of the Tree Commission. The Master Tree Plan that shall specify the
species of tree to be planted on each of the streets in the city. From and
after the effective date of the Master Tree Plan, or any amendment thereof, all
planting shall conform thereto which shall be included as Appendix C of the
Avon Lake Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice, and shall be
maintained as tree-related records and reference material, including a street
and park tree inventory.
         A.   The Urban Forester shall consider all existing and future utility
and environmental factors when recommending a specific species for each of the
streets and other public sites of the city.
         B.   The Urban Forester, with the approval of the Tree Commission,
shall have the authority to amend or add to the master street tree plan at any
time that circumstances make it advisable. The master street tree plan is to be
reviewed and updated every five years. New streets and improved cultivars in
trees are to be considered.
         C.   The Urban Forester shall maintain tree related records and
reference material, including a street and park tree inventory.
(Ord. 199-94, passed 10-24-1994; Ord. 23-84, passed 5-9-2023; Ord. 25-134,
passed 9-8-2025)
§ 1018.031 MASTER TREE PLAN.
   (a)   The Master Tree Plan shall specify the species of tree to be planted
on each of the streets in the city. From and after the effective date of the
Master Tree Plan, or any amendment thereof, all planting shall conform thereto.
   (b)   The Master Tree Plan shall take into consideration all existing and
future utility and environmental factors when identifying specific species for
each of the streets and other public sites of the city.
   (c)   The Master Tree Plan is to be reviewed and updated every five years.
New streets and improved cultivars in trees are to be considered.
   (d)   No tree shall be planted under electric lines on any of the public
streets of the city, which at the estimated full growth will exceed 25 feet in
height, or as to interfere with the aforementioned utility lines.
   (e)   Trees planted on any of the public streets of the city shall be
planted no closer than 20 feet apart; no closer than 35 feet from an
intersection; no closer than ten feet from all utility poles, aprons, hydrants,
manholes or other utility infrastructure unless specifically approved by the
Urban Forester.
   (f)   Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice. The Urban
Forester or the Tree Commission shall have the authority to modify, amend or
extend the Avon Lake Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice,
with the approval of the city department heads and the Tree Commission, at any
time that experience or technology indicates improved methods or whenever
circumstances make it advisable. The Council must approve any changes to policy
or procedure. Other changes require only notification of Council.
   (g)   The Tree Commission shall develop and maintain a list, found in the
Avon Lake Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice, of desirable
and undesirable large, medium, and small trees for planting in tree lawns and
public places, which shall be used by the Urban Forester in developing the
Master Tree Plan.
(Ord. 25-134, passed 9-8-2025)
§ 1018.04 PLANTING OF TREES, SHRUBS, AND HEDGES; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   A permit for planting or removal of trees, shrubs or hedges on Board-
Controlled Property is not required, but said Board must administratively
communicate and receive approval for all activity from the Urban Forester to
preserve current records and maintain biodiversity.
   (b)   Except as provided in division (a) hereof, no person shall plant any
tree, shrub or hedge upon any tree lawn or public place without first obtaining
a permit in writing from the Urban Forester specifying the size, type, species
and location on the tree lawn or public place so to be planted. Approval to
plant requires adherence to the specifications set forth in the Avon Lake
Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice.
   (c)   The Urban Forester shall have the authority to deny a permit under the
following conditions as determined by the Urban Forester or Tree Commission:
      (1)   The tree, shrub, or hedge is an undesirable size, type or species;
      (2)   The tree, shrub, or hedge is undesirable for the location proposed;
or
      (3)   The tree lawn or public place is a size or type unsuitable for
planting of trees, shrubs or hedges.
   (d)   Hereafter, when any tree is planted in a tree lawn or public place and
is in conflict with specifications of the Master Tree Plan, as found in the
Avon Lake Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice, it shall be
lawful for the city to request tree, shrub, hedge, or stump removal by the
property owner within 30 days.
   (e)   Trees planted upon a tree lawn or public place may be removed by the
city as necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare and aesthetics.
The Urban Forester may cause the removal of any such tree by using city
employees or private contractors under contract with the city. Stump grinding
and restoration of tree lawn grass shall take place when trees are replaced or
removed.
(Prior Code, § 1018.05) (Ord. 199-94, passed 10-24-1994; Ord. 21-182, passed
12-20-2021; Ord. 23-84, passed 5-9-2023; Ord. 25-134, passed 9-8-2025)
§ 1018.05 REPLACEMENT OF TREES.
   Any person or property owner granted permission to remove a tree from tree
lawns or public places for the purpose of construction shall replace the
removed tree or trees with a species designated on the Master Tree Plan as part
of the city’s Street Tree Program. The person or property owner shall bear the
cost of replacing all trees removed. Projects initiated by the city shall have
the replacement costs included in the project costs. Trees removed by the city
or in Board-controlled places are to be replaced subject to considerations of
the location from where the tree was removed. Replacing trees in the same
location is not necessary and sometimes not practical. The city shall only pay
for tree replacement when the original tree was part of the city’s Street Tree
Program funded by the original developer and within one year of planting.
(Prior Code, § 1018.06) (Ord. 199-94, passed 10-24-1994; Ord. 21-182, passed
12-20-2021; Ord. 23-84, passed 5-9-2023; Ord. 25-134, passed 9-8-2025)
§ 1018.06 PRUNING OF TREES.
   (a)   Every owner of any tree overhanging any public street, sidewalk or
right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches of such trees so that the
branches will not obstruct or shade any street lights; obstruct the view of
traffic signs or street intersection, or obstruct the passage of pedestrians on
public sidewalks, or constitute a menace to the safety of the public. There
shall be a clear space of at least 14 feet above the surface of the street or
nine feet above the surface of the public sidewalk to remove a safety threat.
   (b)   The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private
property when it interferes with the light from a street light, the visibility
of any traffic control device, sign or intersection, obstructs the passage of
pedestrians on public sidewalks, or generally obstructs vehicular, bicycle, or
pedestrian traffic such that it constitutes a menace to the safety of the
public.
   (c)   Permit required. Pruning of public trees by persons other than the
city, persons contracted for by the city, or persons approved by the Urban
Forester, requires a permit which identifies each tree being pruned and the
type of pruning.
   (d)   Topping. No person shall top any public tree. TOPPING is defined as
the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter
within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and
disfigure the tree. Public trees that have been severely damaged by storms or
other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where
other pruning practices are impractical, may be exempted from this section at
the determination of the Urban Forester.
   (e)   No oak trees (Quercus spp.) or chestnut trees (Castanea spp.) shall be
cut, trimmed or removed between April 1 through December 1 to prevent the
further spread of oak wilt (Bretziella fagacearum) unless deemed necessary or
hazardous after review by the Urban Forester or an emergency exists affecting
public health or safety.
(Prior Code, § 1018.07) (Ord. 199-94, passed 10-24-1994; Ord. 23-84, passed 5-
9-2023; Ord. 25-134, passed 9-8-2025)
§ 1018.07 PRUNING OR REMOVAL OF TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   The city shall remove all public trees or portions of such trees which
are dead, damaged, diseased or dangerous to the life, health or safety of
pedestrians, vehicular or bicycle traffic, or public property.
   (b)   The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead,
damaged, or diseased tree or portions of such trees on private property within
the city, when such trees constitute a serious hazard to the safety of the
public.
   (c)   The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any tree or
shrub that harbors insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to
other trees or shrubs within the city. Prior to removal, the Urban Forester
shall notify the owner of any such tree or shrub on private property of the
nature of such threat.
      (1)   Within 30 days after the date of service of the notice to remove
tree diseased or infested tree or shrub, the owner shall provide the Urban
Forester with a letter of intent from an arborist who is registered with the
city for the removal of such tree or shrub at the owner’s sole expense.
      (2)   Upon the expiration of the time set forth in division (c)(1) above,
the owner has failed to comply with the notice to remove diseased or infested
tree or shrub, the city, its employees or agents, may enter upon the property
to remove the diseased or infested tree or shrub. The actual cost of the work
shall be billed to the property owner and become an assessment against the
property until paid.
   (d)   No oak trees (Quercus spp.) or chestnut trees (Castanea spp.) shall be
trimmed or removed between April 1 through December 1 to prevent the further
spread of oak wilt (Bretziellafagacearum) unless deemed necessary or hazardous
after review by the Urban Forester or his/her designee or an emergency exists
affecting public health or safety.
(Prior Code, § 1018.08) (Ord. 199-94, passed 10-24-1994; Ord. 23-84, passed 5-
9-2023; Ord. 25-134, passed 9-8-2025)
§ 1018.08 ABUSE AND/OR MUTILATION OF PUBLIC TREES.
   (a)   Unless specifically authorized by the Urban Forester, no person shall
intentionally cause damage to a public tree or to the critical root zone. For
purposes of this section, acts causing damage include, but are not limited to:
cut or carve; transplant or graft whether above or below ground; remove; attach
any rope, wire, nail, advertising, poster or other contrivance; allow any
gaseous liquor or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to come in
contact; or set fire to or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat
therefrom will cause injury to the tree; shall pour salt water or upon any
street or abutting land in such a way as to injure any tree planted or growing
thereon. This provision shall not apply to the use of anti-icing materials
necessary for the safety of persons upon the streets or sidewalks.
   (b)   No person without the written permission of the Urban Forester shall
damage, misuse or remove any device placed to protect or maintain such tree
within the public rights-of-way or on public property, except in case of
immediate necessity for the protection of life or property.
   (c)   No person shall change the natural drainage; excavate any ditches,
tunnels, or trenches; or lay any drive within the root protection zone of any
tree having all or any portion of its trunk in or upon any public property
without obtaining a written approval from the Urban Forester and without
strictly complying with the provisions of the issued approval and provisions of
this chapter.
   (d)   No person shall attach any electric wire to any tree growing or
planted upon public property, including low voltage holiday lighting without
the written permission of the Urban Forester. Every person having any wire
charged with electricity running through or across a public street shall
securely fasten such wire or wires so that they shall not come in contact so as
to injure any tree therein, and shall temporarily remove any such wire or the
electricity therein when it shall be deemed necessary by the Urban Forester, in
order to take down or prune any trees growing in a public street, within 24
hours after the owner of such wire, or his agent, has been served a written
notice to remove the wire or the electricity therefrom.
(Prior Code, § 1018.09) (Ord. 199-94, passed 10-24-1994; Ord. 23-84, passed 5-
9-2023; Ord. 25-134, passed 9-8-2025)
§ 1018.09 PROTECTION OF TREES NEAR CONSTRUCTION WORK.
   (a)   Protected trees near excavation, construction or demolition of any
building or structure, or street work, shall be guarded with a highly visible
protective barrier such as a substantial fence, frame, or box which shall not
be removed unless or until the Urban Forester authorizes its removal.
   (b)   The Urban Forester shall review the tree protection plan prior to the
beginning of construction. The Urban Forester will perform periodic inspections
of the construction site to ensure compliance with the tree protection plan and
identify tree damage or other violations not previously report to the Urban
Forester by the contractor. Construction may be halted until violations are
remedied.
   (c)   The protective device shall be not less than four feet high and no
less than four feet from the tree or placed at the greater of the following
distances:
      (1)   Ten feet;
      (2)   The drip line that is at the outermost extent of the branches; or
      (3)   A distance in feet from the tree equal to the circumference of the
trunk in inches (e.g., 12-inch circumference equals a 12-foot distance),
measured at DBH.
   (d)   All building material, dirt or other debris shall be kept outside the
barrier to protect the critical root zone of the tree(s). The protective
barrier must be structurally sound and capable of protecting the trees from all
expected encroachment of debris and machinery associated with said excavation,
construction, demolition, or street work to prevent soil compaction or damage
to the tree or the critical root zone.
   (e)   Tree protection signs shall be visible and placed every twenty feet
within the protection areas.
   (f)   Soil excavation work is permitted closer than the distance parameters
established above provided all excavation of soil is accomplished by hand
shovel, air spade or auger, and no roots greater than two inches in diameter
are severed.
   (g)   If lateral roots greater than two inches in diameter are encountered,
they shall be exposed beyond the excavation limits and an attempt shall be made
to bend and relocate the roots without breaking them. If such lateral roots are
encountered immediately adjacent to the location of new construction and
relocation does not appear practical, the Urban Forester or designee shall be
consulted.
   (h)   If, after inspection by the Urban Forester or designee, it is
determined that the cutting of roots cannot be avoided, the following standards
shall be observed:
      (1)   Roots must be cut sharply and cleanly.
      (2)   The wound shall not be painted or treated.
      (3)   All excavated roots shall be backfilled by hand as soon as possible
to prevent drying. If immediate backfilling is not possible, roots shall be
covered with peat moss or wet burlap and watered.
      (4)   The tree shall be thoroughly watered by providing the equivalent of
one inch of water per week for up to one year at the direction of the Urban
Forester or designee.
   (i)   No construction equipment shall be parked and no particulate
construction material such as sand, soil or gravel shall be stored on the
surface of any unpaved areas within the drip line of any public tree without
the express permission of the Urban Forester or designee.
   (j)   No storage of chemicals, materials, supplies, construction debris or
waste is allowed within the area of the protective barriers.
   (k)   No fuel storage or washing down concrete or cement handling equipment
is permitted on the site. Machinery refueling and maintenance will occur off
site.
   (l)   All grade changes must receive a grading permit from the Public Works
Department with the approval of the Urban Forester prior to the start of the
project to reduce construction activity damage to trees.
   (m)   If it becomes necessary to cut or prune roots outside the root
protection zone during construction, all cuts will be clean cuts perpendicular
to the natural growth direction. Roots must be backfilled within an hour of
cutting followed by watering of the tree within 24 hours with the equivalent of
one inch of rain distributed over the root protection zone.
   (n)   Any tree pruning needed prior to or during construction to prevent
construction related tree damage or equipment clearance must be supervised by
an ISA Certified Arborist following ANSI A300 standards.
   (o)   The Urban Forester shall review the tree preservation plan and
contractor performance during daily construction meetings. Enforcement,
penalties and mitigation regarding breach of the tree preservation plan should
be discussed, understood and captured in construction documents. Any tree
damage or injuries should be reported to the Urban Forester as soon as
possible.
   (p)   If the removal of a public tree cannot be avoided, or if a public tree
does not survive due to construction activities, the owner of the facility to
be constructed shall obtain a permit as specified in §
1018.08 and shall remove the tree at the owner's expense. Said owner shall also
plant, at the owner's sole expense, a replacement tree of a size, type and at a
location approved by the Urban Forester.
   (q)   No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels or trenches or lay any
drive within a distance in feet from the tree trunk equal to one and one-half
times the diameter of the trunk in inches, measured at DBH or the radius of ten
feet whichever is greater from any public tree without first obtaining a
written permit from the Urban Forester.
(Prior Code, § 1018.10) (Ord. 199-94, passed 10-24-1994; Ord. 23-84, passed 5-
9-2023; Ord. 25-134, passed 9-8-2025)
§ 1018.10 PLACING OF MATERIAL INJURIOUS TO TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain upon any public place of
the city, any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other materials which may impede
the free passage of water, air, or fertilizer to the roots of any tree growing
therein, except by written permit of the Urban Forester.
(Prior Code, § 1018.11) (Ord. 199-94, passed 10-24-1994; Ord. 23-84, passed 5-
9-2023)
§ 1018.11 NOTICED TO CORRECT; SERVICE; NONCOMPLIANCE; REMEDY OF CITY.
   The person or property owner shall be provided with written notice of
desired action.
   (a)   Should any person or persons owning real property bordering on a tree
lawn or public place fail to maintain trees as provided in this chapter, the
Urban Forester shall order such person or persons, within 30 days after receipt
of written notice, to comply with the requested maintenance within 30 days
after receipt of written notice.
   (b)   The order provided herein shall be served by certified mail at the
last known address of the property owner. If the delivery of the certified mail
shall fail for any reason, service of the notice required herein shall be
deemed effective upon posting said notice in a conspicuous location upon the
property.
   (c)   When a person to whom an order is directed shall fail to respond or
comply within the specified time, it shall be lawful for the city to perform
requested maintenance and assess the property owner for the cost of services
rendered.
(Prior Code, § 1018.12) (Ord. 199-94, passed 10-24-1994; Ord. 23-84, passed 5-
9-2023; Ord. 25-134, passed 9-8-2025)
§ 1018.12 EMERGENCIES.
   In the case of officially declared emergencies, such as windstorms, ice
storms or other disasters, the provisions of this chapter shall be waived to
the minimal extent possible so that said provisions will in no way hinder
public and/or private work to restore order in the city. Such work shall follow
maintenance standards as outlined by the Urban Forester.
   Necessary emergency activity for repair of underground utilities to assure
landowner services does not require a permit. Any emergency activity which
results in damaging, pruning or removal of trees, shrubs, hedges, or other
vegetation in a tree lawn or public place must be administratively communicated
to the Urban Forester as soon as practicable.
(Prior Code, § 1018.13) (Ord. 199-94, passed 10-24-1994; Ord. 9-2020, passed 2-
10-2020; Ord. 23-84, passed 5-9-2023; Ord. 25-134, passed 9-8-2025)
§ 1018.13 INTERFERENCE WITH URBAN FORESTER OR AGENT.
   No person shall hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with the Urban Forester
or their designated representative or agent while such person is engaged in
carrying out the provisions of this chapter, provided, however, that nothing
herein shall be construed as an attempt to prohibit the pursuit of any remedy,
legal or equitable, in any court of competent jurisdiction for the protection
of property rights by the owner of any property within the city.
(Prior Code, § 1018.14) (Ord. 199-94, passed 10-24-1994; Ord. 23-84, passed 5-
9-2023)
§ 1018.99 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY.
   (a)   The Urban Forester or designee may issue citation to any person who
fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter or who otherwise fails to
comply with any legal directive issued by the Urban Forester or designee in
furtherance of the requirements of this chapter.
   (b)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor and shall be fined up to three times market rate value of the
former tree and $1,000 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed for each seven days of continued violation or noncompliance.
(Ord. 199-94, passed 10-24-1994; Ord. 23-84, passed 5-9-2023; Ord. 25-134,
passed 9-8-2025)
CHAPTER 1022: STREET AND HOUSE NUMBERING
Section
1022.01 Lake Road numbering
1022.02 Properties adjacent to Lake Road
1022.03 Numbering other than Lake Road
§ 1022.01 LAKE ROAD NUMBERING.
   A street numbering system shall be adopted for Lake Road within the city
which will be a continuation of the street numbering system adopted by the City
of Cleveland, Ohio, and successively continued westward from the City of
Cleveland through the Cities of Lakewood, Rocky River and Bay Village, so that
the street numbering system on Lake Road within the city will commence with the
next consecutive numbers after the last numbers established on the north and
south sides of Lake Road in the City of Bay Village and continue thence
consecutively westward through the city.
(Ord. 412, passed 7-10-1939)
§ 1022.02 PROPERTIES ADJACENT TO LAKE ROAD.
   The system of numbering of streets, roads, avenues, highways and properties
meeting or bordering on Lake Road within the city, as disclosed and fixed by
the “Street Number Maps,” numbered one to nine, inclusive, marked “Sheets No.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9” and made a part of this section by reference, is
hereby approved and adopted.
(Ord. 412, passed 7-10-1939)
§ 1022.03 NUMBERING OTHER THAN LAKE ROAD.
   A system of street numbering for all streets, roads, avenues and
thoroughfares, other than Lake Road, within the city is hereby established.
   The Public Works Director is hereby directed to extend upon the copies of
the county tax maps kept in the Municipal Building, the system of street
numbers adopted for all streets, roads, avenues and thoroughfares within the
city, other than Lake Road.
   The system of street numbering for all streets, roads, avenues and
thoroughfares within the city, other than Lake Road, as illustrated upon the
copies of the county tax maps is hereby approved and copies of the tax maps, to
the extent that they illustrate the system adopted and the numbers thus
established, are hereby incorporated by reference and made a part of this
chapter.
(Ord. 525, passed 11-9-1942; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014)
CHAPTER 1024: EMERGENCY ACCESS GATES
Section
1024.01 Definitions
1024.02 Permit required
1024.03 Approval process
1024.04 Submittals for original gate permit
1024.05 Responsible party; update of contact information
1024.06 Operation of gates
1024.07 Installation and approval
1024.08 Duration and renewal of permit
1024.09 Permit fees
1024.10 Maintenance
1024.11 Periodic inspections
1024.12 Revocation of permit
1024.13 Removal of nonconforming gate
1024.14 Non-liability for damage to gate
1024.15 Directional barriers prohibited
1024.16 Existing gates
1024.99 Penalty
§ 1024.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASSOCIATION. A condominium association or owners association governing all
or any portion of a gated community.
   GATE. A gate, crossbar, door or other obstructive device that is utilized
for the purpose of restricting, controlling or obstructing entry or exit by
motor vehicles or pedestrians to or from a private road and that is not manned
on a 24-hour, seven day per week basis by a person capable of providing
immediate access to a police or fire safety vehicle or person.
   GATED COMMUNITY. A residential subdivision, apartment complex, condominium
development, planned unit development or other residential development access
to which is controlled by a gate.
   GATED COMMUNITY LOT. A lot in a gated community.
   PRIVATE ROAD. Any road that has not been dedicated as a public right-of-way,
that is owned by abutting property owners or association of property owners,
and that is utilized for the purpose of providing vehicular or pedestrian
access to a residential subdivision, apartment complex, condominium development
or other residential development. Private driveways serving one single-family
residence shall not be deemed PRIVATE ROADS.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. The person or entity designated in accordance with §
1024.05.
(Ord. 68-2016, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 1024.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No gate may be installed or maintained on a private road unless a permit
issued by the Fire Chief for such gate is in effect and such gate complies with
the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 68-2016, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 1024.03 APPROVAL PROCESS.
   Application for a gate permit shall be submitted on the form approved by the
Fire Chief. A gate permit shall be issued only if and when the Fire Chief
determines that the gate will comply with all the requirements of this chapter
and will not pose a danger to persons or property.
(Ord. 68-2016, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 1024.04 SUBMITTALS FOR ORIGINAL GATE PERMIT.
   Each application for an original gate permit must include or be accompanied
by:
   (a)   The names and contact information for all officers of each association
governing any of the gated community lots;
   (b)   The name and contact information for any management company retained
by any association governing any of the gated community lots;
   (c)   The names, addresses and contact information for all owners of gated
community lots that are not governed by an association;
   (d)   The written consent of each association governing any of the gated
community lots;
   (e)   The written consent of the owners of all gated community lots not
governed by an association. For any gated community lot that is owned jointly
or in common by more than one person or entity, the written consent of those
persons or entities owning more than 50% in interest shall be sufficient;
   (f)   A site plan of the area in which the gate is to be located, drawn to
scale;
   (g)   Plans and specifications for the gate, including method of operation,
UL listing numbers of equipment used, and location of radio operated controller
and keypad;
   (h)   The name and contact information for the contractor who will install
the gate; and
   (i)   Designation of a responsible party acceptable to the Fire Chief,
contact information for the responsible party, and an acknowledgment by the
responsible party that he, she or it agrees to and assumes the obligations
imposed upon him, her or it by this chapter.
(Ord. 68-2016, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 1024.05 RESPONSIBLE PARTY; UPDATE OF CONTACT INFORMATION.
   (a)   A responsible party must be designated for each gate installed or
maintained. The responsible party must reside or maintain an office in Lorain
County, Ohio. The responsible party shall be primarily liable for the
performance of all obligations imposed by this chapter with respect to the
installation and maintenance of the gate and the payment of all fees and fines
imposed by this chapter with respect to the gate.
   (b)   The names and contact information required by §
1024.04(a), (b) and (i) must be kept current at all times. The responsible
party shall notify the Fire Chief in writing not later than 48 hours of a
change in such information.
(Ord. 68-2016, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 1024.06 OPERATION OF GATES.
   (a)   Gates must be electrically operated.
   (b)   Wiring for gates shall be provided by AC current, underground
installation.
   (c)   Gates must fail to the open position when the power is off, and must
remain open until power is restored.
   (d)   As their primary means of emergency access, gates must use one of the
following access control systems:
      (1)   A radio controlled system equipped with a radio receiver capable of
receiving access commands from public safety radio transceivers used by the
city’s Fire Department and Police Department; or
      (2)   Any other system approved by the Fire Chief.
   (e)   As their secondary means of emergency access, gates must be accessible
by a digital keypad using a code designated by the Fire Chief. The keypad must
be attached to the outside of the gate and must be easily visible from vehicles
used by emergency responders.
   (f)   Gates must be lighted sufficiently to allow for visibility at night
without the use of any additional external light source.
   (g)   A conspicuous sign approved by the Fire Chief shall be attached to or
placed near each gate indicating the method for gaining emergency access and
the location of any control device that must be manually accessed.
(Ord. 68-2016, passed 6-13-2016; Ord. 120-2016, passed 9-12-2016)
§ 1024.07 INSTALLATION AND APPROVAL.
   A gate may be installed only in accordance with the plans and specifications
therefor approved by the Fire Chief. Before a gate may be used to control
access, it must be inspected and approved by the Fire Department to ensure that
it has been properly installed, that it complies with the plans and
specifications approved by the Fire Chief and that it is in good working
condition.
(Ord. 68-2016, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 1024.08 DURATION AND RENEWAL OF PERMIT.
   Unless earlier revoked in accordance with §
1024.12, a gate permit shall expire on the day preceding the fifth anniversary
of its issuance. Application to renew a gate permit shall be submitted on the
form provided by the Fire Chief.
(Ord. 68-2016, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 1024.09 PERMIT FEES.
   The fees for gate permits shall be as specified in
Chapter 208 of the Administration Code - General Fee Schedule.
(Ord. 68-2016, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 1024.10 MAINTENANCE.
   Except for gates kept in the open position, gates and their emergency access
systems must be maintained in good working condition at all times. Any gate or
the emergency access systems for which is not in good working order must be
immediately placed in the open position and kept in the open position until the
gate and its emergency access systems are in good working condition.
(Ord. 68-2016, passed 6-13-2016; Ord. 120-2016, passed 9-12-2016)
§ 1024.11 PERIODIC INSPECTIONS.
   Each gate shall be inspected at least annually by the Fire Department to
ensure that the gate and its emergency access systems are in good working
condition and that such gate is in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 68-2016, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 1024.12 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The Fire Chief may revoke the permit for any gate that is not in good
working condition or that is otherwise not in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 68-2016, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 1024.13 REMOVAL OF NONCONFORMING GATE.
   The Fire Chief shall have the right to remove or order the removal of any
gate that doesn’t function properly, violates any section of this chapter or
for which there is not a valid and current permit, and neither the city, the
Fire Chief nor any employee or official of the city shall be liable for any
damage caused by such removal.
(Ord. 68-2016, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 1024.14 NON-LIABILITY FOR DAMAGE TO GATE.
   Neither the city, Fire Chief nor any employee or official of the city shall
be liable for damage to a gate if in responding to an emergency or perceived
emergency or for any other authorized purpose city employees or officials deem
it necessary to damage or remove the gate to gain access to any gated community
or gated community lot.
(Ord. 68-2016, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 1024.15 DIRECTIONAL BARRIERS PROHIBITED.
   Direction-limiting devices, such as tire spikes, are not permitted on any
fire access road.
(Ord. 68-2016, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 1024.16 EXISTING GATES.
   The owners of gates already in existence on the effective date of this
chapter must comply with the provisions of this chapter and obtain permits for
such gates or remove such gates within 180 days after the effective date of
this chapter.
(Ord. 68-2016, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 1024.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree and shall be fined not more than $250 or imprisoned not more
than 30 days, or both.
(Ord. 68-2016, passed 6-13-2016)
TITLE FOUR - Utilities
      
Chap. 1040. Municipal Utilities Generally.
      
Chap. 1048. Water.
      
Chap. 1052. Sewers Generally.
      
Chap. 1056. Sewer Rental Charges.
      
Chap. 1058. Erosion and Sediment Control.
      
Chap. 1060. Comprehensive Stormwater Management.
      
Chap. 1061. Illicit Discharge and Stormwater Pollution Connection Regulation.
      
Chap. 1065. Licensing of Landscape Contractors.
CHAPTER 1040: MUNICIPAL UTILITIES GENERALLY
Editor’s note:
   The Board of Municipal Utilities operates the water and sewer systems
through its Water Department and Sewer Department. The rules, regulations and
rates of the Water Department and the Sewer Department may be obtained, at
cost, at the Municipal Sewer and Water Department Building. Additionally,
consult the Avon Lake Regional Water regulations.
CHAPTER 1048: WATER
Section
1048.01 Sale of property; responsibility for water and sewer bills
1048.99 Penalty
Editor’s note:
   The city furnishes water to neighboring municipalities pursuant to contract.
Copies of the latest relevant legislation and of such contracts may be
obtained, at cost, from the Clerk of Council.
§ 1048.01 SALE OF PROPERTY; RESPONSIBILITY FOR WATER AND SEWER BILLS.
   (a)   Statement of status and acknowledgment of receipt. No person shall
sell, by deed, land contract or otherwise, any interest in any real property
located within the city, which is supplied with water and sewer services of
Avon Lake Regional Water, without first furnishing the purchaser with a
statement from the Department setting forth the current status of the water and
sewer account, of such real property, and, when an escrow account has been
established, without first depositing in such account, prior to delivery of
possession or transfer of title, a statement from the purchaser acknowledging
the receipt of such document and accepting responsibility for all future bills
on both accounts and in accordance with this code of ordinances and the rules
and regulations of the Board of Municipal Utilities.
   (b)   Disbursement of funds by escrow agent. No person acting in the
capacity of an escrow agent in any real property transaction involving the sale
of real property located within the city, which is serviced or supplied with
water and sewer services of the Department, shall disburse any funds unless
division (a) of this section has been complied with.
   (c)   Rights of purchaser. Conviction under any section of this code of
ordinances shall not be a bar to the right of the purchaser of real property to
recover by civil suit, from either the previous owner, the seller, the real
estate agent or the escrow agent, the amount of money due for water and sewer
services supplied by the Department to the previous owner or seller and paid
for by the purchaser.
(Ord. 66-92, passed 4-27-1992; Ord. 25-2014, passed 2-24-2014)
§ 1048.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than $500 or
imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both.
(Ord. 66-92, passed 4-27-1992)
CHAPTER 1052: SEWERS GENERALLY
Section
1052.01 Permit required; application; fee
1052.02 Authorization and registration required
1052.03 Specifications and requirements
1052.04 Materials; construction; inspections
1052.05 Rules and regulations
1052.06 Privies prohibited
1052.07 Titus-Pitts-Hill Drainage Area (Central Avon Lake Drainage Project
(CALDP)); Storm Sewer System Construction Fund
1052.99 Penalty
Editor’s note:
   Copies of all legislation pertinent to
Chapter 1052 may be obtained, at cost, from the Clerk of Council.
§ 1052.01 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEE.
   No building sewer shall be constructed to connect with a public sewer, nor
shall any connection be made to a public sewer within the city, until the
written permission of the Board of Municipal Utilities has been obtained by the
person employed to perform the work. An application for a permit shall be
signed by the owner, agent or lessee of the property for which the connection
is to be made and shall describe the sewer to be connected.
(Ord. 68-59, passed 10-26-1959; Ord. 158-2012, passed 12-17-2012)
§ 1052.02 AUTHORIZATION AND REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   No building sewer shall be constructed or connection made to a public sewer
by any person who has not been authorized and registered to perform such work.
(Ord. 68-59, passed 10-26-1959)
§ 1052.03 SPECIFICATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   The written permission to construct a building sewer or to make a connection
to a public sewer shall specify the permissible use of the building sewer and
connection and such specifications shall be governed by the following
requirements.
   (a)   Sewage, including wastes from water closets, urinals, lavatories,
sinks, bathtubs, showers, laundries, cellar floor drains, garage floor drains,
bars, soda fountains, drinking fountains, stable floor drains and other
objectionable wastes shall be discharged into a sanitary or combined sewer and
in no case into a stormwater sewer.
   (b)   Industrial waste shall not be discharged into a stormwater sewer, but
may be discharged into a sanitary sewer if the waste is of such a character as
not to be detrimental to the sewerage system or to the sewage treatment works.
Where such waste is detrimental to the sewerage system or to the sewage
treatment works, it shall be otherwise disposed of in a satisfactory manner or
so improved in character as not to be detrimental to the sewerage system or
sewage treatment works.
   (c)   Surface water, rain water from roofs, subsoil drainage, building
foundation drainage, cistern overflow, clean water from condensers, waste water
from water motors and elevators and any other clean and unobjectionable waste
water shall be discharged into a stormwater or combined sewer and in no case
into a sanitary sewer.
   (d)   Connection with a cesspool or a privy vault shall not be made into a
sanitary, combined or storm sewer.
   (e)   No person shall discharge into a building sewer or tap a public sewer
for the purpose of discharging into it any waste or drainage water prohibited
by this section. Any existing connection in violation of any of the provisions
of this section shall be abandoned and removed.
(Ord. 68-59, passed 10-26-1959)
§ 1052.04 MATERIALS; CONSTRUCTION; INSPECTIONS.
   The building sewer and connection shall be of materials and workmanship as
specified in Part Fourteen - the Building and Housing Code. The construction
and inspection of the building sewer and connection shall be in accordance with
Part Fourteen - the Building and Housing Code and the rules and regulations of
the Board of Municipal Utilities.
(Ord. 68-59, passed 10-26-1959)
§ 1052.05 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Director of Municipal Utilities and the Board of Municipal Utilities are
hereby authorized and directed to adopt and enforce rules and regulations in
accordance with this chapter for the purpose of providing control of the
installation of sewer connections and inspection thereof. The Director and the
Board shall maintain accurate and complete records of all permits issued for
and inspections made of connections to the public sewers. They shall also
require the abandonment and removal of connections to the public sewers which
violate any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 68-59, passed 10-26-1959)
§ 1052.06 PRIVIES PROHIBITED.
   No owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant of any lot or land located
within the city shall establish, construct, maintain or permit to remain a
privy, cesspool or other receptacle for sewage or excreta, or a connection to a
private sewer, ditch or other outlet, if such lot or land is accessible to a
public sewer constructed and used for the purpose, and if a public water main
or other water supply satisfactory to permit use of plumbing is available. When
such public sewer and water main or other water supply are available or are
hereafter made available, a connection to such public sewer shall be
established and used by the owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant.
(Ord. 69-59, passed 10-26-1959)
§ 1052.07 TITUS-PITTS-HILL DRAINAGE AREA (CENTRAL AVON LAKE DRAINAGE PROJECT
(CALDP)); STORM SEWER SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION FUND.
   (a)   Owners of all unimproved residential real property in the Titus-Pitts-
Hill Drainage Area (Central Avon Lake Drainage Project (CALDP)) shall, upon
development of said property, pay a storm sewer tap-in fee per dwelling unit as
set forth in
Chapter 208 of the Administration Code - the General Fee Schedule. Should there
be more than one dwelling unit per building or lot, said fee shall be charged
for each dwelling unit, up to and including two and one-half units per acre.
   (b)   Owners of all unimproved commercial and industrial real property in
the Titus-Pitts-Hill Drainage Area (Central Avon Lake Drainage Project (CALDP))
shall, upon development of said property, pay a trunk storm sewer capacity fee
as set forth in
Chapter 208 of the Administration Code - the General Fee Schedule.
   (c)   The fees established in divisions (a) and (b) of this section shall be
collected by the Building Inspector, who shall keep accurate records of all
fees so collected. Any determination in regard to the interpretation of this
section shall be made by the City Council.
   (d)   The City Council shall develop its own policy as deemed necessary for
the enforcement of this section and the collection of said fees.
   (e)   The fees established in divisions (a) and (b) of this section are
based upon current construction costs, and, in order that these fees be kept
current, the Avon Lake City Council shall adjust them yearly by multiplying
them by the first Cleveland Construction Cost Index figure published after
January 1, 1996, and every year thereafter, divided by 6014.17, which is the
current Engineering News Record construction cost of Cleveland.
   (f)   The tap-in fee established in division (a) of this section shall apply
to present unimproved real property upon which buildings are constructed after
the effective date of this section (Ordinance 214-96, passed November 25,
1996). It shall also apply to unimproved real property upon which buildings are
currently under construction, but without occupancy permits having been issued
therefor on the effective date of this section. Existing improved real property
shall not be charged such fee.
   (g)   There is hereby established a Titus-Pitts-Hill Storm Sewer
Construction Fund into which all fees collected under this section shall be
deposited, and upon which all interest on said funds shall accrue. Said Fund
shall only be used for construction of the storm sewer from Lake Erie to the
detention basin behind the Avon Lake Service Garage, and as indicated in the
1996 update of the master plan for storm sewers.
   (h)   The fees established in divisions (a) and (b) of this section may be
paid at any time prior to the improvement of such real property, but shall be
paid prior to the purchase of a building permit, and the same is hereby made a
condition of the issuance of an occupancy permit. In those situations, and only
those situations, where unimproved property has buildings under construction on
the effective date of this section (Ordinance 214-96, passed November 25,
1996), the fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit and
shall be made a condition of the issuance thereof.
   (i)   The fees established in divisions (a) and (b) of this section shall
apply to all improvements, regardless of whether such improvements are
connected to a storm sewer or not.
   (j)   (1)   Prior to August 15, 1997, a property owner may request that the
payment of the tap-in fee charge be paid over a period of 25 years, through the
County Auditor’s office, as a lien to be placed upon the property.
      (2)   The lien amount for acreage shall be as set forth in Chapter 208 of
the Administration Code - the General Fee Schedule.
      (3)   If a lien has been placed upon a property, and requested units for
that property exceed the number of units so liened, then the property owners
shall pay for the additional units as stated in Chapter 208 of the
Administration Code - the General Fee Schedule.
(Ord. 214-96, passed 11-25-1996; Ord. 137-97, passed 7-14-1997; Ord. 22-98,
passed 1-26-1998)
Editor’s note:
   The Titus-Pitts-Hill Drainage Area is also known as the Central Avon Lake
Drainage Project (CALDP)
§ 1052.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100
for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each 24 hour
period the violation or noncompliance continues after a period of 30 days
following the original conviction.
(Ord. 94-74, passed 6-10-1974)
CHAPTER 1056: SEWER RENTAL CHARGES
Section
1056.01 Declaration of public utility
1056.02 Rules and regulations; conflicts
1056.03 Declaration of necessity; use of moneys
1056.04 Water Pollution Control and Sewer Fund; investments
1056.05 Sewer System Construction Fund
§ 1056.01 DECLARATION OF PUBLIC UTILITY.
   The Water Pollution Control Center and public sewerage system of the city,
including the present system and future improvements, shall be operated and
administered as a public utility.
(Ord. 175-84, passed 12-26-1984)
§ 1056.02 RULES AND REGULATIONS; CONFLICTS.
   The Water Pollution Control Center and the public sewerage system of the
city shall be operated and administered under rules and regulations established
by the Board of Municipal Utilities. Such rules and regulations shall be for
the collection of user charges, expenditures of revenues and other matters
necessary for the safe, economical, efficient and proper operation of such
facilities. The rules and regulations of the Board shall have the same force
and effect as ordinances of the city, except when in conflict with such
ordinances, the City Charter or the Constitution or laws of the state.
(Ord. 175-84, passed 12-26-1984)
§ 1056.03 DECLARATION OF NECESSITY; USE OF MONEYS.
   It is hereby determined and declared that the collection of sewer service
charges to cover the costs of constructing, expanding, operating, maintaining
and administering the city’s wastewater treatment facilities is necessary and
conducive to the protection of the public health, safety, welfare and
convenience of the city.
(Ord. 175-84, passed 12-26-1984; Ord. 159-2012, passed 12-17-2012)
§ 1056.04 WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AND SEWER FUND; INVESTMENTS.
   (a)   Funds received from the collection of revenue generated by the
schedule of sewer services charges shall be deposited in a like manner as other
municipal funds and shall be accounted for and known as the Water Pollution
Control and Sewer Fund (also known as the Sewer Fund) and shall be held for the
payment of all costs and expenses, including debt, for the operation,
maintenance, replacement, repair, rehabilitation, management and administration
of the Water Pollution Control Center and the public sanitary and combined
sewerage system and appurtenances.
   (b)   The Board of Municipal Utilities shall, as part of the authority
granted in §
1056.02, promulgate rules and regulations that shall provide that the revenue
generated by each increment of the consumption charge noted in Chapter 208 of
the Administration Code - the General Fee Schedule is used for its appropriate
purpose. However, the Board of Municipal Utilities may authorize and recommend
the temporary use of revenue generated by a given increment for purposes noted
in division (a) of this section, provided that provision is made for the timely
replacement of such revenue. The Director of Municipal Utilities shall
recommend adjustments to the consumption charge and/or its increments noted in
Chapter 208 of the Administration Code - the General Fee Schedule.
   (c)   The Board shall have the authority to authorize and recommend the
transfer of revenue collected from the schedule of sewer service charges to
interest earning funds or to otherwise authorize and recommend the investment
of such funds in accordance with appropriate and current procedures being
followed at that time. Interest earned on such funds shall be spent for those
purposes enumerated in division (a) of this section.
(Prior Code, § 1056.05) (Ord. 175-84, passed 12-26-1984)
§ 1056.05 SEWER SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION FUND.
   A capital improvement charge shall be levied at the rate of $0.03 per
thousand gallons billable consumption. In February of each year, an amount
equal to $0.03 for every 1,000 gallons of billable flow shall be transferred to
the Sewer System Construction Fund.
(Prior Code, § 1056.06) (Ord. 147-83, passed 12-26-1983)
CHAPTER 1058: EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
Section
1058.01 Purpose and scope
1058.02 Definitions
1058.03 Disclaimer of liability
1058.04 Conflicts, severability, nuisances and responsibility
1058.05 Development of Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plans
1058.06 Application procedures
1058.07 Compliance with state and federal regulations
1058.08 Stormwater pollution prevention plan
1058.09 Performance standards
1058.10 Abbreviated stormwater pollution prevention plan
1058.11 Drainage ditches and watercourses
1058.12 Fees
1058.13 Enforcement
1058.14 Violations
1058.15 Appeals
1058.99 Penalty
§ 1058.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish technically feasible and
economically reasonable standards to achieve a level of erosion and sediment
control that will minimize damage to property and degradation of water
resources and wetlands, and will promote and maintain the health and safety of
the citizens of Avon Lake and complies with the intent of the Avon Lake
Municipal Stormwater Program Manual.
   (b)   This chapter will:
      (1)   Allow development while minimizing increases in erosion and
sedimentation; and
      (2)   Reduce water quality impacts to receiving water resources and
wetlands that may be caused by new development or redevelopment activities.
   (c)   This chapter applies to all parcels used or being developed, either
wholly or partially, for new or relocated projects involving, sanitary or storm
sewers, waterlines, underground cables or pipelines; subdivisions or larger
common plans of development; industrial, commercial, institutional or
residential projects; redevelopment activities; general clearing; and all other
uses that are not specifically exempted in division (d) of this section.
   (d)   This chapter does not apply to activities regulated by, and in
compliance with, the Ohio Agricultural Sediment Pollution Abatement Rules.
(Ord. 89-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 25-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1058.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABBREVIATED STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (ABBREVIATED SWP3). See
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN.
   ACRE. A measurement of area equaling 43,560 square feet.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Schedule of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices (both
structural and non-structural) to prevent or reduce the pollution of water
resources and wetlands. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating
procedures and practices to control facility and/or construction site runoff,
spillage or leaks; sludge or waste disposal; or drainage from raw material
storage.
   COMMUNITY. Throughout this chapter, this shall refer to Avon Lake, its
designated representatives, boards or commissions.
   CONSTRUCTION ENTRANCE. The permitted points of ingress and egress to
development areas regulated under this chapter.
   DEVELOPMENT AREA. A parcel or contiguous parcels owned by one or more
persons, or operated as one development unit, and used or being developed for
commercial, industrial, residential, institutional purposes or undergoing other
construction or alteration that changes runoff characteristics.
   DISTURBED AREA. An area of land subject to erosion due to the removal of
vegetative cover and/or soil-disturbing activities.
   DRAINAGE.
      (1)   The area of land contributing surface water to a specific point.
      (2)   The removal of excess surface water or groundwater from land by
surface or subsurface drains.
   EROSION. The process by which the land surface is worn away by the action of
wind, water, ice, gravity, or any combination of those forces.
   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL. The control of soil, both mineral and organic,
to minimize the removal of soil from the land surface and to prevent its
transport from a disturbed area by means of wind, water, ice, gravity or any
combination of those forces.
   FINAL STABILIZATION. All soil-disturbing activities at the site have been
completed and a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of at least
80% coverage for the area has been established or equivalent stabilization
measures, such as the use of mulches or geotextiles, have been employed.
   LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT. A professional landscape architect registered in the
State of Ohio.
   LARGER COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE. A contiguous area where multiple
separate and distinct construction activities may be taking place at different
times on different schedules under one plan.
   MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE. The level of pollutant reduction that site
owners of small municipal separate storm sewer systems regulated under 40
C.F.R. parts 9, 122, 123 and 124, referred to as NPDES Stormwater Phase II,
must meet.
   NPDES: NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM. A regulatory program
in the Federal Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., that prohibits the
discharge of pollutants into surface waters of the United States without a
permit.
   PARCEL. A tract of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a use,
building or group of buildings and their accessory uses and buildings as a
unit, together with such open spaces and driveways as are provided and
required. A PARCEL may contain more than one contiguous lot individually
identified by a ‘Permanent Parcel Number’ assigned by the Lorain County
Auditor’s office.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, firm, trust, commission, board, public
or private partnership, joint venture, limited liability company agency,
unincorporated association, municipal corporation, county or state agency, the
federal government, other legal entity, or an agent thereof.
   PHASING. Clearing a parcel of land in distinct sections, with the
stabilization of each section before the clearing of the next.
   PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. A professional engineer registered in the State of
Ohio.
   QUALIFIED INSPECTION PERSONNEL. A person knowledgeable in the principles and
practice of erosion and sediment controls, who possess the skills to assess all
conditions at the construction site that could impact stormwater quality and to
assess the effectiveness of any sediment and erosion control measure selected
to control the quality of stormwater discharges from the construction activity.
   RAINWATER AND LAND DEVELOPMENT. Ohio’s standards for stormwater management,
land development and urban stream protection. The most current edition of these
standards shall be used with this chapter.
   RUNOFF. The portion of rainfall, melted snow or irrigation water that flows
across the ground surface and is eventually conveyed to water resources or
wetlands.
   SEDIMENT. The soils or other surface materials that are transported or
deposited by the action of wind, water, ice, gravity or any combination of
those forces, as a product of erosion.
   SEDIMENTATION. The deposition or settling of sediment.
   SETBACK. A designated transition area around water resources or wetlands
that is left in a natural, usually vegetated, state so as to protect the water
resources or wetlands from runoff pollution. Soil- disturbing activities in
this area are restricted by this chapter.
   SOIL-DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Clearing, grading, excavating, filling or other
alteration of the earth’s surface where natural or human-made ground cover is
destroyed and that may result in, or contribute to, erosion and sediment
pollution.
   STABILIZATION. The use of BMPs, such as seeding and mulching, that reduce or
prevent soil erosion by water, wind, ice, gravity or a combination of those
forces.
   STORMWATER MANAGER. The designated employee of the Public Works Department
authorized by Council to administer the stormwater program for the city in
accordance with the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Program Manual.
   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWP3). The written document that sets
forth the plans and practices to be used to meet the requirements of this
chapter.
   SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, lakes, reservoirs, marshes,
wetlands or other waterways situated wholly or partly within the boundaries of
the state, except those private waters which do not combine or affect a
junction with surface water. Waters defined as sewerage systems, treatment
works or disposal systems in R.C. § 6111.01 are not included.
   UNSTABLE SOILS. A portion of land that is identified by the city as prone to
slipping, sloughing or landslides, or is identified by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture Natural Resource Conservation Service methodology as having low
soil strength.
   WATER RESOURCE. Any public or private body of water including lakes and
ponds, as well as any brook, creek, river or stream having banks, a defined
bed, and a definite direction of flow, either continuously or intermittently
flowing.
   WETLAND. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground
water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life
in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas
(40 C.F.R. part 232, as amended).
(Ord. 89-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 25-2013, passed 3-25-2013; Ord. 43-2014,
passed 4-14-2014)
§ 1058.03 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall not relieve any person
from responsibility for damage to any person otherwise imposed by law. The
provisions of this chapter are promulgated to promote the health, safety and
welfare of the public and are not designed for the benefit of any individual or
for the benefit of any particular parcel of property.
(Ord. 89-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 25-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1058.04 CONFLICTS, SEVERABILITY, NUISANCES AND RESPONSIBILITY.
   (a)   Where this chapter is in conflict with other provisions of law or
ordinance, the most restrictive provisions shall prevail.
   (b)   If any clause, section or provision of this chapter is declared
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the validity
of the remainder shall not be affected thereby.
   (c)   This chapter shall not be construed as authorizing any person to
maintain a private or public nuisance on their property, and compliance with
the provisions of this chapter shall not be a defense in any action to abate
such a nuisance.
   (d)   Failure of the city to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly
conditions or to recommend corrective measures shall not relieve the site owner
from the responsibility for the condition or damage resulting therefrom, and
shall not result in the city, its officers, employees or agents being
responsible for any condition or damage resulting therefrom.
   (e)   In the event any provisions of this chapter conflict with provisions
of Chapter 1060, the more stringent regulations shall prevail.
   (f)   In the event any provision of this chapter concerning the location,
construction, maintenance, repair, grading or use of a detention facility,
nonstructural stormwater management practice, structural stormwater management
practice, riparian area, water resource or wetland is in conflict with a
provision of Chapter 1060 of this code of ordinances, the conflict, to the
extent possible, shall be resolved by the Stormwater Program Manager. The
Stormwater Program Manager shall consider factors in such decision that are
based on permissible provisions that may allow grading, clearing or filling
that may be necessary in conjunction with the construction of said practices as
part of the overall approved SWP3 plans, and not in violation of other state or
federal regulations.
   (g)   In the event a conflict exists between the provisions of this chapter
and the provisions of Chapter 1060 on matters concerning ongoing maintenance,
repair, cleaning and use of an existing detention facility, nonstructural
stormwater management practice, structural stormwater management practice,
riparian area, water resource or wetland, the conflict shall be resolved by the
Stormwater Program Manager. The Stormwater Program Manager shall resolve
conflicts in such a way that require the least disturbance or interference with
the then existing natural elements and features of such practices, yet is
reasonable to enable the maintenance, repair or cleaning to be completed.
(Ord. 89-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 25-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1058.05 DEVELOPMENT OF STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLANS.
   (a)   This chapter requires that a stormwater pollution prevention plan be
developed and implemented for all parcels disturbing one acre or more and on
which any regulated activity of §
1058.01(c) is proposed.
   (b)   The following activities shall require submission of an abbreviated
stormwater pollution prevention plan:
      (1)   New single-family residential construction regardless of parcel
size. If such activities disturb one acre or more, or are part of a larger
common plan of development or sale disturbing one acre or more, an Ohio EPA
Construction Site General Permit and a stormwater pollution prevention plan may
be required;
      (2)   Additions or accessory buildings for single-family residential
construction regardless of parcel size. If such activities disturb one acre or
more, or are part of a larger common plan of development or sale disturbing one
acre or more, an Ohio EPA construction site general permit and a stormwater
pollution prevention plan may be required;
      (3)   All nonresidential construction on parcels of less than one acre;
and
      (4)   General clearing activities not related to construction and
regardless of parcel size. If such activities disturb one acre or more, or are
part of a larger common plan of development or sale disturbing one acre or
more, an Ohio EPA construction site general permit and a stormwater pollution
prevention plan may be required.
   (c)   Activities disturbing one quarter or less of an acre shall not require
submission of a stormwater pollution prevention plan or an abbreviated
stormwater pollution prevention plan, unless required by the Stormwater
Manager. These activities must comply with all other provisions of this
regulation.
(Ord. 89-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 25-2013, passed 3-25-2013; Ord. 43-2014,
passed 4-14-2014)
§ 1058.06 APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Soil-disturbing activities submitting a stormwater pollution
prevention plan. The applicant shall submit two sets of the SWP3 and the
applicable fees to the Public Works Department as follows:
      (1)   For subdivisions. After the approval of the preliminary plans and
with submittal of the improvement plans;
      (2)   For other construction projects. Before issuance of a zoning permit
by the Code Administrator; and
      (3)   For general clearing projects. Prior to issuance of a grading
permit by the Public Works Department. Grading permits are a requirement for
site clearing activities of any kind.
   (b)   Soil-disturbing activities submitting an abbreviated stormwater
pollution prevention plan. The applicant shall submit two sets of the
abbreviated SWP3 and the applicable fees to the Public Works Department as
follows:
      (1)   For single-family home construction. Before issuance of a grading
permit by the Public Works Department/Stormwater Manager;
      (2)   For other construction projects. Before issuance of a zoning permit
by the Code Administrator; and
      (3)   For general clearing projects Prior to issuance of a grading permit
by the Public Works Department/Stormwater Manager. Grading permits are a
requirement for site-clearing activities of any kind.
   (c)   Review. The Stormwater Manager shall review the plans submitted under
divisions (a) or (b) of this section for conformance with this regulation and
approve, or return for revisions with comments and recommendations for
revisions. A plan rejected because of deficiencies shall receive a narrative
report stating specific problems and the procedures for filing a revised plan.
   (d)   Start of soil-disturbing activities. Soil-disturbing activities shall
not begin and zoning permits shall not be issued without an approved SWP3 or
Abbreviated SWP3.
   (e)   Approval of SWP3 for individual sublots. SWP3 for individual sublots
in a subdivision will not be approved unless the larger common plan of
development or sale containing the sublot is in compliance with this chapter.
   (f)   Period of validity. Approvals issued in accordance with this chapter
shall remain valid for one year from the date of approval.
(Ord. 89-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 25-2013, passed 3-25-2013; Ord. 43-2014,
passed 4-14-2014)
§ 1058.07 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL REGULATIONS.
   Approvals issued in accordance with this chapter do not relieve the
applicant of responsibility for obtaining all other necessary permits and/or
approvals from the Ohio EPA, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and other
federal, state and/or county agencies. If requirements vary, the most
restrictive requirement shall prevail. These permits may include, but are not
limited to, those listed below. Additionally, the applicant shall be
responsible for submitting a plan that is compliant with the following state
and federal regulations:
   (a)   Ohio EPA NPDES permits authorizing stormwater discharges associated
with construction activity or the most current version thereof. Applicant shall
provide a copy of the approved EPA notice of intent (NOI);
   (b)   Section 401 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1341. The applicant
shall provide, if applicable, details relating to development limitations to be
compliant with the Ohio EPA water quality certification;
   (c)   Ohio EPA isolated wetland permit. The applicant shall provide, if
applicable, details relating to development limitations to be compliant with
the Ohio EPA isolated wetland permit requirements; and
   (d)   Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. The applicant
shall provide, if applicable, details relating to development limitations to be
compliant with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers individual permit requirements.
(Ord. 89-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 25-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1058.08 STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN.
   (a)   In order to control sediment pollution of water resources and
wetlands, the applicant shall submit an SWP3 in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
   (b)   The SWP3 shall be certified by a professional engineer, a registered
surveyor, certified professional erosion and sediment control specialist or a
registered landscape architect. Plans that require drainage calculations, pipe
sizing and detention calculations must be stamped by a professional engineer.
   (c)   The SWP3 shall incorporate measures as recommended by the most current
edition of Rainwater and Land Development as published by the Ohio Department
of Natural Resources and shall include the following information:
      (1)   Site description. The SWP3 shall provide:
         A.   A description of the nature and type of the construction activity
(e.g., residential, shopping mall, highway and the like);
         B.   Total area of the site and the area of the site that is expected
to be disturbed (i.e., grubbing, clearing, excavation, filling or grading,
including off-site borrow areas);
         C.   An estimate of the impervious area and percent of imperviousness
created by the soil- disturbing activity;
         D.   Existing data describing the soil and, if available, the quality
of any known pollutant discharge from the site such as that which may result
from previous contamination caused by prior land uses;
         E.   A description of prior land uses at the site;
         F.   An implementation schedule which describes the sequence of major
soil-disturbing operations (i.e., grubbing, excavating, grading, utilities and
infrastructure installation) and the implementation of erosion and sediment
controls to be employed during each operation of the sequence;
         G.   The location and name of the immediate receiving stream or
surface water(s) and the first subsequent receiving water(s);
         H.   The aerial (plan view) extent and description of wetlands or
other special aquatic sites at or near the site which will be disturbed or
which will receive discharges from disturbed areas of the project;
         I.   For subdivided developments where the SWP3 does not call for a
centralized sediment control capable of controlling multiple individual lots, a
detail drawing of a typical individual lot showing standard individual lot
erosion and sediment control practices; and
         J.   Site map showing:
            1.   Limits of soil-disturbing activity of the site, including off-
site spoil and borrow areas, if applicable. Designated off-site spoil and
borrow areas within the limits or outside the limits of Avon Lake shall also be
provided.
            2.   Soils types should be depicted for all areas of the site,
including locations of unstable or highly erodible soils.
            3.   Existing and proposed one-foot contours. This must include a
delineation of drainage watersheds expected during and after major grading
activities as well as the size of each drainage watershed in acres.
            4.   Surface water locations including springs, wetlands, streams,
lakes, water wells and the like, on or within 200 feet of the site, including
the boundaries of wetlands or stream channels and named receiving water(s) the
applicant intends to fill or relocate for which the applicant is seeking
approval from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and/or Ohio EPA;
            5.   Existing and planned locations of buildings, roads, parking
facilities and utilities;
            6.   The location of all erosion and sediment control practices,
including the location of areas likely to require temporary stabilization
during the course of site development;
            7.   Sediment ponds, including their sediment settling volume and
contributing drainage area;
            8.   Areas designated for the storage or disposal of solid,
sanitary and toxic wastes, including dumpster areas, areas designated for
cement truck washout, and vehicle fueling;
            9.   The location of designated stoned construction entrances where
the vehicles will ingress and egress the construction site; and
            10.   The location of any in-stream activities including stream
crossings.
      (2)   A soils engineering report. The Public Works Department Stormwater
Manager may require the SWTS to include a soils engineering report based upon
his or her determination that the conditions of the soils are unknown or
unclear to the extent that additional information is required to protect
against erosion or other hazards. This report shall be based on adequate and
necessary test borings, and shall contain all the information listed below.
Recommendations included in the report and approved by the Public Works
Department shall be incorporated in the grading plans and/or other
specifications for site development.
         A.   Data regarding the nature, distribution, strength and erodibility
of existing soils;
         B.   If applicable, data regarding the nature, distribution, strength,
and erodibility of the soil to be placed on the site;
         C.   Conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures;
         D.   Conclusions and recommended designs for interim soil
stabilization devices and measures, and for permanent soil stabilization after
construction is completed;
         E.   Design criteria for corrective measures, when necessary; and
         F.   Opinions and recommendations covering the stability of the site.
(Ord. 89-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 25-2013, passed 3-25-2013; Ord. 43-2014,
passed 4-14-2014)
§ 1058.09 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   The SWP3 must contain a description of the controls appropriate for each
construction operation and the applicant must implement such controls. The SWP3
must clearly describe for each major construction activity the appropriate
control measures; the general sequence during the construction process under
which the measures will be implemented; and the contractor responsible for
implementation (e.g., contractor A will clear land and install perimeter
controls, and contractor B will maintain perimeter controls until final
stabilization). The SWP3 shall identify all subcontractors engaged in
activities that could impact stormwater runoff. The SWP3 shall contain
signatures from all of the identified subcontractors indicating that they have
been informed and understand their roles and responsibilities in complying with
the SWP3. The controls shall include the following minimum components.
   (a)   Non-structural preservation measures. The SWP3 must make use of
practices that preserve the existing natural condition to the maximum extent
practicable. Such practices may include preserving riparian areas, preserving
existing vegetation and vegetative buffer strips, phasing of construction
operations in order to minimize the amount of disturbed land at any one time,
and designation of tree preservation areas or other protective clearing or
grubbing practices.
   (b)   Erosion control practices. The SWP3 must make use of erosion controls
that are capable of providing cover over disturbed soils. A description of
control practices designed to restabilize disturbed areas after grading or
construction shall be included in the SWP3. The SWP3 must provide
specifications for stabilization of all disturbed areas of the site and provide
guidance as to which method of stabilization will be employed for any time of
the year. Such practices may include: temporary seeding, permanent seeding,
mulching, matting, sod stabilization, vegetative buffer strips, phasing of
construction operations, the use of construction entrances and the use of
alternative ground cover. Erosion control practices must meet the following
requirements:
      (1)   Stabilization. Disturbed areas must be stabilized as specified in
Tables 1 and 2 below.
 
   Table 1: Permanent Stabilization
Area requiring permanent stabilization  Time frame to apply erosion controls
Any area that will lie dormant for one  Within 7 calendar days of the most
year or more                            recent disturbance
Any area within 50 feet of a stream and Within 2 calendar days of reaching
at final grade                          final grade
Any area at final grade                 Within 7 calendar days of reaching
                                        final grade within that area
 
 
   Table 2: Tempory Stabilization
Area requiring temporary stabilization   Time frame to apply erosion controls
                                         Within 2 calendar days of the most
Any disturbed area within 50 feet of a   recent disturbance if that area will
stream and not at final grade            remain idle for more than 21 calendar
                                         days
For all construction activities, any
disturbed area, including soil           Within 7 calendar days of the most
stockpiles that will be dormant for more recent disturbance within the area
than 21 days but less than one year, and
not within 50 feet of a stream
Disturbed areas that will be idle over   Prior to November 1
winter
Note:   Where vegetative stabilization techniques may cause structural
instability or are otherwise unobtainable, alternative stabilization
techniques must be employed. These techniques may include mulching or erosion
matting.
 
      (2)   Permanent stabilization of conveyance channels. Applicants shall
undertake special measures to stabilize channels and outfalls and prevent
erosive flows. Measures may include seeding, dormant seeding, mulching, erosion
control matting, sodding, riprap, natural channel design with bioengineering
techniques, or rock check dams, all as defined in the most recent edition of
Rainwater and Land Development or the Field Office Technical Guide available at
www.nrcs.usda.gov/resources/guides-and-instructions/field-office-technical-
guides.
   (c)   Runoff control practices. The SWP3 shall incorporate measures that
control the flow of runoff from disturbed areas so as to prevent erosion. Such
practices may include rock check dams, pipe slope drains, diversions to direct
flow away from exposed soils and protective grading practices. These practices
shall divert runoff away from disturbed areas and steep slopes where
practicable.
   (d)   Sediment control practices. The SWP3 shall include a description of,
and detailed drawings for, all structural practices that shall store runoff,
allowing sediments to settle and/or divert flows away from exposed soils or
otherwise limit runoff from exposed areas. Structural practices shall be used
to control erosion and trap sediment from a site remaining disturbed for more
than 14 calendar days. Such practices may include, among others: sediment
settling ponds, silt fences, storm drain inlet protection, and earth diversion
dikes or channels which direct runoff to a sediment settling pond. All sediment
control practices must be capable of ponding runoff in order to be considered
functional. Earth diversion dikes or channels alone are not considered a
sediment control practice unless used in conjunction with a sediment settling
pond. Sediment control practices must meet the following requirements.
      (1)   Timing. Sediment control structures shall be functional throughout
the course of earth- disturbing activity. Sediment basins and perimeter
sediment barriers shall be implemented prior to grading and within seven
calendar days from the start of grubbing. They shall continue to function until
the up slope development area is re-stabilized. As construction progresses and
the topography are altered, appropriate controls must be constructed or
existing controls altered to address the changing drainage patterns.
      (2)   Sediment settling ponds.
         A.   A sediment settling pond, or equivalent best management practice
upon approval from the Stormwater Manager, is required for any one of the
following conditions, as determined in Table 3:
            1.   Concentrated stormwater runoff;
            2.   Runoff from drainage areas that exceeds the design capacity of
silt fence or inlet protection; and
            3.   Ten acres of disturbed land.
         B.   The sediment-settling pond shall provide both a sediment storage
zone and a dewatering zone. The volume of the dewatering zone shall be at least
67 cubic yards of storage per acre of total contributing drainage area and have
a minimum of 48-hour drain time for sediment basins serving a drainage area
over five acres. The volume of the sediment storage zone shall be calculated by
one of the following methods.
            1.   The volume of the sediment storage zone shall be 1,000 ft.3
per disturbed acre within the watershed of the basin.
            2.   The volume of the sediment storage zone shall be the volume
necessary to store the sediment as calculated with a generally accepted erosion
prediction model. When determining the total contributing drainage area, off-
site areas and areas which remain undisturbed by construction activity must be
included unless runoff from these areas is diverted away from the sediment
settling pond and is not commingled with sediment-laden runoff. The depth of
the dewatering zone must be less than or equal to five feet. The configuration
between the inlets and the outlet of the basin must provide at least two units
of length for each one unit of width (> 2:1 length: width ratio), however a
length to width ration of 4:1 is recommended. Sediment must be removed from the
sediment-settling pond when the design capacity has been reduced by 40%. This
limit is typically reached when sediment occupies one- half of the basin depth.
When designing sediment settling ponds, the applicant must consider public
safety, especially as it relates to children, as a design factor for the
sediment basin and alternative sediment controls must be used where site
limitations would preclude a safe design. The use of a combination of sediment
and erosion control measures in order to achieve maximum pollutant removal is
encouraged.
      (3)   Silt fence and diversions. Sheet flow runoff from denuded areas
shall be intercepted by silt fence or diversions to protect adjacent
properties, water resources, and wetlands from sediment transported via sheet
flow. Where intended to provide sediment control, silt fence shall be placed on
a level contour and shall be capable of temporarily ponding runoff. The
relationship between the maximum drainage area to silt fence for a particular
slope range is shown in Table 3 below. Stormwater diversion practices shall be
used to keep runoff away from disturbed areas and steep slopes. Such devices,
which include swales, dikes or berms, may receive stormwater runoff from areas
up to ten acres. Placing silt fence in parallel does not extend the permissible
drainage area to the silt fence.
 
   Table 3: Maximum Drainage Area to Silt Fence
Maximum Drainage Area (acres) to Range of Slope for a Drainage Area (%)
100 Linear Feet of Silt Fence
0.5                              <2%
0.25                             > 2% but < 20%
0.125                            > 20% but < 50%
 
      (4)   Inlet protection. Erosion and sediment control practices, such as
boxed inlet protection, shall be installed to minimize sediment-laden water
entering active storm drain systems. All inlets receiving runoff from drainage
areas of one or more acres will require a sediment settling pond. Straw or hay
bales are not acceptable forms of inlet protection.
      (5)   Off-site tracking of sediment and dust control. Best management
practices must be implemented to ensure sediment is not tracked off-site and
that dust is controlled. These best management practices must include, but are
not limited to, the following:
         A.   Construction entrances shall be built and shall serve as the only
permitted points of ingress and egress to the development area. These entrances
shall be built of a stabilized pad of aggregate stone or recycled concrete or
cement sized greater than two inches in diameter, placed over a geotextile
fabric, and constructed in conformance with specifications in the most recent
edition of the Rainwater and Land Development Manual.
         B.   Streets directly adjacent to construction entrances and receiving
traffic from the development area shall be cleaned daily to remove sediment
tracked off-site. If applicable, the catch basins on these streets nearest to
the construction entrances shall also be cleaned weekly.
   Based on site conditions, the Stormwater Manager may require additional best
management practices to control off-site tracking and dust. These additional
BMPs may include:
         C.   Silt fence or construction fence installed around the perimeter
of the development area to ensure that all vehicle traffic adheres to
designated construction entrances.
         D.   Designated wheel-washing areas. Wash water from these areas must
be directed to a designated sediment trap, the sediment-settling pond, or to a
sump pump for dewatering in conformance with division (g) of this section.
         E.   Applicants shall take all necessary measures to comply with
applicable regulations regarding fugitive dust emissions, including obtaining
necessary permits for such emissions. The Stormwater Manager may require dust
controls including the use of water trucks to wet disturbed areas, tarping
stockpiles, temporary stabilization of disturbed areas, and regulation of the
speed of vehicles on the site.
      (6)   Surface waters of the state protection. Construction vehicles shall
avoid water resources and wetlands. If the applicant is permitted to disturb
areas within 50 feet of a water resource or wetland, the following conditions
shall be addressed in the SWP3:
         A.   All BMPs and stream crossings shall be designed as specified in
the most recent edition of the Rainwater and Land Development Manual.
         B.   Structural practices shall be designated and implemented on site
to protect water resources or wetlands from the impacts of sediment runoff.
         C.   No structural sediment controls (e.g., the installation of silt
fence or sediment settling pond in-stream) shall be used in a water resource or
wetland.
         D.   Where stream crossings for roads or utilities are necessary and
permitted, the project shall be designed such that the number of stream
crossings and the width of the disturbance are minimized.
         E.   Temporary stream crossings shall be constructed if water
resources or wetlands will be crossed by construction vehicles during
construction.
         F.   Construction of bridges, culverts or sediment control structures
shall not place soil, debris or other particulate material into or close to the
water resources or wetlands in such a manner that it may slough, slip or erode.
      (7)   Modifying controls. If periodic inspections or other information
indicates a control has been used inappropriately or incorrectly, the applicant
shall replace or modify the control for site conditions.
   (e)   Non-sediment pollutant controls. No solid or liquid waste, including
building materials, shall be discharged in stormwater runoff. The applicant
must implement site best management practices to prevent toxic materials,
hazardous materials or other debris from entering water resources or wetlands.
These practices shall include but are not limited to the following:
      (1)   Waste materials. A covered dumpster shall be made available for the
proper disposal of garbage, plaster, drywall, grout, gypsum and other waste
materials;
      (2)   Concrete truck wash out. The washing of concrete material into a
street, catch basin or other public facility or natural resource is prohibited.
A designated area for concrete wash out shall be made available;
      (3)   Fuel/liquid tank storage. All fuel/liquid tanks and drums shall be
stored in a marked storage area. A dike shall be constructed around this
storage area with a minimum capacity equal to 110% of the volume of all
containers in the storage area;
      (4)   Toxic or hazardous waste disposal. Any toxic or hazardous waste
shall be disposed of properly; and
      (5)   Contaminated soils disposal and runoff. Contaminated soils from
redevelopment sites shall be disposed of properly. Runoff from contaminated
soils shall not be discharged from the site. Proper permits shall be obtained
for development projects on solid waste landfill sites or redevelopment sites.
   (f)   Compliance with other requirements. The SWP3 shall be consistent with
applicable state and/or local waste disposal, sanitary sewer or septic system
regulations, including provisions prohibiting waste disposal by open burning,
and shall provide for the proper disposal of contaminated soils located within
the development area.
   (g)   Trench and ground water control. There shall be no sediment-laden or
turbid discharges to water resources or wetlands resulting from dewatering
activities. If trench or ground water contains sediment, it must pass through a
sediment-settling pond or other equally effective sediment control device,
prior to being discharged from the construction site. Alternatively, sediment
may be removed by settling in place or by dewatering into a sump pit, filter
bag or comparable practice. Ground water dewatering which does not contain
sediment or other pollutants is not required to be treated prior to discharge.
However, care must be taken when discharging ground water to ensure that it
does not become pollutant-laden by traversing over disturbed soils or other
pollutant sources.
   (h)   Internal inspections. All controls on the site shall be inspected at
least once every seven calendar days and within 24 hours after any storm event
greater than one-half inch of rain per 24-hour period. The inspection frequency
may be reduced to at least once every month if the entire site is temporarily
stabilized or runoff is unlikely due to weather conditions (e.g., site is
covered with snow, ice, or the ground is frozen). A waiver of inspection
requirements is available until one month before thawing conditions are
expected to result in a discharge if prior written approval has been attained
from the Stormwater Manager and all of the following conditions are met.
      (1)   The project is located in an area where frozen conditions are
anticipated to continue for extended periods of time (i.e., more than one
month).
      (2)   Land-disturbance activities have been suspended, and temporary
stabilization is achieved.
      (3)   The beginning date and ending dates of the waiver period are
documented in the SWP3.
      (4)   The applicant shall assign qualified inspection personnel to
conduct these inspections to ensure that the control practices are functional
and to evaluate whether the SWP3 is adequate, or whether additional control
measures are required. Qualified inspection personnel are individuals with
knowledge and experience in the installation and maintenance of sediment and
erosion controls. These inspections shall meet the following requirements.
         A.   Disturbed areas and areas used for storage of materials that are
exposed to precipitation shall be inspected for evidence of or the potential
for, pollutants entering the drainage system.
         B.   Erosion and sediment control measures identified in the SWP3
shall be observed to ensure that they are operating correctly. The applicant
shall utilize an inspection form provided by the city or an alternate form
acceptable to the Stormwater Manager. The inspection form shall include:
            1.   The inspection date;
            2.   Names, titles and qualifications of personnel making the
inspection;
            3.   Weather information for the period since the last inspection,
including a best estimate of the beginning of each storm event, duration of
each storm event and approximate amount of rainfall for each storm event in
inches, and whether any discharges occurred;
            4.   Weather information and a description of any discharges
occurring at the time of inspection;
            5.   Locations of:
               a.   Discharges of sediment or other pollutants from site;
               b.   BMPs that need to be maintained;
               c.   BMPs that failed to operate as designed or proved
inadequate for a particular location; and
               d.   Where additional BMPs are needed that did not exist at the
time of inspection.
            6.   Corrective action required including any necessary changes to
the SWP3 and implementation dates.
         C.   Discharge locations shall be inspected to determine whether
erosion and sediment control measures are effective in preventing significant
impacts to the receiving water resource or wetlands.
         D.   Locations where vehicles enter or exit the site shall be
inspected for evidence of off-site vehicle tracking.
         E.   The applicant shall maintain for three years following final
stabilization the results of these inspections, the names and qualifications of
personnel making the inspections, the dates of inspections, major observations
relating to the implementation of the SWP3, a certification as to whether the
facility is in determined by these inspections.
   (i)   Maintenance. The SWP3 shall be designed to minimize maintenance
requirements. All control practices shall be maintained and repaired as needed
to ensure continued performance of their intended function until final
stabilization. All sediment control practices must be maintained in a
functional condition until all up slope areas they control reach final
stabilization. The applicant shall provide a description of maintenance
procedures needed to ensure the continued performance of control practices and
shall ensure a responsible party and adequate funding to conduct this
maintenance, all as determined by the Stormwater Manager. The maintenance plan
shall also detail the responsible persons for each measure installed along with
contact information. The maintenance plan shall require approval by the
Stormwater Manager.
      When inspections reveal the need for repair, replacement or installation
of erosion and sediment control BMPs, the following procedures shall be
followed.
      (1)   When practices require repair or maintenance. If an internal
inspection reveals that a control practice is in need of repair or maintenance,
with the exception of a sediment-settling pond, it must be repaired or
maintained within three calendar days of the inspection. Sediment settling
ponds must be repaired or maintained within ten calendar days of the
inspection.
      (2)   When practices fail to provide their intended function. If an
internal inspection reveals that a control practice fails to perform its
intended function as detailed in the SWP3 and that another, more appropriate
control practice is required, the SWP3 must be amended and the new control
practice must be installed within ten calendar days of the inspection.
      (3)   When practices depicted on the SWP3 are not installed. If an
internal inspection reveals that a control practice has not been implemented in
accordance with the schedule, the control practice must be implemented within
ten calendar days from the date of the inspection. If the internal inspection
reveals that the planned control practice is not needed, the record must
contain a statement of explanation as to why the control practice is not
needed.
   (j)   Final stabilization. Final stabilization shall be determined by the
Stormwater Manager. Once a definable area has achieved final stabilization, the
applicant may note this on the SWP3 and no further inspection requirement
applies to that portion of the site.
(Ord. 89-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 25-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1058.10 ABBREVIATED STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN.
   (a)   Submission. In order to control sediment pollution of water resources
and wetlands, the applicant shall submit an Abbreviated SWP3 in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter.
   (b)   Certified. The Abbreviated SWP3 shall be certified by a professional
engineer, a registered surveyor, certified professional erosion and sediment
control specialist or a registered landscape architect.
   (c)   Contents. The Abbreviated SWP3 shall include a minimum of the
following BMPs. The Stormwater Manager may require other BMPs as site
conditions warrant.
      (1)   Construction entrances. Construction entrances shall be built and
shall serve as the only permitted points of ingress and egress to the
development area. These entrances shall be built of a stabilized pad of
aggregate stone or recycled concrete or cement sized greater than two inches in
diameter, placed over a geotextile fabric, and constructed in conformance with
specifications in the most recent edition of the Rainwater and Land Development
Manual.
      (2)   Concrete truck wash out. The washing of concrete material into a
street, catch basin or other public facility or natural resource is prohibited.
A designated area for concrete wash out shall be made available.
      (3)   Street sweeping. Streets directly adjacent to construction
entrances and receiving traffic from the development area shall be cleaned
daily to remove sediment tracked off-site. If applicable, the catch basins on
these streets nearest to the construction entrances shall be cleaned weekly.
      (4)   Stabilization. The development area shall be stabilized as detailed
in Table 4.
 
Table 4: Stabilization
Area requiring stabilization            Time frame to apply erosion controls
                                        Within 2 calendar days of the most
Any disturbed area within 50 feet of a  recent disturbance if that area will
stream and not at final grade           remain idle for more than 21 calendar
                                        days
For all construction activities, any
disturbed area, including soil
stockpiles, that will be dormant for    Within 7 calendar days of the most
more than 7 calendar days but less than recent disturbance within the area
one year, and not within 50 feet of a
stream
Disturbed areas that will be idle over  Prior to November 1
winter
Note:   Where vegetative stabilization techniques may cause structural
instability or are otherwise unobtainable, alternative stabilization
techniques must be employed. These techniques may include mulching or erosion
matting.
 
      (5)   Inlet protection. Erosion and sediment control practices, such as
boxed inlet protection, shall be installed to minimize sediment-laden water
entering active storm drain systems. Straw or hay bales are not acceptable
forms of inlet protection.
      (6)   Internal inspection and maintenance. All controls on the
development area shall be inspected at least once every seven calendar days and
within 24 hours after any storm event greater than one-half inch of rain per
24-hour period. Maintenance shall occur as detailed below.
         A.   When practices require repair or maintenance. If the internal
inspection reveals that a control practice is in need of repair or maintenance,
with the exception of a sediment- settling pond, it must be repaired or
maintained within three calendar days of the inspection. Sediment settling
ponds must be repaired or maintained within ten calendar days of the
inspection.
         B.   When practices fail to provide their intended function. If the
internal inspection reveals that a control practice fails to perform its
intended function and that another, more appropriate control practice is
required, the Abbreviated SWP3 must be amended and the new control practice
must be installed within ten calendar days of the inspection.
         C.   When practices depicted on the Abbreviated SWP3 are not
installed. If the internal inspection reveals that a control practice has not
been implemented in accordance with the schedule, the control practice must be
implemented within ten calendar days from the date of the inspection. If the
inspection reveals that the planned control practice is not needed, the record
must contain a statement of explanation as to why the control practice is not
needed.
      (7)   Final stabilization. Final stabilization shall be determined by the
Stormwater Manager.
(Ord. 89-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 25-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1058.11 DRAINAGE DITCHES AND WATERCOURSES.
   (a)   Riparian setbacks. For the purposes of planning, RIPARIAN SETBACKS are
defined as land adjacent to any creek, ditch or streams of the state having a
defined bed and bank that, if appropriately sized, helps to stabilize stream
banks, limit erosion, reduce flood size flows and/or filter and settle out
runoff pollutants, or performs other functions consistent with the purposes of
this chapter. Within the city, along streams of the state, “riparian setbacks”
are specifically defined as the land within 50 feet from top of bank of any
major ditch, or stream of the state having a defined bed and bank. Within that
50 feet are two zones defined as follows.
      (1)   Zone 1 - This is the area defined as the first 20 feet from top of
bank where there is no construction and no disturbance authorized.
      (2)   Zone 2 - This is the area defined as 20 feet from top of bank to 50
feet from top of bank where no permanent structures may be built and light
grading can occur. It lies adjacent to Zone 1.
   (b)   Ditches.
      (1)   Major ditch (gable ditch, powdermaker ditch and heider ditch as
designated on the stormwater master plan) - The land within the first 25 feet
from top of bank or as designated by the Stormwater Program Manager, where the
zones are as follows.
         A.   Zone 1 - This is the area defined as the first ten feet from top
of bank where there is no construction and no disturbance is authorized.
         B.   Zone 2 - This is the area defined as the area starting at ten
feet from top of bank and ending 25 feet from top of bank where no permanent
structures may be built and only light grading is permitted with approval. It
lies adjacent to Zone 1.
      (2)   Minor ditch (tributary to the major ditched identified above) - The
land within the first 15 feet from top of bank or as designated by the
Stormwater Program Manager, where the zones are as follows.
         A.   Zone 1 - This is the area defined as the first ten feet from top
of bank where there is no construction and no disturbance authorized.
         B.   Zone 2 - This is the area defined as the area starting at ten
feet from top of bank and ending 15 feet from top of bank where no permanent
structures may be built and only light grading is permitted with approval. It
lies adjacent to Zone 1.
   (c)   Swales. There are no riparian zones for swales. It is recommended to
keep a minimum height of grass within a swale to be four inches.
   (d)   Ponds and other BMP (best management practices). The land within the
first ten feet from the top of bank or as designated by the Stormwater Program
Manager.
   (e)   Zone maintenance.
      (1)   Zone 1 - it would be optimal for Zone 1 to be completely natural,
but in areas adjacent to residential properties, the minimum height of the
grass shall be four inches. The Stormwater Program Manager reserves the right
to review the specific maintenance requirements within the designated Zone 1
areas. Designated maintenance requirements for each site shall be made a part
of the covenants and restrictions for each project as approved by the
Stormwater Program Manager.
      (2)   Zone 2 - Can be maintained per other City Property Maintenance Code
requirements.
   (f)   Pre-existing site conditions.
      (1)   If a site does not comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter prior to the passage of this chapter, it shall not be a violation of
this chapter to maintain the site in its current condition. However:
         A.   If the existing structures/obstructions that currently cause the
property to be in noncompliance are razed, then the site shall be required to
conform to the provisions of this chapter with future improvements to the
property.
         B.   No sites shall be exempt from maintaining the setbacks that were
established by the final plat that was recorded at the time of development.
Riparian setbacks established at the time of development shall govern.
         C.   Commercial and residential sites where ponds or other stormwater
control BMPs were constructed must be maintained by the current owner. The
appropriate ponds and BMPs shall be maintained in all perpetuity by the
property owner/HOA as they were intended for the purpose of the original
design. Owners/HOAs that fail to maintain said BMPs shall be in violation of
this code.
      (2)   Any re-development of an existing site shall require the new
improvements to meet the requirements of Chapters 1058 and 1060 for
improvements to the preexisting BMPs installed at said site.
(Ord. 89-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 25-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1058.12 FEES.
   The stormwater pollution prevention plan and abbreviated stormwater
pollution plan review, filing, and inspection fee is part of a complete
submittal and is required to be submitted to the Public Works Department before
the review process begins.
(Ord. 89-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 25-2013, passed 3-25-2013; Ord. 43-2014,
passed 4-14-2014)
§ 1058.13 ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   All development areas may be subject to external inspections by the
city to ensure compliance with the approved SWP3 or Abbreviated SWP3.
   (b)   After each external inspection, the city shall prepare and distribute
a status report to the applicant.
   (c)   If an external inspection determines that operations are being
conducted in violation of the approved SWP3 or Abbreviated SWP3 the Stormwater
Program Manager may take necessary action as detailed in §
1058.14 of this chapter.
(Ord. 89-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 25-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1058.14 VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   No person shall violate or cause or knowingly permit to be violated
any of the provisions of this regulation, or fail to comply with any of such
provisions or with any lawful requirements of any public authority made
pursuant to this regulation, or knowingly use or cause or permit the use of any
lands in violation of this regulation or in violation of any permit granted
under this chapter.
   (b)   Upon notice, the Stormwater Program Manager and/or designee may
suspend any active soil-disturbing activity for a period not to exceed 90
calendar days, and may require immediate erosion and sediment control measures
whenever he or she determines that such activity is not meeting the intent of
this regulation. Such notice shall be in writing, shall be given to the
applicant, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. In
instances, however, where the Stormwater Manager and/or designee finds that
immediate action is necessary for public safety or the public interest, he or
she may require that work be stopped upon verbal order pending issuance of the
written notice.
   (c)   In cases where a violation notice has been issued for a site, the
owner/agent shall be granted a reasonable amount of time, not to exceed five
calendar days, to respond in writing to the violations and provide a timeline
to complete the necessary corrections. The Stormwater Program Manager shall
review and approve the appropriate timelines as he or she feels is appropriate
for the violations under review.
   (d)   Violations of the requirements set forth in the approved stormwater
pollution prevention plan or abbreviated stormwater pollution prevention plan
is considered an illicit discharge and shall be subject to the fines and
penalties set forth in accordance with Chapter 1061 of this code of ordinances.
   (e)   Sites that are in violation with the requirements of this chapter, as
determined by the Stormwater Program Manager, shall be required to take
appropriate actions to correct the violations. Sites that do not comply within
a reasonable amount of time, as determined by the Stormwater Program Manager,
shall be subject to appropriate actions such as withholding of inspections
including building inspections or underground utility site inspections, stop
work orders, cease and desist orders, and final inspections for occupancy
permits or plat approval. Sites subject to such actions cannot resume work
until all violations are corrected to the satisfaction of the Stormwater
Program Manager and such restrictions are suspended in writing. The Stormwater
Program Manager shall herein be granted the right to permit portions of the
site work to resume in cases where partial corrective actions have been
corrected and the remaining actions have been agreed to in a written timeline
agree to by the owner/contractor.
   Responsible parties that object to such actions can appeal to such
determination in accordance with §
1058.15 herein.
   (f)   In the event that the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of
Chapter 1060 of this code of ordinances or the provisions of an approved SWP3
plan the more restrictive provisions shall prevail. Any activities or actions
taken in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1060 or through an approved
SWP3 plan shall not constitute a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 89-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 25-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1058.15 APPEALS.
   Any person aggrieved by any order, requirement, determination, or any other
action or inaction by the city in relation to this regulation may appeal to the
court of common pleas. Such an appeal shall be made in conformity with the
provisions set forth in the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Program Manual
maintained by the Stormwater Manager. Written notice of appeal shall be served
on the Stormwater Manager and a copy shall be provided to the Law Director.
(Ord. 89-2012, passed 6-25-2012)
§ 1058.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Any person, firm, entity or corporation, including but not limited to,
the owner of the property, his or her agents and assigns, occupant, property
manager, and any contractor or subcontractor who violates or fails to comply
with any provision of this chapter shall be notified in accordance with §
1058.14. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a known and identified violation or noncompliance occurs or continues. If
the person, firm, entity or corporation fails to make the necessary corrections
within five calendar days after written notice, they may be fined up to $200
for each offense per day.
   (b)   The imposition of any other penalties provided herein shall not
preclude the city instituting an appropriate action or proceeding in a court of
proper jurisdiction to prevent an unlawful development, or to restrain,
correct, or abate a violation, or to require compliance with the provisions of
this chapter or other applicable laws, ordinances, rules, or regulations, or
the orders of the city.
   (c)   The penalties and fines set forth in division (a) of this section, may
be levied in situations where the Stormwater Program Manager has determined the
responsible party has failed to take corrective actions to resolve the
violations. Situations such as adverse weather conditions including rain or
freezing weather, continuance of other construction activities on site, and
failure to abide by a stop work order issued against the site shall be taken
into account by the city before enacting fines.
   (d)   In cases where the Stormwater Program Manager has determined it
necessary to levy fines, documentation shall be provided to the offending party
that shows that the original notice has not been appropriately been corrected
in a timely manner, and list the appropriate violations of §§
1058.14 and
1060.16. In special cases where corrective actions have been started but not to
the acceptable practices of the Stormwater Program Manager, additional time may
be granted before penalties are levied.
(Ord. 89-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 25-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
CHAPTER 1060: COMPREHENSIVE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section
1060.01 Purpose and scope
1060.02 Definitions
1060.03 Disclaimer of liability
1060.04 Conflicts, severability, nuisances and responsibility
1060.05 Development of Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plans
1060.06 Application procedures
1060.07 Compliance with state and federal regulations
1060.08 Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plans
1060.09 Performance standards
1060.10 Alternative actions
1060.11 Easements
1060.12 Maintenance and final inspection approval
1060.13 On-going inspections
1060.14 Fees
1060.15 Installation of water quality best management practices
1060.16 Violations
1060.17 Appeals
1060.99 Penalty
Editor’s note:
   Ordinance 25-08, passed February 25, 2008, adopted the Avon Lake Municipal
Stormwater Program Manual. Ord. 25-08 was repealed by Ord. 88-2012, which was
passed 6-25-2012.
§ 1060.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish technically feasible and
economically reasonable stormwater management standards in accordance with the
Avon Lake Municipal Stormwater Program Manual to achieve a level of stormwater
quality and quantity control that will minimize damage to property and
stormwater assets along with degradation of water resources and will promote
and maintain the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city.
   (b)   This chapter requires individuals who disturb land or generate debris
on land within the city to:
      (1)   Control stormwater runoff from their property and ensure that all
stormwater management practices are properly designed, constructed and
maintained;
      (2)   Reduce water quality impacts to receiving water resources that may
be caused by new development or redevelopment activities;
      (3)   Control the volume, rate and quality of stormwater runoff
originating from their property so that surface water and ground water are
protected while flooding, debris and erosion potential are not increased;
      (4)   Minimize the need to construct, repair and replace subsurface storm
drain systems and provide a healthy water resource;
      (5)   Preserve natural infiltration and ground water recharge, and
maintain subsurface flow that replenishes water resources;
      (6)   Incorporate stormwater quality and quantity controls into site
planning and design at the earliest possible stage in the development process;
      (7)   Reduce the expense of maintenance or remedial projects needed to
address problems caused by inadequate stormwater management;
      (8)   Maximize use of stormwater management practices that serve multiple
purposes including, but not limited to, flood control, erosion control, fire
protection, water quality protection, recreation and habitat preservation;
      (9)   Design sites to minimize the number of stream crossings and the
width of associated disturbance in order to minimize future expenses related to
the maintenance and repair of stream crossings; and
      (10)   Maintain, promote and re-establish conditions necessary for
naturally occurring stream processes that assimilate pollutants, attenuate
flood flows and provide a healthy water resource.
   (c)   This chapter shall apply to all work that shall disturb an area in
excess of one acre and used or being developed, either wholly or partially, for
new or relocated projects involving roads; subdivisions or larger common plans
of development; industrial, commercial, institutional or residential projects;
building activities on farms; redevelopment activities; grading; and all other
uses that are not specifically exempted in §
1060.01
   (d)   Public entities, including the State of Ohio, Lorain County and the
city shall comply with this chapter for roadway projects initiated after the
adoption of this chapter and, to the maximum extent practicable, for projects
initiated before that time.
   (e)   This chapter does not apply to activities regulated by, and in
compliance with, the Ohio Agricultural Sediment Pollution Abatement Rules.
   (f)   This chapter does not require a comprehensive stormwater management
plan for linear construction projects, such as pipeline or utility line
installation, that do not result in the installation of impervious surface as
determined by the Stormwater Manager. Such projects must be designed to
minimize the number of stream crossings and the width of disturbance. Linear
construction projects must comply with the requirements of Chapter 1058 Erosion
and Sediment Control.
   (g)   This chapter does not apply to projects that disturb less than one
acre in total area, and are repair or renovation of an existing roadway or
improved site as determined by the Stormwater Program Manager.
(Ord. 88-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 26-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1060.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACRE. A measurement of area equaling 43,560 square feet.
   AS-BUILT SURVEY. A survey shown on a plan or drawing prepared by a
registered surveyor indicating the actual dimensions, elevations and locations
of any structures, underground utilities, swales, detention facilities and
sewage treatment facilities after construction has been completed.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Schedule of activities, prohibitions of
practices, operation and maintenance procedures, treatment requirements and
other practices to reduce the pollution of water resources and to control
stormwater volume and rate.
   CLEAN WATER ACT. 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq. Referred to as the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act or the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of
1972.
   COMMUNITY. The City of Avon Lake, its designated representatives, boards or
commissions.
   COMPREHENSIVE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN. The written document and plans
meeting the requirements of this regulation that sets forth the plans and
practices to minimize stormwater runoff from a development area, to safely
convey or temporarily store and release post-development runoff at an allowable
rate to minimize flooding and stream bank erosion, and to protect or improve
stormwater quality and stream channels.
   CRITICAL STORM. A storm that is calculated by means of the percentage
increase in volume of runoff by a proposed development area. The CRITICAL STORM
is used to calculate the maximum allowable stormwater discharge rate from a
developed site.
   DEBRIS. Any gathered or exposed particulates that are subject to transport
by stormwater facilities in whole or part by ordinary stormwater flow.
   DETENTION FACILITY. A basin, pond, oversized pipe or other structure that
reduces the peak flow rate of stormwater leaving the facility by temporarily
storing a portion of the stormwater entering the facility.
   DEVELOPMENT AREA. A parcel or contiguous parcels owned by one person or
persons, or operated as one development unit, and used or being developed for
commercial, industrial, residential, institutional or other construction or
alteration that changes runoff characteristics.
   DEVELOPMENT DRAINAGE AREA. A combination of each hydraulically unique
watershed with individual outlet points on the development area.
   DISTURBANCE. Any activity involving the addition or removal of soil or the
alteration of existing land surfaces.
   DISTURBED AREA. An area of land subject to erosion due to the removal of
vegetative cover and/or soil-disturbing activities.
   DRAINAGE. The removal of excess surface water or groundwater from land by
surface or subsurface drains.
   EROSION. The process by which the land surface is worn away by the action of
wind, water, ice, gravity or any combination of those forces.
   EXTENDED CONVEYANCE. A stormwater management practice that replaces and/or
enhances traditional open or closed storm drainage conduits by retarding flow,
promoting percolation of runoff into the soil, and filtering pollutants during
the stormwater quality event.
   EXTENDED DETENTION. A stormwater management practice that replaces and/or
enhances traditional detention facilities by releasing the runoff collected
during the stormwater quality event over at least 24 to 48 hours, retarding
flow and allowing pollutants to settle within the facility.
   FINAL STABILIZATION. All soil-disturbing activities at the site have been
completed and a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of at least
80% coverage for the area has been established or equivalent stabilization
practices, such as the use of mulches or geotextiles, have been employed.
   GRADING. The process in which the topography of the land is altered to a new
slope.
   HYDROLOGIC UNIT CODE. A cataloguing system developed by the United States
Geological Survey and the Natural Resource Conservation Service to identify
watersheds in the United States.
   IMPERVIOUS COVER. Any surface that cannot effectively absorb or infiltrate
water. This may include roads, streets, parking lots, rooftops, sidewalks and
other areas not covered by vegetation.
   INFILTRATION. A stormwater management practice that does not discharge to a
water resource during the stormwater quality event, requiring collected runoff
to either infiltrate into the ground water and/or be consumed by
evapotranspiration, thereby retaining stormwater pollutants in the facility.
   LARGER COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT. A contiguous area where multiple separate
and distinct construction activities may be taking place at different times on
different schedules under one plan.
   MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE. The level of pollutant reduction that operators
of small municipal separate storm sewer systems regulated under 40 C.F.R. parts
9, 122, 123 and 124, referred to as NPDES Stormwater Phase II, must meet.
   NPDES, NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM. A regulatory program
in the Federal Clean Water Act that prohibits the discharge of pollutants into
surface waters of the United States without a permit.
   NONSTRUCTURAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICE. Stormwater runoff control and
treatment techniques that use natural practices to control runoff and/or reduce
pollution levels.
   POST-DEVELOPMENT. The conditions that exist following the completion of
soil-disturbing activity in terms of topography, vegetation, land use and the
rate, volume, quality or direction of stormwater runoff.
   PRE-CONSTRUCTION MEETING. Meeting prior to construction between all parties
associated with the construction of the project including government agencies,
contractors and owners to review agency requirements and plans as approved and
submitted.
   PRE-DEVELOPMENT. The conditions that exist prior to the initiation of soil-
disturbing activity in terms of topography, vegetation, land use and the rate,
volume, quality or direction of stormwater runoff.
   PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. A professional engineer registered in the State of
Ohio with specific education and experience in water resources engineering,
acting in conformance with the Code of Ethics of the Ohio State Board of
Registration for Engineers and Surveyors.
   REDEVELOPMENT. A construction project on land where impervious cover has
previously been developed and where the new land use will not increase the
runoff coefficient. If the new land use will increase the runoff coefficient,
then the project is considered to be a new development project rather than a
redevelopment project. (Refer to Table 1 in §
1060.09.)
   RIPARIAN AREA. Land adjacent to any brook, creek, river, or stream having a
defined bed and bank that, if appropriately sized, helps to stabilize
streambanks, limit erosion, reduce flood size flows, and/or filter and settle
out runoff pollutants, or performs other functions consistent with the purposes
of this regulation.
   RIPARIAN AND WETLAND SETBACK. The real property adjacent to a water resource
on which soil-disturbing activities are limited, all as defined by the
requirements of §
1058.11.
   RUNOFF. The portion of rainfall, melted snow or irrigation water that flows
across the ground surface and is eventually returned to water resources.
   SEDIMENT. The soils or other surface materials that can be transported or
deposited by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion.
   SEDIMENTATION. The deposition of sediment in water resources.
   SITE OWNER/OPERATOR. Any individual, corporation, firm, trust, commission,
board, public or private partnership, joint venture, agency, unincorporated
association, municipal corporation, county or state agency, the federal
government, other legal entity or an agent thereof that is responsible for the
overall construction site.
   SOIL-DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Clearing, grading, excavating, filling or other
alteration of the earth’s surface where natural or human-made ground cover is
destroyed and that may result in, or contribute to, increased stormwater
quantity and/or decreased stormwater quality.
   STABILIZATION. The use of best management practices that reduce or prevent
soil erosion by stormwater runoff, trench dewatering, wind, ice, gravity or a
combination thereof.
   STORMWATER MANAGER. The employee designated by the Public Works Director to
administer the stormwater program for the city in accordance with the
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Program Manual.
   STRUCTURAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICE. Any constructed facility,
structure or device that provides storage, conveyance and/or treatment of
stormwater runoff.
   SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, lakes, reservoirs, marshes,
wetlands or other waterways situated wholly or partly within the boundaries of
the state, except those private waters which do not combine or affect a
junction with surface water. Waters defined as sewerage systems, treatment
works or disposal systems in R.C. § 6111.01 are not included.
   TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD. The sum of the existing and/or projected point
source, non-point source and background loads for a pollutant to a specified
watershed, water body or water body segment. A TMDL sets and allocates the
maximum amount of a pollutant that may be introduced into the water and still
ensures attainment and maintenance of water quality standards.
   WATER QUALITY VOLUME. The volume of runoff from a contributing watershed
that must be captured and treated, equivalent to the maximized capture volume
as defined in the American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) Manual and Report
on Engineering Practice No. 87 and Water Environment Federation Manual of
Practice No. 23 titled Urban Runoff Quality Management.
   WATER RESOURCE. Any public or private body of water; including wetlands; the
area within the ordinary high water level of lakes and ponds; as well as the
area within the ordinary high water level of any brook, creek, river, or stream
having a defined bed and bank (either natural or artificial) which confines and
conducts continuous or intermittent flow.
   WATER RESOURCE CROSSING. Any bridge, box, arch, culvert, truss or other type
of structure intended to convey people, animals, vehicles or materials from one
side of a watercourse to another. This does not include private, noncommercial
footbridges or pole-mounted aerial electric or telecommunication lines, nor
does it include below grade utility lines.
   WATERSHED. The total drainage area contributing stormwater runoff to a
single point.
   WETLAND. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground
water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life
in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas
(40 C.F.R. part 232; 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.).
(Ord. 88-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 26-2013, passed 3-25-2013; Ord. 43-2014,
passed 4-14-2014)
§ 1060.03 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (a)   Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall not relieve any
person from responsibility for damage to any person otherwise imposed by law.
The provisions of this chapter are promulgated to promote the health, safety
and welfare of the public and are not designed for the benefit of any
individual or any particular parcel of property.
   (b)   By approving a comprehensive stormwater management plan under this
chapter, the city does not accept responsibility for the design, installation
and operation and maintenance of stormwater management practices.
(Ord. 88-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 26-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1060.04 CONFLICTS, SEVERABILITY, NUISANCES AND RESPONSIBILITY.
   (a)   Where this chapter is in conflict with other provisions of law or
ordinance, the most restrictive provisions shall prevail.
   (b)   If any clause, section or provision of this regulation is declared
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the validity
of the remainder shall not be affected thereby.
   (c)   This chapter shall not be construed as authorizing any person to
maintain a nuisance on their property, and compliance with the provisions of
this regulation shall not be a defense in any action to abate such a nuisance.
   (d)   Failure of the city to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly
conditions or to recommend corrective measures shall not relieve the site owner
from the responsibility for the condition or damage resulting therefrom, and
shall not result in the city, its officers, employees or agents being
responsible for any condition or damage resulting therefrom.
   (e)   In the event any provisions of this chapter conflict with provisions
of Chapter 1058, the more stringent regulations shall prevail.
   (f)   In the event any provision of this chapter concerning the location,
construction, maintenance, repair, grading or use of a detention facility, non-
structural stormwater management practice, structural stormwater management
practice, riparian area, water resource or wetland is in conflict with a
provision of Chapter 1058 of this code of ordinances, the conflict, to the
extent possible, shall be resolved by the Stormwater Program Manager. The
Stormwater Program Manager shall consider factors in such decision that are
based on permissible provisions that may allow grading, clearing or filling
that may be necessary in conjunction with the construction of said practices as
part of the overall approved SWP3 plans, and not in violation of other state or
federal regulations.
   (g)   In the event a conflict exists between the provisions of this chapter
and the provisions of Chapter 1058 on matters concerning ongoing maintenance,
repair, cleaning and use of an existing detention facility, non-structural
stormwater management practice, structural stormwater management practice,
riparian area, water resource or wetland, the conflict shall be resolved by the
Stormwater Program Manager. The Stormwater Program Manager shall resolve
conflicts in such a way that requires the least disturbance or interference
with the then existing natural elements and features of such practices, yet is
reasonable to enable the maintenance, repair or cleaning to be completed.
(Ord. 88-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 26-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1060.05 DEVELOPMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANS.
   (a)   This chapter requires that a comprehensive stormwater management plan
be developed and implemented for soil-disturbing activities disturbing one or
more acres of total land, or less than one acre if part of a larger common plan
of development or sale disturbing one or more acres of total land, and on which
any regulated activity of §
1060.01(c) is proposed.
   (b)   The city shall administer this regulation, shall be responsible for
determination of compliance with this regulation, and shall issue notices and
orders as may be necessary. The city may consult with the Lorain County SWCD,
private engineers, stormwater districts or other technical experts in reviewing
the comprehensive stormwater management plan.
(Ord. 88-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 26-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1060.06 APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Pre-application meeting. The applicant shall attend a pre-application
meeting with the Stormwater Manager to discuss the proposed project, review the
requirements of this chapter, identify unique aspects of the project that must
be addressed during the review process, and establish a preliminary review and
approval schedule.
   (b)   Preliminary comprehensive stormwater management plan. The applicant
shall submit two sets of a preliminary comprehensive stormwater management plan
(preliminary plan) and the applicable fees to the Stormwater Manager. The
preliminary plan shall show the proposed property boundaries, setbacks,
dedicated open space, public roads, water resources, stormwater control
facilities and easements in sufficient detail and engineering analysis to allow
the Stormwater Manager to determine if the site is laid out in a manner that
meets the intent of this regulation and if the proposed stormwater management
practices are capable of controlling runoff from the site in compliance with
this regulation. The applicant shall submit two sets of the preliminary plan
and applicable fees as follows:
      (1)   For subdivisions. In conjunction with the submission of the
preliminary subdivision plan;
      (2)   For other construction projects. In conjunction with the
application for a zoning permit; and
      (3)   For general clearing projects. In conjunction with the application
for a zoning permit.
   (c)   Final comprehensive stormwater management plan. The applicant shall
submit two sets of a final comprehensive stormwater management plan (final
plan) and the applicable fees to the Stormwater Program Manager in conjunction
with the submittal of the final plat, improvement plans, or application for a
building or zoning permit for the site. The final plan shall meet the
requirements of §
1060.08 and shall be approved by the Stormwater Program Manager prior to
approval of the final plat and before issuance of a zoning permit by the Code
Administrator and grading permit issued by the Public Works Department.
   The final comprehensive stormwater management plan shall include all post-
construction BMPs installed on the site. Details such as inspection and
maintenance shall become part of the approved plans. Any documents associated
with these responsibilities such as subdivision covenants and restrictions
shall be submitted for review and recorded with the final plans. The Stormwater
Program Manager shall review the documents to ensure perpetual maintenance of
the post-construction BMPs.
   (d)   Review and comment. The Stormwater Program Manager shall review the
preliminary and final plans submitted, and shall approve or return for
revisions with comments and recommendations for revisions. A preliminary or
final plan rejected because of deficiencies shall receive a narrative report
stating specific problems and the procedures for filing a revised preliminary
or final plan.
   (e)   Approval necessary. Land-clearing and soil-disturbing activities shall
not begin and zoning and/or building permits shall not be issued without an
approved comprehensive stormwater management plan.
   (f)   Valid for two years. Approvals issued in accordance with this
regulation shall remain valid for two years from the date of approval.
(Ord. 88-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 26-2013, passed 3-25-2013; Ord. 43-2014,
passed 4-14-2014)
§ 1060.07 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL REGULATIONS.
   Approvals issued in accordance with this chapter do not relieve the
applicant of responsibility for obtaining all other necessary permits and/or
approvals from other federal, state and/or county agencies. If requirements
vary, the most restrictive shall prevail. These permits may include, but are
not limited to, those listed below.
   (a)   Ohio EPA NPDES permits authorizing stormwater discharges associated
with construction activity or the most current version thereof. Proof of
compliance with these requirements shall be the applicant’s notice of intent
(NOI) number from Ohio EPA, a copy of the Ohio EPA Director’s authorization
letter for the NPDES permit or a letter from the site owner explaining why the
NPDES permit is not applicable.
   (b)   Section 401 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1341. The applicant
shall provide, if applicable, details relating to the development limitations
to be compliant with the Ohio EPA water quality certification.
   (c)   Ohio EPA isolated wetland permit. The applicant shall provide, if
applicable, details relating to the development limitations to be compliant
with the Ohio EPA isolated wetland permit.
   (d)   Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. The applicant
shall provide, if applicable, details relating to the development limitations
to be compliant with the Ohio EPA Clean Water Act.
(Ord. 88-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 26-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1060.08 COMPREHENSIVE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANS.
   (a)   Comprehensive stormwater management plan required. The applicant shall
develop a comprehensive stormwater management plan describing how the quantity
and quality of stormwater will be managed after construction is complete for
every discharge from the site and/or into a water resource. The plan will
illustrate the type, location and dimensions of every structural and non-
structural stormwater management practice incorporated into the site design,
and the rationale for their selection. The rationale must address how these
stormwater management practices will address flooding within the site as well
as flooding that may be caused by the development upstream and downstream of
the site. The rationale will also describe how the stormwater management
practices minimize impacts to the physical, chemical and biological
characteristics of on-site and downstream water resources and, if necessary,
correct current degradation of water resources that is occurring or take
measures to prevent predictable degradation of water resources.
   (b)   Preparation by professional engineer. The comprehensive stormwater
management plan shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer and
include supporting calculations, plan sheets, and design details. To the extent
necessary, as determined by the Stormwater Program Manager, a site survey shall
be performed by a registered professional surveyor to establish boundary lines,
measurements, or land surfaces.
   (c)   Community procedures. The Stormwater Program Manager shall prepare and
maintain procedures providing specific criteria and guidance to be followed
when designing the stormwater management system for the site. These procedures
may be updated from time to time, at the discretion of the Stormwater Program
Manager, based on improvements in engineering, science, monitoring and local
maintenance experience. The Stormwater Program Manager shall make the final
determination of whether the practices proposed in the comprehensive stormwater
management plan meet the requirements of this regulation. The Stormwater
Program Manager may also maintain a list of acceptable best management
practices that meet the criteria of this regulation to be used in the city.
   (d)   Contents of comprehensive stormwater management plan. The
comprehensive stormwater management plan shall contain an application,
narrative report, construction site plan sheets, a long-term inspection and
maintenance agreement, and a site description with the following information
provided:
      (1)   Site description.
         A.   A description of the nature and type of the construction activity
(e.g., residential, shopping mall, highway and the like);
         B.   Total area of the site and the area of the site that is expected
to be disturbed (i.e., grubbing, clearing, excavation, filling or grading,
including off-site borrow areas);
         C.   A description of prior land uses at the site;
         D.   An estimate of the impervious area and percent of imperviousness
created by the soil- disturbing activity at the beginning and at the conclusion
of the project;
         E.   Existing data describing the soils throughout the site, including
the soil series and association, hydrologic soil group, porosity, infiltration
characteristics, depth to ground water, depth to bedrock and any impermeable
layers;
         F.   If available, the quality of any known pollutant discharge from
the site such as that which may result from previous contamination caused by
prior land uses;
         G.   The location and name of the immediate water resource(s) and the
first subsequent water resource(s);
         H.   The aerial (plan view) extent and description of water resources
at or near the site that will be disturbed or will receive discharges from the
project; and
         I.   Describe the current condition of water resources including the
vertical stability of stream channels and indications of channel incision that
may be responsible for current or future sources of high sediment loading or
loss of channel stability.
      (2)   Site map showing.
         A.   Limits of soil-disturbing activity on the site;
         B.   Soils types for the entire site, including locations of unstable
or highly erodible soils;
         C.   Existing and proposed one-foot contours. This must include a
delineation of drainage watersheds expected before, during, and after major
grading activities as well as the size of each drainage watershed in acres;
         D.   Water resource locations including springs, wetlands, streams,
lakes, water wells, and associated setbacks on or within 200 feet of the site,
including the boundaries of wetlands or streams and first subsequent named
receiving water(s) the applicant intends to fill or relocate for which the
applicant is seeking approval from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and/or Ohio
EPA;
         E.   Existing and planned locations of buildings, roads, parking
facilities and utilities; and
         F.   The location of any in-stream activities including stream
crossings.
      (3)   Contact information. Company name and contact information as well
as contact name, address and phone numbers for the following:
         A.   The professional engineer who prepared the comprehensive
stormwater management plan;
         B.   The site owner; and
         C.   Responsible party on-site.
      (4)   Phase. Phase, if applicable, of the overall development plan;
      (5)   List. List of sublot numbers if project is a subdivision;
      (6)   Permit number. Ohio EPA NPDES permit number and other applicable
state and federal permit numbers, if available, or status of various permitting
requirements if final approvals have not been received;
      (7)   Location. Location, including complete site address and sublot
number if applicable;
      (8)   Location of easements. Location of any easements or other
restrictions placed on the use of the property;
      (9)   Site plan. A site plan sheet showing:
         A.   The location of each proposed post-construction stormwater
management practice; and
         B.   The geographic coordinates of the site and each proposed practice
in North American Datum Ohio State Plan North.
      It is preferred that the entire site be shown on one plan sheet to allow
a complete view of the site during plan review. If a smaller scale is used to
accomplish this, separate sheets providing an enlarged view of areas on
individual sheets should be provided.
      (10)   An inspection and maintenance agreement. The inspection and
maintenance agreement required for post-construction stormwater management
practices under this regulation shall be a stand-alone document between the
city and the applicant, and, to the extent required, based upon the nature and
scope of the project, contain or reference the following information and
provisions as the Stormwater Program Manager may deem appropriate:
         A.   The location of each stormwater management practice, including
those practices permitted to be located in, or within 50 feet of, water
resources, and identification of the drainage area served by each stormwater
management practice;
         B.   A schedule for regular maintenance for each aspect of the
stormwater management system and description of routine and non-routine
maintenance tasks to ensure continued performance of the system as is detailed
in the approved comprehensive stormwater management plan. This schedule may
include additional standards, as required by the Stormwater Program Manager, to
ensure continued performance of stormwater management practices permitted to be
located in, or within 50 feet of, water resources;
         C.   The location and documentation of all access and maintenance
easements on the property;
         D.   Identification of the landowner(s), organization or city
responsible for long-term maintenance, including repairs, of the stormwater
management practices;
         E.   The landowner(s), organization or city shall maintain stormwater
management practices in accordance with this regulation;
         F.   The city has the authority to enter upon the property to conduct
inspections as necessary to verify that the stormwater management practices are
being maintained and operated in accordance with this chapter;
         G.   The city shall maintain public records of the results of site
inspections, shall inform the landowner(s), organization or city responsible
for maintenance of the inspection results, and shall specifically indicate any
corrective actions required to bring the stormwater practices into proper
working condition;
         H.   If the city notifies the landowner(s), organization or city
responsible for maintenance of the maintenance problems that require
correction, the specific corrective actions shall be taken within a reasonable
time frame as determined by the city. If the necessary corrective actions are
not taken the city is herein authorized to enter upon the property and to
perform the corrective actions identified in the inspection report if the
landowner(s), organization or city responsible for maintenance does not make
the required corrections in the specified time period. The city shall be
reimbursed by the landowner(s), organization, or city responsible for
maintenance for all expenses incurred within ten days of receipt of invoice
from the city;
         I.   The method of funding long-term maintenance and inspections of
all stormwater management practices; and
         J.   A release of the city from all damages, accidents, casualties,
occurrences or claims that might arise or be asserted against the city from the
construction, presence, existence, or maintenance of the stormwater management
practices.
      Alteration or termination of these stipulations is prohibited without
written approval of the Stormwater Program Manager. The applicant must provide
a draft of this inspection and maintenance agreement as part of the
comprehensive stormwater management plan submittal. Once a draft is approved, a
memorandum of agreement shall be recorded with the Lorain County Recorder. A
final recorded copy of the agreement, or the memorandum of agreement, must be
submitted to the city to receive final inspection approval of the site.
      (11)   Calculations required. The applicant shall submit calculations for
projected stormwater runoff flows, volumes and timing into and through all
stormwater management practices for flood control, channel protection, water
quality and the condition of the habitat, stability and incision of each water
resource and the floodplain, as required in § 1060.09 of this chapter. These
submittals shall be completed for both pre- and post-development land use
conditions and shall include the underlying assumptions and hydrologic and
hydraulic methods and parameters used for these calculations. The applicant
shall also include critical storm determination and demonstrate that the runoff
from upper watershed areas have been considered in the calculations;
      (12)   List of all contractors and subcontractors before construction.
Prior to construction or before the pre-construction meeting, provide the list
of all contractors and subcontractors names, addresses, and phones involved
with the implementation of the comprehensive stormwater management plan,
including a written document containing signatures of all parties as proof of
acknowledgment that they have reviewed and understand the requirements and
responsibilities of the comprehensive stormwater management plan;
      (13)   Existing and proposed drainage patterns. The location and
description of existing and proposed drainage patterns and stormwater
management practices, including any related stormwater management practices
beyond the development area and the larger common development area; and
      (14)   Inclusions. For each stormwater management practice to be employed
on the development area, include the following:
         A.   Location and size, including detail drawings, maintenance
requirements during and after construction, and design calculations, all where
applicable;
         B.   Any other structural and/or non-structural stormwater management
practices necessary to meet the design criteria in this regulation and any
supplemental information requested by the Stormwater Program Manager; and
         C.   Final site conditions including stormwater inlets and permanent
nonstructural and structural stormwater management practices. Details of
stormwater management practices shall be drawn to scale and shall show volumes
and sizes of contributing drainage areas.
(Ord. 88-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 26-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1060.09 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (a)   General. The stormwater system, including stormwater management
practices for storage, treatment and control, and conveyance facilities, shall
be designed to prevent structure flooding during the 100-year, 24-hour storm
event; to maintain predevelopment runoff patterns, flows, and volumes; and to
meet the following criteria.
      (1)   Integrated practices that address degradation of water resources.
The stormwater management practices shall function as an integrated system that
controls flooding and minimizes the degradation of the physical, biological and
chemical integrity of the water resources receiving stormwater discharges from
the site. Acceptable practices shall:
         A.   Not disturb riparian areas, unless the disturbance is intended to
support a watercourse restoration project and complies with §
1058.11;
         B.   Maintain predevelopment hydrology and ground water recharge on as
much of the site as practicable;
         C.   Only install new impervious surfaces and compact soils where
necessary to support the future land use; and
         D.   Compensate for increased runoff volumes caused by new impervious
surfaces and soil compaction by reducing stormwater peak flows to less than
pre-development levels.
      Stormwater management practices that meet the criteria in this
regulation, and additional criteria required by the Stormwater Program Manager,
shall comply with this chapter.
      (2)   Practices designed for final use. Stormwater management practices
shall be designed to achieve the stormwater management objectives of this
regulation, to be compatible with the proposed post-construction use of the
site, to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and to function safely
with minimal maintenance.
      (3)   Stormwater management for all lots. Areas developed for a
subdivision, as defined in §
1058.05, shall provide stormwater management and water quality controls for the
development of all subdivided lots. This shall include provisions for lot
grading and drainage that prevent structure flooding during the 100-year, 24-
hour storm; and maintain, to the extent practicable, the pre-development runoff
patterns, volumes and peaks from the lot.
      (4)   Stormwater facilities in water resources. Stormwater management
practices and related activities shall not be constructed in water resources
unless the applicant shows proof of compliance with all appropriate permits
from the Ohio EPA, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and other applicable
federal, state and local agencies as required in this chapter, and the activity
is in compliance with
Chapter 1058 and §
1058.11, all as determined by the Stormwater Program Manager.
      (5)   Stormwater ponds and surface conveyance channels. All stormwater
pond and surface conveyance designs must provide a minimum of one foot
freeboard above the projected peak stage within the facility during the 100-
year, 24-hour storm. When designing stormwater ponds and conveyance channels,
the applicant shall consider public safety as a design factor and alternative
designs must be implemented where site limitations would preclude a safe
design.
      (6)   Exemption. The site where soil-disturbing activities are conducted
shall be exempt from the requirements of this section if it can be shown to the
satisfaction of the Stormwater Program Manager that the site is part of a
larger common plan of development where the stormwater management requirements
for the site are provided by an existing stormwater management practice, or if
the stormwater management requirements for the site are provided by practices
defined in a regional or local stormwater management plan approved by the
Stormwater Program Manager.
      (7)   Maintenance. All stormwater management practices shall be
maintained in accordance with inspection and maintenance agreements approved by
the Stormwater Program Manager as detailed in §
1060.08.
      (8)   Ownership. Unless otherwise required by the city, stormwater
management practices serving multiple lots in subdivisions shall be on a
separate lot held and maintained by an entity of common ownership or, if
compensated by the property owners, by the city. Stormwater management
practices serving single lots shall be placed on these lots, protected within
an easement, and maintained by the property owner.
      (9)   Preservation of existing natural drainage. Practices that preserve
and/or improve the existing natural drainage shall be used to the maximum
extent practicable. Such practices may include minimizing site grading and
compaction; protecting and/or restoring water resources, riparian areas, and
existing vegetation; and maintaining unconcentrated stormwater runoff to and
through these areas.
      (10)   Preservation of wetland hydrology. Concentrated stormwater runoff
from BMPs to wetlands shall be converted to diffuse flow before the runoff
enters a wetland in order to protect the natural hydrology, hydroperiod and
wetland flora. The flow shall be released such that no erosion occurs down
slope. Practices such as level spreaders, vegetative buffers, infiltration
basins, conservation of forest covers, and the preservation of intermittent
streams, depressions, and drainage corridors may be used to maintain the
wetland hydrology.
If the applicant proposes to discharge to natural wetlands, a hydrological
analysis shall be preformed to demonstrate that the proposed discharge matches
the pre-development hydroperiods and hydrodynamics.
   (b)   Stormwater conveyance design criteria. All stormwater management
practices shall be designed to convey stormwater to allow for the maximum
removal of pollutants and reduction in flow velocities. This shall include but
not be limited to:
      (1)   Stream relocation or enclosure. The Stormwater Program Manager may
allow the enclosure or relocation of water resources only if the applicant
shows proof of compliance with all appropriate permits from the Ohio EPA, the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and other applicable federal, state and local
agencies as required in § 1060.07 of this regulation, and the activity is in
compliance with Chapter 1058, all as determined by the Stormwater Manager. At a
minimum, stream relocation designs must show how the project will minimize
changes to the vertical stability, floodplain form, channel form, and habitat
of upstream and downstream channels on and off the property;
      (2)   Off-site stormwater discharges. Off-site stormwater runoff that
discharges to or across the applicant’s development site shall be conveyed
through the stormwater conveyance system planned for the development site at
its existing peak flow rates during each design storm. Off- site flows shall be
diverted around stormwater quality control facilities or, if this is not
possible, the stormwater quality control facility shall be sized to treat the
off-site flow. Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plans will not be approved
until it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Stormwater Program Manager
that off-site runoff will be adequately conveyed through the development site
in a manner that does not exacerbate upstream or downstream flooding and
erosion;
      (3)   Sheet flow. The site shall be graded in a manner that maintains
sheet flow over as large an area as possible. The maximum area of sheet flow
shall be determined based on the slope, the uniformity of site grading, and the
use of easements or other legally-binding mechanisms that prohibit re-grading
and/or the placement of structures within sheet flow areas. In no case shall
the sheet flow length be longer than 300 feet, nor shall a sheet flow area
exceed one and one-half acres. Flow shall be directed into an open channel,
storm sewer, or other stormwater management practice from areas too long and/or
too large to maintain sheet flow, all as determined by the Stormwater Program
Manager;
      (4)   Open channels. Unless otherwise allowed by the City Engineer,
drainage tributary to stormwater management practices shall be provided by an
open channel with landscaped banks and designed to carry the ten-year, 24-hour
stormwater runoff from upstream contributory areas;
      (5)   Open drainage systems. Open drainage systems shall be preferred on
all new development sites to convey stormwater where feasible. Storm sewer
systems shall be allowed only when the site cannot be developed at densities
allowed under zoning or where the use of an open drainage system affects public
health or safety, all as determined by the Stormwater Program Manager. The
following criteria shall be used to design storm sewer systems when necessary.
         A.   Storm sewers shall be designed such that they do not surcharge
from runoff caused by the five-year, 24-hour storm, and that the hydraulic
grade line of the storm sewer stays below the gutter flow line of the overlying
roadway, or below the top of drainage structures outside the roadway during a
ten-year, 24-hour storm. The system shall be designed to meet these
requirements when conveying the flows from the contributory area within the
proposed development and existing flows from off-site areas that are upstream
from the development.
         B.   The minimum inside diameter of pipe to be used in public storm
sewer systems is 12 inches. Smaller pipe sizes may be used in private systems,
subject to the approval.
         C.   All storm sewer systems shall be designed taking into
consideration the tailwater of the receiving facility or water resource. The
tailwater elevation used shall be based on the design storm frequency. The
hydraulic grade line for the storm sewer system shall be computed with
consideration for the energy losses associated with entrance into and exit from
the system, friction through the system, and turbulence in the individual
manholes, catch basins and junctions within the system.
         D.   The inverts of all curb inlets, manholes, yard inlets and other
structures shall be formed and channelized to minimize the incidence of
quiescent standing water where mosquitoes may breed.
         E.   Headwalls shall be required at all storm sewer inlets or outlets
to and from open channels or lakes.
      (6)   Water resource crossings. The following criteria shall be used to
design structures that cross a water resource in the city.
         A.   Water resource crossings other than bridges shall be designed to
convey the stream’s flow for the minimum 25-year, 24-hour storm.
         B.   Bridges, open bottom arch or spans are the preferred crossing
technique and shall be considered in the planning phase of the development.
Bridges and open spans should be considered for all state scenic rivers, cold-
water habitat, exceptional warm-water habitat, seasonal salmonid habitat
streams and Class III headwater streams. The footers or piers for these bridges
and open spans shall not be constructed below the ordinary high water mark.
         C.   If a culvert or other closed bottom crossing is used, 25% of the
cross-sectional area, or a minimum of one foot of box culverts and pipe arches,
must be embedded below the channel bed.
         D.   The minimum inside diameter of pipes to be used for crossings
shall be 12 inches.
         E.   The maximum slope allowable shall be a slope that produces a ten-
fps velocity within the culvert barrel under design flow conditions. Erosion
protection and/or energy dissipaters shall be required to properly control
entrance and outlet velocities.
         F.   All culvert installations shall be designed with consideration
for the tailwater of the receiving facility or water resource. The tailwater
elevation used shall be based on the design storm frequency.
         G.   Headwalls shall be required at all culvert inlets or outlets to
and from open channels or lakes.
         H.   Streams with a drainage area of five square miles or larger shall
incorporate floodplain culverts at the bankfull elevation to restrict head loss
differences across the crossing so as to cause no rise in the 100-year storm
event.
         I.   Bridges shall be designed such that the hydraulic profile through
a bridge shall be below the bottom chord of the bridge for either the 100-year,
24-hour storm, or the 100-year flood elevation as determined by FEMA, whichever
is more restrictive.
      (7)   Overland flooding. Overland flood routing paths shall be used to
convey stormwater runoff from the 100-year, 24-hour storm event to an adequate
receiving water resource or stormwater management practice such that the runoff
is contained within the drainage easement for the flood routing path and does
not cause flooding of buildings or related structures. The peak 100-year water
surface elevation along flood routing paths shall be at least one foot below
the finished grade elevation at the structure. When designing the flood routing
paths, the conveyance capacity of the site’s storm sewers shall be taken into
consideration;
      (8)   Compensatory flood storage mitigation. All fill proposed to be
placed in a designated Flood Hazard Mitigation area shall be in accordance with
Chapter 1476; and
      (9)   Velocity dissipation. Velocity dissipation devices shall be placed
at discharge locations and along the length of any outfall to provide non-
erosive flow velocity from the structure to a water resource so that the
natural physical and biological characteristics and functions of the water
resource are maintained and protected.
   (c)   Stormwater quality control.
      (1)   Direct runoff to a BMP. The site shall be designed to direct runoff
to one or more of the following stormwater management practices. These
practices are listed in Table 2 of this regulation and shall be designed to
meet the following general performance standards:
         A.   Extended conveyance facilities that slow the rate of stormwater
runoff; filter and biodegrade pollutants in stormwater; promote infiltration
and evapotranspiration of stormwater; and discharge the controlled runoff to a
water resource;
         B.   Extended detention facilities that detain stormwater; settle or
filter particulate pollutants; and release the controlled stormwater to a water
resource;
         C.   Infiltration facilities that retain stormwater; promote settling,
filtering, and biodegradation of pollutants; and infiltrate captured stormwater
into the ground. The Stormwater Program Manager may require a soil engineering
report to be prepared for the site to demonstrate that any proposed
infiltration facilities meet these performance standards;
         D.   For sites less than five acres, but greater than one acre and not
part of a common plan of development, where one or more acres are disturbed,
the Stormwater Program Manager may approve other BMPs if the applicant
demonstrates that these BMPs meet the objectives of this regulation as stated
in division (c)(6) of this section;
         E.   For sites greater than five acres, or less than five acres but
part of a larger common plan of development or sale which will disturb five or
more acres, the Stormwater Program Manager may approve other BMPs if the
applicant demonstrates to the Stormwater Program Manager’s satisfaction that
these BMPs meet the objectives of this regulation as stated in division (c)(6)
of this section, and has prior written approval from the Ohio EPA; and
         F.   For the construction of new roads and roadway improvement
projects by public entities (i.e., the state, counties, townships, cities or
villages), the Stormwater Program Manager may approve BMPs not included in
Table 2 of this regulation, but must show compliance with the current version
of the Ohio Departments of Transportation’s Location and Design Manual, Volume
Two, Drainage Design.
NOTE: In division (c)(2) of this section, the size of the water quality volume
(WQv) orifice can be limited to two and one-half inches in extended detention
ponds when drainage areas are too small to allow a practical WQv orifice size.
      (2)   Criteria applying to all stormwater management practices. Practices
chosen must be sized to treat the water quality volume (WQv) and to ensure
compliance with Ohio Water Quality Standards (O.A.C. Chapter 3745-1).
         A.   The WQv shall be equal to the volume of runoff from a 0.75-inch
rainfall event and shall be determined according to one of the following
methods:
            1.   Through a site hydrologic study approved by the Stormwater
Program Manager that uses continuous hydrologic simulation; site-specific
hydrologic parameters, including impervious area, soil infiltration
characteristics, slope, and surface routing characteristics; proposed best
management practices controlling the amount and/or timing of runoff from the
site; and local long-term hourly records; or
            2.   Using the following equation:
                  WQv = C*P*A/12
               where terms have the following meanings:
                  WQv = water quality volume in acre-feet
                  C = runoff coefficient appropriate for storms less than one
inch
                  P = 0.75-inch precipitation depth
                  A = area draining into the stormwater practice, in acres
         Runoff coefficients required by the Ohio Environmental Protection
Agency (Ohio EPA) for use in determining the water quality volume can be
determined using the list in Table 1 or using the following equation to
calculate the runoff coefficient, if the applicant can demonstrate that
appropriate controls are in place to limit the proposed impervious area of the
development:
               C = 0.858i3 - 0.78i2 + 0.774i + 0.04, where:
               i = fraction of the drainage area that is impervious
 
   Table 1: Runoff Coefficient Based on the Type of Land Use
Land Use                                           Runoff Coefficient
Industrial and commercial                          0.8
High-density residential (>8 dwellings/acre)       0.5
Medium-density residential (4 to 8 dwellings/acre) 0.4
Low-density residential (<4 dwellings/acre)        0.3
Open space and recreational areas                  0.2
Where land use will be mixed, the runoff coefficient should be calculated
using a weighted average. For example, if 60% of the contributing drainage
area to the stormwater treatment structure is low density residential, 30% is
high density residential, and 10% is open space, the runoff coefficient is
calculated as follows (0.6)(0.3) + (0.3)(0.5) + (0.1)(0.2) = (0.35)
 
         B.   An additional volume equal to 20% of the WQv shall be
incorporated into the stormwater practice for sediment storage. This volume
shall be incorporated into the sections of stormwater practices where
pollutants will accumulate.
         C.   Stormwater quality management practices shall be designed such
that the drain time is long enough to provide treatment and protect against
downstream bank erosion, but short enough to provide storage available for
successive rainfall events as defined in Table 2.
 
   Table 2: Draw Down Times for Stormwater Management Practices
Best Management Practice                                 Drain Time of WQv
Infiltration facilities*                                    24 - 48 hours
Extended conveyance facilities (vegetated swales, filter
strips)
   Vegetated filter strip with berm                   24 hours
   Enhanced water quality swale                       24 hours**
   Flow through design                                24 hours
Extended detention facilities
   Extended dry detention basins***                   48 hours
   Wet detention basins +                             24 hours
   Pocket wetland^                                    24 hours
   Constructed wetlands (above permanent pool)        24 hours
   Bioretention*                                      40 hours
   Sand and other media filtration                    40 hours
*   The WQv shall completely infiltrate within 48 hours so there is no
standing or residual water pool.
**   Sized to pass a hydrograph with a volume equal to the WQv, a duration
of two hours, peak rainfall intensity of one inch/hour at a depth of no
more than 3 inches and have a minimum hydraulic residence time of 5
minutes. The use of this criterion is limited to sites where the total
area disturbed is 5 acres or less. Prior approval from the Stormwater
Program Manager is necessary to use this practice. For sites greater than
5 acres or less than 5 acres but part of a larger common plan of
development or sale which will disturb 5 or more acres, prior written
approval is required from the Ohio EPA.
***   The use of a forebay and micropool is required on all extended dry
detention basins. Each is to be sized at a minimum 10% of the WQv.
+   Provide both a permanent pool and an extended detention volume above
the permanent pool, each sized with at least 0.75*WQv.
^   A pocket wetland must have a wet pool equal to the WQv, with 25% of
the WQv in a pool and 75% in marshes. The EDV above the permanent pool
must be equal to the WQv.
 
         D.   Each practice shall be designed to facilitate sediment removal,
vegetation management, debris control, and other maintenance activities defined
in the inspection and maintenance agreement for the site.
   NOTE:   This table is similar to that found in the Ohio EPA Construction
General Permit. It has been reordered to match recommended BMP categories and
additional description of the “drain time” for vegetated swales and filter
strips has been added. The “Flow-Through Design” BMP is an Ohio EPA alternative
practice and does require additional approvals from the Community and Ohio EPA
depending the development site size, and can be removed from the table if
necessary.
      (3)   Additional criteria applying to infiltration facilities.
         A.   Infiltration facilities shall only be allowed if the soils of the
facility fall within hydrologic soil groups A or B, if the seasonal high water
table is at least three feet below the final grade elevation, and any
underlying bedrock is at least six feet below the final grade elevation.
         B.   All runoff directed into an infiltration basin must first flow
through a pretreatment practice such as a grass channel or filter strip to
remove coarser sediments that could cause a loss of infiltration capacity.
         C.   During construction, all runoff from disturbed areas of the site
shall be diverted away from the proposed infiltration basin site. No
construction equipment shall be allowed within the infiltration basin site to
avoid soil compaction.
      (4)   Additional criteria applying to extended conveyance facilities.
         A.   Facilities shall be lined with fine turf-forming, flood-tolerant
grasses.
         B.   Facilities designed according to the extended conveyance
detention design drain time shall:
            1.   Not be located in areas where the depth to bedrock and/or
seasonal high water table is less than three feet below the final grade
elevation; and
            2.   Only be allowed where the underlying soil consists of
hydrologic soil group (HSG) A or B, unless the underlying soil is replaced by
at least a two and one-half foot deep layer of soil amendment with a
permeability equivalent to a HSG A or B soil and an underdrain system is
provided.
         C.   Facilities designed according to the flow through design drain
time shall:
            1.   Only be allowed on sites where:
               a.   The total area disturbed is five acres or less;
               b.   The discharge rate from the BMP will have negligible
hydrologic impacts to received waters as described in division (c)(6)B. of this
section;
               c.   Prior written approval is given by the Stormwater Program
Manager; and
               d.   For sites greater than five acres or less than five acres
but part of a larger common plan of development or sale which will disturb five
or more acres, prior written approval has been given by the Ohio EPA.
            2.   Be designed to slow and filter runoff flowing through the turf
grasses with a maximum depth of flow no greater than three inches; and
            3.   Be designed to have a minimum hydraulic residence time of five
minutes.
         D.   Concentrated runoff shall be converted to sheet flow, or a
diffuse flow using a plunge pool, flow diffuser or level spreader, before
entering an extended conveyance facility designed according to the flow-through
drain time.
      (5)   Additional criteria for extended detention facilities.
         A.   The outlet shall be designed to not release more than the first
half of the water quality volume in less than one-third of the drain time. The
outlet shall be designed to minimize clogging, vandalism, maintenance and
promote the capture of floatable pollutants.
         B.   The basin design shall incorporate the following features to
maximize multiple uses, aesthetics, safety and maintainability.
            1.   Basin side slopes above the permanent pool shall have a run to
rise ratio of 3:1 or as approved by the Stormwater Program Manager in order to
satisfy the intent of this chapter.
            2.   The perimeter of all permanent pool areas deeper than four
feet shall be surrounded by an aquatic bench that extends at least eight feet
and no more than 15 feet outward from the normal water edge. The eight-foot
wide portion of the aquatic bench closest to the shoreline shall have an
average depth of six inches below the permanent pool to promote the growth of
aquatic vegetation. The remainder of the aquatic bench shall be no more than 15
inches below the permanent pool to minimize drowning risk to individuals who
accidentally or intentionally enter the basin, and to limit growth of dense
vegetation in a manner that allows waves and mosquito predators to pass through
the vegetation. The maximum slope of the aquatic bench shall be ten (H) to one
(V). The aquatic bench shall be planted with hearty plants comparable to
wetland vegetation that are able to withstand prolonged inundation.
            3.   A forebay designed to allow larger sediment particles to
settle shall be placed at basin inlets. The forebay and micropool volume shall
be equal to at least 10% of the water quality volume (WQv).
NOTE:   Division (c)(6) below identifies the criteria that are currently be
used by the Ohio EPA to assess the equivalency of alternative practices that
are not listed in Table 2.
      (6)   Criteria for the acceptance of alternative post-construction BMPs.
The applicant may request approval from the Stormwater Program Manager for the
use of alternative structural post- construction BMPs if the applicant shows to
the satisfaction of the Program Manager that these BMPs are equivalent in
pollutant removal and runoff flow/volume reduction effectiveness to those
listed in Table 2. If the site is greater than five acres, or less than five
acres but part of a larger common plan of development or sale which will
disturb five or more acres, prior approval from the Ohio EPA is necessary. To
demonstrate the equivalency, the applicant must show the following.
         A.   The alternative BMP has a minimum total suspended solid (TSS)
removal efficiency of 80%, using the Level II Technology Acceptance Reciprocity
Partnership (TARP) testing protocol.
         B.   The water quality volume discharge rate from the selected BMP is
reduced to prevent stream bed erosion, unless there will be negligible
hydrologic impact to the receiving surface water of the state. The discharge
rate from the BMP will have negligible impacts if the applicant can demonstrate
one of the following conditions.
            1.   The entire water quality volume is recharged to ground water.
            2.   The development will create less than one acre of impervious
surface.
            3.   The development project is a redevelopment project with an
ultra-urban setting, such as a downtown area, or on a site where 100% of the
project area is already impervious surface and the stormwater discharge is
directed into an existing storm sewer system.
            4.   The stormwater drainage system of the development discharges
directly into a large river of fourth order or greater or to a lake, and where
the development area is less than 5% of the water area upstream of the
development site, unless a total maximum daily load (TMDL) has identified water
quality problems in the receiving surface water of the state.
   (d)   Stormwater quantity control. The comprehensive stormwater management
plan shall describe how the proposed stormwater management practices are
designed to meet the following requirements for stormwater quantity control for
each watershed in the development.
      (1)   The peak discharge rate of runoff from the critical storm and all
more frequent storms occurring under post-development conditions shall not
exceed the peak discharge rate of runoff from a one-year, 24-hour storm
occurring on the same development drainage area under pre-development
conditions.
      (2)   Storms of less frequent occurrence (longer return periods) than the
critical storm, up to the 100-year, 24-hour storm shall have peak runoff
discharge rates no greater than the peak runoff rates from equivalent size
storms under pre-development conditions. The one-, two-, five-, ten-, 25-, 50-
and 100-year storms shall be considered in designing a facility to meet this
requirement.
      (3)   The critical storm for each specific development drainage area
shall be determined as follows:
         A.   Determine, using a curve number-based hydrologic method that
generates hydrographs, or other hydrologic method approved by the Stormwater
Program Manager, the total volume (acre-feet) of runoff from a one-year, 24-
hour storm occurring on the development drainage area before and after
development. These calculations shall meet the following standards:
            1.   Calculations shall include the lot coverage assumptions used
for full build out as proposed;
            2.   Calculations shall be based on the entire contributing
watershed to the development area;
            3.   Curve numbers for the pre-development condition must reflect
the average type of land use over the past ten years and not only the current
land use; and
            4.   To account for future post-construction improvements to the
site, calculations shall assume an impervious surface such as asphalt or
concrete for all parking areas and driveways, regardless of the surface
proposed in the site description.
         B.   From the volume determined in division (d)(3)A. of this section,
determine the percent increase in volume of runoff due to development. Using
the percentage, select the 24-hour Critical Storm from Table 3.
 
Table 3: 24-Hour Critical Storm
If the Percentage of Increase in Volume of Runoff
is:                                               The Critical Storm will be:
Equal to or Greater Than: and Less Than:
—                       10                      1 year
For example, if the percent increase between the pre- and post-development
runoff volume for a one-year storm is 35%, the critical storm is a five-year
storm. The peak discharge rate of runoff for all storms up to this frequency
shall be controlled so as not to exceed the peak discharge rate from the one-
year frequency storm under pre-development conditions in the development
drainage area. The post-development runoff from all less frequent storms need
only be controlled to meet pre- development peak discharge rates for each of
those same storms.
 
   (e)   Stormwater management on redevelopment projects. Comprehensive
Stormwater Management Plans for redevelopment projects shall reduce existing
site impervious areas by at least 20%. A one-for-one credit towards the 20% net
reduction of impervious area can be obtained through the use of pervious
pavement and/or green roofs.
      (1)   Where site conditions prevent the reduction of impervious area,
stormwater management practices shall be implemented to provide stormwater
quality control facilities for at least 20% of the site’s impervious area.
      (2)   When a combination of impervious area reduction and stormwater
quality control facilities are used, the combined area shall equal or exceed
20% of the site.
      (3)   Where projects are a combination of new development and
redevelopment, the total water quality volume that must be treated shall be
calculated by a weighted average based on acreage, with the new development at
100% water quality volume and redevelopment at 20%.
      (4)   Where conditions prevent impervious area reduction or on-site
stormwater management for redevelopment projects, practical alternatives as
detailed in §
1060.10 may be approved by the Stormwater Program Manager.
(Ord. 88-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 26-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1060.10 ALTERNATIVE ACTIONS.
   (a)   When the city determines that site constraints compromise the intent
of this chapter, off-site alternatives may be used that result in an
improvement of water quality and a reduction of stormwater quantity. Such
alternatives shall meet the following standards:
      (1)   Shall achieve the same level of stormwater quantity and quality
control that would be achieved by the on-site controls required under this
regulation;
      (2)   Implemented in the same hydrologic unit code (HUC) 14 watershed
unit as the proposed development project;
      (3)   The mitigation ratio of the water quality volume is 1.5 to 1 or the
water quality volume at the point of retrofit, whichever is greater;
      (4)   An inspection and maintenance agreement as described in §
1060.08(d)(10) is established to ensure operations and treatment in perpetuity;
and
      (5)   Obtain prior written approval from Ohio EPA.
   (b)   Alternative actions may include, but are not limited to the following.
All alternative actions shall be approved by the Stormwater Program Manager:
      (1)   Fees, in an amount specified by the city to be applied to
community-wide stormwater management practices;
      (2)   Implementation of off-site stormwater management practices and/or
the retrofit of an existing practice to increase quality and quantity control;
      (3)   Stream, floodplain or wetland restoration; and
      (4)   Acquisition or conservation easements on protected open space
significantly contributing to stormwater control such as wetland complexes.
(Ord. 88-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 26-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1060.11 EASEMENTS.
   Access to stormwater management practices as required by the Stormwater
Program Manager for inspections and maintenance shall be granted by easements.
The following provisions shall apply to all easements.
   (a)   Easements shall be included in the inspection and maintenance
agreement submitted with the comprehensive stormwater management plan.
   (b)   Easements shall be approved by the city prior to approval of a final
plat and shall be recorded with the Lorain County Auditor. Easements granted
after approval of the plat by the city shall be recorded as a separate document
with the Lorain County Recorder.
   (c)   Unless otherwise required by the City Engineer or Stormwater Program
Manager, access easements between a public right-of-way and all stormwater
management practices shall be no less than 25 feet wide. The easement shall
also incorporate the entire practice plus an additional 25-foot wide band
around the perimeter of the stormwater management practice. Based on the review
of the BMP or stormwater management practice being considered, and in
accordance with an agreed upon maintenance plan for the BMP or stormwater
management practice, the easement width may be reduced as recommended and
approved by the Stormwater Program Manager.
   (d)   The easement shall be graded and/or stabilized as necessary to allow
maintenance equipment to access and manipulate around and within each facility,
as defined in the inspection and maintenance agreement for the site.
   (e)   Easements to structural stormwater management practices shall be
restricted against the construction therein of buildings, fences, walls and
other structures that may obstruct the free flow of stormwater and the passage
of inspectors and maintenance equipment; and against the changing of final
grade from that described by the final grading plan approved by the city. Any
re-grading and/or obstruction placed within a maintenance easement may be
removed by the city at the property owners’ expense.
(Ord. 88-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 26-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1060.12 MAINTENANCE AND FINAL INSPECTION APPROVAL.
   To receive final inspection and acceptance of any project, or portion
thereof, the following must be completed and provided to the Stormwater Program
Manager.
   (a)   Final stabilization must be achieved and all permanent stormwater
management practices must be installed and made functional, as determined by
the Stormwater Program Manager and per the approved comprehensive stormwater
management plan.
   (b)   An as-built certification, including a survey and inspection, must be
sealed, signed and dated by a professional engineer and a professional surveyor
with a statement certifying that the stormwater management practices, as
designed and installed, meet the requirements of the comprehensive stormwater
management plan approved by the Stormwater Program Manager. In evaluating this
certification, the Stormwater Program Manager may require the submission of a
new set of stormwater practice calculations if he or she determines that the
design was altered significantly from the approved comprehensive stormwater
management plan. The as-built survey must provide the location, dimensions and
bearing of such practices and include the entity responsible for long-term
maintenance as detailed in the inspection and maintenance agreement.
   (c)   A copy of the complete and recorded inspection and maintenance
agreement as specified in §
1060.08 must be provided to the Stormwater Program Manager.
(Ord. 88-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 26-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1060.13 ON-GOING INSPECTIONS.
   (a)   The city shall inspect stormwater management practices periodically.
Upon finding a malfunction or other need for maintenance, the city shall
provide written notification to the responsible party, as detailed in the
inspection and maintenance agreement, of the need for maintenance.
   (b)   Upon notification, the responsible party shall have five calendar
days, or other mutually agreed upon time, to makes repairs or submit a plan
with detailed action items and established time lines. Should repairs not be
made within this time, or a plan approved by the Stormwater Program Manager for
these repairs not be in place, the city may undertake the necessary repairs and
assess the responsible party.
(Ord. 88-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 26-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1060.14 FEES.
   The comprehensive stormwater management plan review, filing, and inspection
fee is part of a complete submittal and is required to be submitted to the city
before the review process begins. The Stormwater Program Manager shall
establish a fee schedule based upon the actual estimated cost for providing
these services.
(Ord. 88-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 26-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1060.15 INSTALLATION OF WATER QUALITY BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.
   The applicant may not direct runoff through any water quality structures or
portions thereof that would be degraded by construction site sediment until the
entire area tributary to the structure has reached final stabilization as
determined by the Stormwater Program Manager. This occurs after the completion
of the final grade at the site, after all of the utilities are installed, and
the site is subsequently stabilized with vegetation or other appropriate
methods. The developer must provide documentation acceptable to the Stormwater
Program Manager to demonstrate that the site is completely stabilized. Upon
this proof of compliance, the water quality structure(s) may be completed and
placed into service. Upon completion of installation of these practices, all
disturbed areas and/or exposed soils caused by the installation of these
practices must be stabilized within two days.
(Ord. 88-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 26-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1060.16 VIOLATIONS.
   No person shall violate or cause or knowingly permit to be violated any of
the provisions of this chapter, or fail to comply with any of such provisions
or with any lawful requirements of any public authority made pursuant to this
chapter, or knowingly use or cause or permit the use of any lands in violation
of this chapter or in violation of any permit granted under this chapter.
   (a)   Sites that are in violation with the requirements on this chapter as,
determined by the Stormwater Program Manager, shall be required to take
immediate actions to correct the violations. Sites that do not comply within a
reasonable amount of time, as determined by the Stormwater Program Manager,
shall be subject to immediate actions such as withholding of inspections
including building inspections or underground utility site inspections, stop
work orders, cease and desist orders, and final inspections for occupancy
permits or plat approval. Sites subject to such actions cannot resume work
until all violations are corrected to the satisfaction of the Stormwater
Program Manager and such restrictions are suspended in writing. In cases where
a violation notice has been issued for a site, the owner/agent shall be granted
a reasonable amount of time, not to exceed five calendar days to respond, in
writing, to the violations and provide a timeline to complete the necessary
corrections. The Stormwater Program Manager shall review and approve the
appropriate timelines as he or she feels is appropriate for the violations
under review. Responsible parties that object to such actions can appeal to
such determination in accordance with §
1060.17 herein.
   (b)   In the event that the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of
Chapter 1058 of this code of ordinances, or the provisions of an approved SWP3
plan, the more restrictive provisions shall prevail. Any activities or actions
taken in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 1058 or through an approved SWP3 plan shall not constitute a violation
of this chapter.
(Ord. 88-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 26-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1060.17 APPEALS.
   Any person aggrieved by any order, requirement, determination or any other
action or inaction by the city in relation to this chapter may appeal to the
court of common pleas. Such an appeal shall be made in conformity with the
appropriate standards of the Ohio Revised Code. Written notice of appeal shall
be served on the city.
(Ord. 88-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 26-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1060.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Any person, firm, entity or corporation; including, but not limited
to, the owner of the property, his or her agents and assigns, occupant,
property manager, and any contractor or subcontractor who violates or fails to
comply with any provision of this chapter shall be notified in accordance with
§
1060.16. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues. If the person, firm,
entity or corporation owner/agent fails to make the necessary corrections
within five calendar days after notice, they may be fined no more than $200 for
each offense per day.
   (b)   The imposition of any other penalties provided herein shall not
preclude the city instituting an appropriate action or proceeding in a court of
proper jurisdiction to prevent an unlawful development, or to restrain, correct
or abate a violation, or to require compliance with the provisions of this
chapter or other applicable laws, ordinances, rules or regulations, or the
orders of the city.
   (c)   The penalties and fines set forth in division (a) of this section
shall be levied in situations where the Stormwater Program Manager has
determined the responsible party has failed to take corrective actions to
resolve the violations. Situations such as adverse weather conditions,
including rain or freezing weather, continuance of other construction
activities on site, and failure to abide by a stop work order issued against
the site, shall be taken into account by the city before enacting fines.
   (d)   In cases where the Stormwater Program Manager has determined it
necessary to levy fines, documentation shall be provided to the offending party
that shows that the original notice has had not been appropriately been
corrected in a timely manner, and list the appropriate violations of §§
1058.14 and
1060.16. In special cases where corrective actions have been started, but not
to the acceptable practices of the Stormwater Program Manager, additional time
may be granted before penalties are levied.
(Ord. 88-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 26-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
CHAPTER 1061: ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND STORMWATER POLLUTION CONNECTION REGULATION
Section
1061.01 Purpose; intent
1061.02 Definitions
1061.03 Applicability
1061.04 Responsibility for administration
1061.05 Ultimate responsibility
1061.06 Discharge prohibitions
1061.07 Suspension of MS4 access
1061.08 Industrial or construction activity discharges
1061.09 Monitoring of discharges
1061.10 Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants by
the use of Best Management Practices
1061.11 Notification of spills
1061.12 Enforcement
1061.13 Appeal of notice of violation
1061.14 Enforcement measures after appeal
1061.15 Cost of abatement of the violation
1061.16 Injunctive relief
1061.17 Violations deemed a public nuisance
1061.18 Remedies not exclusive
1061.99 Penalty
§ 1061.01 PURPOSE; INTENT.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of non-stormwater
discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as
required by federal and state law. This chapter establishes methods for
controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives
of this chapter are:
   (a)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user;
   (b)   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system; and
   (c)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance
and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 78-07, passed 7-9-2007)
§ 1061.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). The schedules of activities, prohibitions
of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BEST MANAGEMENT
PRACTICES also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices
to control site runoff spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal or drainage
from raw materials storage.
   CLEAN WATER ACT. The Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et
seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES construction permits.
These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of five acres
or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing,
grading, excavating, and demolition.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material, including any substance, waste or
combination thereof which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or
otherwise managed.
   ILLEGAL DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the
storm drain system, except as exempted in of this chapter.
   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. Defined as either of the following:
      (1)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system, including,
but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge
including sewage, process wastewater and wash water to enter the storm drain
system, and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and
sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously
allowed, permitted or approved by the Stormwater Manager; or
      (2)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to a storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps,
or equivalent records and/or approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14).
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE
PERMIT. A permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority delegated
pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to
waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual,
group, or general area-wide basis.
   NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is
not composed entirely of stormwater.
   PERSON. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or
the owner’s agent.
   POLLUTANT. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. POLLUTANTS may
include, but are not limited to the following: paints, varnishes and solvents;
oil and other petrochemical fluids; non- hazardous liquid and solid wastes and
yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned
objects, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables;
pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers when applied in excess of federal, state
or local standards; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; wastes and residues that result
from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of
any kind.
   PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
   STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM. Publicly-owned facilities by which stormwater is
collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm
drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-
made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs and other drainage structures.
   STORMWATER. Any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting entirely of
water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
   STORMWATER MANAGER. The authorized enforcement agent for the purpose of
implementing the requirements of this chapter. The STORMWATER MANAGER, who
shall be designated by the Pubic Works Director, may utilize employees, agents
or designees from the Public Works Department, the Building Department and
other personnel assigned to work for the city by the city’s consulting engineer
upon approval of the departmental head.
   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN. A document which describes the best
management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business
to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site, and the actions to
eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance
systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
   WASTEWATER. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater,
discharged from a facility.
(Ord. 78-07, passed 7-9-2007; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014)
§ 1061.03 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by
federal or state law and/or regulation or an authorized enforcement agency.
(Ord. 78-07, passed 7-9-2007)
§ 1061.04 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
   The Stormwater Manager shall administer, implement and enforce the
provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the
Stormwater Manager may be delegated in writing by the Stormwater Manager or the
city to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the
employ of the city.
(Ord. 78-07, passed 7-9-2007)
§ 1061.05 ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.
   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are
minimum standards; therefore, this chapter does not intend or imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution or unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
(Ord. 78-07, passed 7-9-2007)
§ 1061.06 DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
   (a)   Prohibition of illegal discharges.
      (1)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the
municipal storm drain system or watercourses, any materials, including, but not
limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, that cause or
contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than
stormwater.
      (2)   The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge
to the storm drain system is prohibited, except as described as follows:
         A.   The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this chapter: water line flushing or other potable water
sources, landscape maintenance, irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream
flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains,
uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including
active ground water de-watering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning
condensation, springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian
habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if de-chlorinated, typically less
than one PPM chlorine), firefighting activities, and any other water source not
containing pollutants;
         B.   Discharges specified in writing by the Stormwater Manager as
being necessary to protect public health and safety;
         C.   Dye testing. However, a verbal notification is required to be
given to the Stormwater Manager Prior to the time of the test; and
         D.   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental
Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver or order and other applicable laws and
regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any
discharge to the storm drain system.
   (b)   Prohibition of illicit connections.
      (1)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of
illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
      (2)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
      (3)   A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection
to continue.
(Ord. 78-07, passed 7-9-2007)
§ 1061.07 SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS.
   (a)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The
Stormwater Manager may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a
person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of
the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order
issued in an emergency, the Stormwater Manager may take such steps as deemed
necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United
States, or to minimize danger to persons.
   (b)   Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge.
      (1)   Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may
have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an
illicit discharge. The Public Works Director will notify a violator of the
proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the
authorized enforcement agency for a hearing for reconsideration.
      (2)   A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to
premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the
authorized enforcement agency.
(Ord. 78-07, passed 7-9-2007; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014)
§ 1061.08 INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.
   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to
the Stormwater Manager prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
(Ord. 78-07, passed 7-9-2007)
§ 1061.09 MONITORING OF DISCHARGES.
   (a)   Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have
stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including
construction activity.
   (b)   Access to facilities.
      (1)   The Stormwater Manager shall be permitted to enter and inspect
facilities under this chapter as often as may be necessary to determine
compliance with this chapter. If a discharger has security measures in force
which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its
premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access
to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency.
      (2)   Facility operators shall allow the Stormwater Manager ready access
to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an
NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional
duties as defined by state and federal law.
      (3)   The Stormwater Manager shall have the right to set up on any
permitted facility, such devices as are necessary in his or her opinion to
conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility’s stormwater discharge.
      (4)   The Stormwater Manager has the right to require the discharger to
install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to
measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their
accuracy.
      (5)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the Stormwater Manager and shall not
be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
      (6)   Unreasonable delay in allowing the Stormwater Manager access to a
permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this
chapter. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to
discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if
the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the
permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or
required by this chapter.
      (7)   If the Stormwater Manager has been refused access to any part of
the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he or she is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter
or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety
and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek
issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 78-07, passed 7-9-2007)
§ 1061.10 REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORMWATER POLLUTANTS BY
THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.
   The city will adopt requirements identifying best management practices
(BMPs) for any activity, operation or facility which may cause or contribute to
pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of
the United States. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial
establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal
storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-
structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premises,
which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to
implement, at said person’s expense, additional structural and non-structural
BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES
permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial
activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the
provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPP) for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.
(Ord. 78-07, passed 7-9-2007)
§ 1061.11 NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.
   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible
for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a
facility or operation, has information of any known or suspected release of
materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants
discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the United
States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of
hazardous materials, said person shall immediately notify emergency response
agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a
release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the Stormwater
Manager in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day.
Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the Stormwater Manager within three business days of
the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a
commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such
establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and
the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for
at least three years.
(Ord. 78-07, passed 7-9-2007)
§ 1061.12 ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   Whenever the Stormwater Manager finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the Stormwater
Manager may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible
person. Such notice may require without limitation:
      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
      (2)   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
      (3)   That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and
desist;
      (4)   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
      (5)   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
and
      (6)   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
   (b)   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation
or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should
the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the
work will be performed by a designated governmental agency, or a contractor,
and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
(Ord. 78-07, passed 7-9-2007)
§ 1061.13 APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of
the Stormwater Manager. The notice of appeal must be mailed to the Clerk of the
Municipal Court and post marked within 14 days from the date of the notice of
violation. A hearing on the appeal before the Municipal Court shall take place
no less than three nor more than 14 days from the date of receipt of the notice
of appeal. Written notice of the hearing shall be sent to the parties by the
Clerk of the Municipal Court.
(Ord. 78-07, passed 7-9-2007; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014)
§ 1061.14 ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL.
   If the violation has not been corrected as per the requirements set forth in
the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 30 days of the
decision of the Municipal Court affirming the decision of the Stormwater
Manager, then representatives of the city shall enter upon the subject private
property and are authorized to take any and all necessary measures to abate the
violation and/or restore the property as authorized by law. It shall be
unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises
to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon
the premises for the purposes set forth above.
(Ord. 78-07, passed 7-9-2007; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014)
§ 1061.15 COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION.
   (a)   Within 14 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the
property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative
costs. The property owner may file a written protest with the Clerk of the
Municipal Court objecting to the amount of the assessment within seven days
after receiving notice of the costs of the abatement. The matter will be set
for a hearing before the Municipal Court as provided in §
1061.13. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by
the decision of the Municipal Court, or by the expiration of the time in which
to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the
property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the
assessment.
   (b)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the city by reason of such violation. The liability shall be
paid in no more than 12 equal payments. Interest at the rate of 8% per annum
shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the first day following discovery
of the violation.
(Ord. 78-07, passed 7-9-2007; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014)
§ 1061.16 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision, or fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated
or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the Stormwater Manager,
through the city’s Law Department, may petition for a preliminary or permanent
injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further
violations, or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the
violation.
(Ord. 78-07, passed 7-9-2007)
§ 1061.17 VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter is considered a threat to public health, safety and welfare, and
is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at
the violator’s expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
(Ord. 78-07, passed 7-9-2007)
§ 1061.18 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local laws, and it is within
the discretion of the city to seek cumulative remedies.
(Ord. 78-07, passed 7-9-2007)
§ 1061.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Any person that has violated or continues to violate this chapter
shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and
shall be subject to a criminal penalty not to exceed $500 per violation per day
and/or imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 30 days.
   (b)   The city may recover all attorney fees, court costs and other expenses
associated with enforcement of this chapter, including sampling and monitoring
expenses.
(Ord. 78-07, passed 7-9-2007)
CHAPTER 1065: LICENSING OF LANDSCAPE CONTRACTORS
Section
1065.01 Contractor defined
1065.02 Certificates of registration and qualification required
1065.03 Exception for public and municipal utility organizations
1065.04 Exception for homeowners/occupants
1065.05 Permits
1065.06 Disposal of waste
1065.07 Suspension or revocation of certificates
1065.08 Registration fees
1065.09 Appeals
1065.10 Certificate of insurance and bond
1065.99 Enforcement and penalty
§ 1065.01 CONTRACTOR DEFINED.
   (a)   As used in this chapter, CONTRACTOR or LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR means any
individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association or other organization,
or any combination thereof, constructs, alters, repairs, adds to, or subtracts
from landscaping, including but not limited to the planting of trees, shrubs,
flowers and plants, sprinkler fitters, sod applicators, tree removal and
trimming and the application of chemical pesticides and fertilizers. Any person
who or which undertakes, offers to undertake, purports to have the capacity to
undertake or submits a bid to undertake in any of the foregoing activities is
included in the meaning of “contractor” or “landscape contractor”.
   (b)   As used in this chapter, URBAN FORESTER shall mean any individual,
firm, partnership, corporation, association, or other organization, or any
combination thereof, engages in the business or occupation of pruning, treating
or removing trees upon public land within the city.
(Ord. 40-2010, passed 3-3-2010; Ord. 23-84, passed 5-9-2023)
§ 1065.02 CERTIFICATES OF REGISTRATION AND QUALIFICATION REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall engage in the business or act in the capacity of a
landscape contractor except pursuant to a certificate of registration and
qualification issued by the city, unless such person is particularly exempted
by another provision of the chapter. Such certificate must be obtained from the
Public Works Department notwithstanding any cross registrations between other
municipal departments.
   (b)   The Public Works Department shall reserve the right to request and
review references from contractors seeking registration. Applications and
qualifications shall be reviewed annually prior to renewal of registration.
(Ord. 40-2010, passed 3-3-2010; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014)
§ 1065.03 EXCEPTION FOR PUBLIC AND MUNICIPAL UTILITY ORGANIZATIONS.
   No provision of this chapter shall be interpreted to require licenses,
registration or certificates of registration and qualification for officials or
employees of public or municipal utility organizations to engage in the
installation, alteration, repair, maintenance or utilization of any device,
appliance, installation or appurtenance forming part of the equipment for the
generation, transmission or distribution of any commodity or service which such
public utility organization is authorized by law to furnish and provide. state
laws regarding licenses for applicators shall override this section where
applicable.
(Ord. 40-2010, passed 3-3-2010)
§ 1065.04 EXCEPTION FOR HOMEOWNERS/OCCUPANTS.
   No provision of this chapter or regulation adopted by authority of this
chapter shall be interpreted to require that the owner or occupant of a single-
or two-family dwelling be licensed or registered or hold a certificate of
registration and qualification to personally perform work upon his or her
premises. However, this exception shall not apply to any person performing work
on such premises and holding himself or herself out to the public as a
landscape contractor for profit. All such work of an owner or occupant shall be
performed by the owner or occupant with the assistance of only non-paid
gratuitous help and/or with the paid help of a person or persons not holding
himself or herself or themselves out to the public as a landscape contractor
for profit, and the work shall be done in conformity with this chapter and the
rules and regulations promulgated under this chapter, and no work shall be done
unless all permits, inspections and approvals required by this chapter and all
other applicable municipal ordinances are obtained.
(Ord. 40-2010, passed 3-3-2010)
§ 1065.05 PERMITS.
   (a)   No individual permits are required for contractors doing work as
listed in §
1065.01(a) that involves either landscaping, trees or earth disturbing
activities on private properties as long as the work does not alter the
drainage pattern or contours of the property as related to grading or affect
the landscaping, trees or earth on public lands. Contractors doing such work
are required to be registered within the city annually as outlined in §
1065.02.
   (b)   Landscape contractors who do work which alters the drainage pattern/
contour of the property involves the installation of sprinkler systems or
affect the landscaping, trees or earth on public lands shall be required to
submit plans to the Public Works Department for approval of a permit. Policies
of the Public Works Department shall apply as to the submission requirements.
(Ord. 40-2010, passed 3-3-2010; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014; Ord. 114-2014,
passed 9-8-2014; Ord. 23-84, passed 5-9-2023)
§ 1065.06 DISPOSAL OF WASTE.
   Landscape contractors as defined in this section shall be responsible for
the disposal of all waste materials created by or resulting from the work being
done. Waste, as defined herein, as created by or resulting from a landscape
contractor’s work shall include grass clippings, trimmings, leaves, plants,
bushes, branches, dirt, sod and rocks. Any and all waste created by a
contractor’s work shall be removed off-site and shall not be permitted to be
left for removal by the city or refuse contractor hired by the city. Leaves
from adjoining properties left by landscape contractors on the tree lawn, not
on the roadway surface, shall be removed by the city only during the regular
annual fall city-wide clean-up.
(Ord. 40-2010, passed 3-3-2010)
§ 1065.07 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATES.
   The Public Works Department shall suspend or revoke any certificate of
registration and qualification issued under this chapter for any of the
following reasons:
   (a)   Misrepresentation of a material fact by the applicant in obtaining a
certificate of registration and qualification;
   (b)   Blatant disregard in controlling runoff to neighboring properties;
   (c)   Departure from or disregard of plans and specifications filed with the
application for a permit; or
   (d)   Noncompliance with or a violation of any of the provisions or
regulations of the Federal Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq. or any
violation of Chapter 1060 and Chapter 1061.
(Ord. 40-2010, passed 3-3-2010; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014)
§ 1065.08 REGISTRATION FEES.
   The fee to be charged for the issuance of each certificate of registration
and qualification for a landscape contractor shall be set forth in Chapter 208
of the Administration Code - the General Fee Schedule. Each such certificate
shall expire on December 31 of the year of issuance. A registered landscape
contractor may under this registration perform work in connection with any or
all trades as specified under §
1065.01. Any registered contractor or subcontractor also working in the
building trades as specified under Chapter 1438 of the Building and Housing
Code is not considered as being registered as a landscape contractor under this
chapter. Building trade contractors and landscape trade contractors have
separate registration requirements, restrictions and registrations.
Registration for landscape contractors shall be issued through the Public Works
Department.
(Ord. 40-2010, passed 3-3-2010; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014)
§ 1065.09 APPEALS.
   Any revocation, suspension or refusal to issue or renew a license or a
certificate of registration and qualification or any other action or
determination by any administrative officer under this chapter may be appealed
as provided in
Chapter 1061.
(Ord. 40-2010, passed 3-3-2010.)
§ 1065.10 CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE AND BOND.
   (a)   In order to be registered with the city, every contractor must
maintain the following insurance:
      (1)   Commercial general liability insurance on an occurrence basis in a
combined single limit of not less than $500,000 per occurrence;
      (2)   If the contractor has employees, employer’s liability insurance
with a limit of not less than $500,000 per occurrence;
      (3)   Automobile liability insurance with a limit of not less than
$500,000 per occurrence;
      (4)   If the contractor will perform work in the public right-of-way, an
umbrella liability insurance policy with a limit of not less than $1,000,000;
and
      (5)   Workers compensation insurance in the amount required by law.
   (b)   Every policy of insurance required by divisions (a)(1) through (a)(4)
of this section shall be issued by a solvent insurance carrier licensed to
engage in the business of insurance in Ohio and shall designate the city as an
additional insured. The commercial general liability insurance policy must
contain a provision that the policy may not be cancelled, terminated or
materially changed except upon at least 30 days prior written notice to the
city.
   (c)   Every application for a certificate of registration and qualification
shall be accompanied by certificates evidencing that the insurance policies
required by divisions (a) and (b) of this section are in effect.
   (d)   Every application for a certificate of registration and qualification
shall be accompanied by a contractor’s bond in the amount of $5,000 on the
city’s approved form and executed by the applicant and a solvent surety company
licensed to engage in the business of insurance in Ohio.
(Ord. 50-2018, passed 4-9-2018)
§ 1065.99 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY.
   (a)   The Urban Forester, as defined in §
1018.03, or Public Works Director or other persons having jurisdiction hereof,
may issue citations to any person who fails to comply with the provisions of
this chapter.
   (b)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined
$1,000 for each offense and shall be liable for a mitigation fee equal to or up
to three times the market value of the damaged or destroyed tree to be
deposited into the Avon Lake Tree Fund. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed for every seven days of continued violation or noncompliance.
(Ord. 40-2010, passed 3-3-2010; Ord. 23-84, passed 5-9-2023; Ord. 25-134,
passed 9-8-2025)
TITLE SIX - Recreation Facilities
      
Chap. 1070. Avon Lake Parks and Assembly Hall.
      
Chap. 1078. Swimming Pool.
CHAPTER 1070: AVON LAKE PARKS AND ASSEMBLY HALL
Section
1070.01 Assembly Hall usage
1070.02 Municipal Park rules
1070.03 Veterans Memorial Park
1070.04 Veterans Memorial Park Rules
1070.05 Beach Park
1070.06 Miller Road Park Lake Erie Access Facility
1070.07 Skate park rules and regulations
1070.08 Vendor’s permits
1070.09 Reckless or hazardous operation of skateboards and in-line skates,
other wheeling or similar devices prohibited in certain areas
 
1070.99 Penalty
§ 1070.01 ASSEMBLY HALL USAGE.
   Requests for use: requests for use of the Assembly Hall shall be made to the
Recreation Department which may approve or reject such requests. The Recreation
Department may prescribe the form of application and may adopt rules relative
to the information required or other requirements as it deems necessary for the
orderly use of the Assembly Hall.
(Ord. 80-74, passed 5-13-1974; Ord. 165-08, passed 12-8-2008)
§ 1070.02 MUNICIPAL PARK RULES.
   (a)   Purpose and definitions.
      (1)   Avon Lake parks are primarily intended for the use and enjoyment of
the residents of the city and their friends. Persons not residing in the city
are guests and are extended the privileges of the parks, provided they do not
abuse the hospitality or rules of the city.
      (2)   As used in §§
1070.02 through
1070.06, PARKS means those areas owned or managed by the city that are used for
park and/or recreational purposes, including city parks, playgrounds, beaches,
fields, wildlife preserves and those public park areas which have been set
aside by allotters for recreational and/or park purposes.
      (3)   As used in §§
1070.02 through
1070.06, RECREATION DEPARTMENT means the city’s Department of Recreation.
      (4)   As used in §§
1070.02 through
1070.06, DIRECTOR means the Recreation Director.
      (5)   As used in §§
1070.02 through
1070.06, SUNRISE means the time of day provided by the Astronomical
Applications Department of the U.S. Naval Observatory as the time for sunrise
on that day in the city.
      (6)   As used in §§
1070.02 through
1070.06, SUNSET means the time of day provided by the Astronomical Applications
Department of the U.S. Naval Observatory as the time for sunset on that day in
the city.
      (7)   As used in this section, TOBACCO shall have the meaning given to it
in §
667.01 of this code of ordinances.
      (8)   As used in this section, SMOKING shall have the meaning given to it
in §
667.01 of this code of ordinances.
   (b)   Vehicles and traffic.
      (1)   Driving. No person may operate a motor vehicle at any park and
recreation area, except upon roads, driveways, parking areas and areas
designated open to motor vehicles or except as authorized by the Recreation
Department.
      (2)   Parking. All motor vehicles shall be parked only in established and
indicated parking areas or in such other areas and at such times as the
Recreation Department officials may designate. Parking on the roadways and
driveways is prohibited. No person shall park or station any vehicle in any
zone designated and marked “No Parking” or otherwise marked for restricted use
except briefly for emergency purposes.
      (3)   Heavy equipment and vehicles. Heavy vehicles, trucks, commercial
vehicles and the like are prohibited from using park driveways, except by
written permit of the Director.
      (4)   Direction of traffic. No person shall fail to comply with any
order, signal or direction given or posted by any police officer or designated
official for the direction of traffic.
      (5)   Bicycles. All bicyclists shall comply with state and municipal laws
and regulations pertaining to bicycles.
      (6)   Skates. Skates, skateboards, roller skates, incline skates and
similar equipment may be restricted to certain times and locations by the
Recreation Department for safety reasons.
      (7)   Mopeds. No motorized vehicle, including mopeds, is allowed to be
operated off any road or upon any designated bike path within the interior of
parks; provided, however, to the extent mandated by federal law, low-speed
electric bicycles, as that term is used in 15 U.S.C. § 2085, may be operated
within those areas of parks where non-motorized bicycles are permitted.
      (8)   Unauthorized vehicles. Subject to the mandates of federal law
pertaining to low-speed electric bicycles, as that term is used in 15 U.S.C. §
2085, mini bikes, go-carts, snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles, swamp buggies,
race cars and any other non-licensed motorized vehicles are prohibited in
parks.
      (9)   Aircraft and other flying apparatus. It shall be unlawful for any
person to use a park as a starting or landing field for aircraft, hot air
balloons, parachutes, hang gliders, drones or other flying apparatus except as
authorized by the Recreation Department.
      (10)   Vehicle maintenance. Motor vehicle maintenance is prohibited in
parks, except repairs or maintenance of an emergency nature.
   (c)   Hours of operation.
      (1)   Miller Road Park, Bleser Park, Veterans Memorial Park, Weiss Field,
Walker Road Park, Russ Lynch Bicentennial Park, Resatar Park, Sunset Park,
Wedgewood Park, Beach Park, Inwood Park, Belle Road Park, Ilg Family Park,
Overlook Park and West Shore Drive Park. The parks listed in this division (c)
(1) shall be open to the public from 6:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m., unless
otherwise indicated. No person, other than employees of the city or enforcement
officers, shall be permitted to remain in parks except when open as herein
specified or for activities authorized by the Recreation Department or the
Mayor. No person shall enter any park when the park has been closed by order of
the Recreation Department or the Mayor. Miller Road Park beach and Veterans
Memorial Park beach will be closed between sunset and sunrise.
      (2)   Lights. Except for lighting for special events approved by the
Recreation Department, lights for playing surfaces and spectator areas of parks
will be turned off at 11:00 p.m.
   (d)   Littering.
      (1)   Trash and other debris. No person shall throw rubbish, trash or
other litter into any lake, pond or stream or upon the ice of such lake, pond
or stream or into any fountain or on any roadway or any park or into any park
area.
      (2)   Hazardous waste. No person shall dump or dispose of any harmful
wastes, chemicals, contaminants, brush, appliances and/or tires on park grounds
or into ponds, lakes or streams.
      (3)   Trash disposal. Park visitors must properly dispose of their trash.
Any trash generated outside a park may not be disposed of inside the park.
      (4)   Personal property. Personal property shall not be stored in any
park except in a facility or area specifically designated by the Recreation
Department for such storage.
      (5)   Ice or water. Ice or ice water containing salt shall not be emptied
on park grounds.
   (e)   Advertising and signs. No bill, sign, bulletin board or the like shall
be placed anywhere in a park without written permission of the Recreation
Department.
   (f)   Natural resources and other park objects.
      (1)   Trees, shrubbery, lawns and other plant life. Except in accordance
with the direction of the Director, no person shall cut, carve or injure the
bark or break off the limbs or branches, or mutilate in any way or pick the
flowers or seeds of any tree or plant existing in a park, nor dig in or
otherwise disturb grass areas or in any other way injure or impair the natural
beauty or usefulness of any area, nor remove any plant material from a park.
      (2)   Wildlife. Except pursuant to §
618.13, no person shall feed, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, hunt, chase,
capture, shoot or throw any object or projectile which may harm any mammal,
bird, reptile or amphibian. Fishing is permitted only in areas designated for
that purpose by the Recreation Department and in accordance with state law and
regulations.
      (3)   Statuary, memorials and other objects. Except in accordance with
the direction of the Recreation Department, no person may remove, excavate,
take, dig into or destroy any site, object, building, artifact, implement or
location of historical, archaeological, geological, scientific or educational
interest of every character located in, on or under the surface of any park.
   (g)   Animals.
      (1)   Control. Persons bringing pets or other animals into outdoor park
areas, other than designated dog park areas, shall keep them under confinement
or direct control by use of a physical restraint, leash, cage or crate. The
leads on leashes and physical restraints used to control animals shall not be
more than six feet long.
      (2)   Pets in swim areas. Except when participating in a special event
approved by the Recreation Department allowing such activity, no person shall
permit a pet animal in the water of a swimming pool or designated swim area,
and no person shall permit a pet animal, except for an animal trained in
assisting handicapped or disabled persons, within the land area or beach area
adjacent to the water of a swimming pool or designated swim area.
      (3)   Pets on athletic fields and other athletic areas. No person shall
permit a pet animal on a designated soccer field, baseball field, football
field, tennis court, basketball court or other designated athletic area.
      (4)   Farm animals. Persons shall not bring into or permit to range at
any park, domestic fowl, horse, swine, sheep, goat or other livestock except in
areas designated for such purposes by the Recreation Department. Horses and
horseback riding are permitted at Weiss Field.
   (h)   Vending. Solicitors, agents and peddlers are prohibited from showing
or displaying their wares in parks without written permission from the
Recreation Department.
   (i)   Intoxicating beverages.
      (1)   Except as hereinafter provided, no intoxicating liquor or
intoxicated person is permitted in any park. INTOXICATING LIQUOR includes all
beverages which contain any alcoholic content whatsoever, i.e., beer, wine,
liquor, ale or spirituous beverages. The dispensing, use, drinking and
consumption of intoxicating liquor shall be permitted indoors and in adjacent
enclosed areas outdoors only at:
         A.   Lake House located at Veterans Memorial Park;
         B.   Assembly Hall (the Folger Home) located at Veterans Memorial
Park;
         C.   The Peter Miller House Museum located at Miller Road Park;
         D.   The Old Firehouse Community Center at 100 Avon Belden Road; and
         E.   The Anchor Recreational Facility at 33483 Lake Road;
   if such dispensing, use, drinking and consumption has been approved in
advance by the Mayor and the Recreation Director, adequate security in the form
of one or more off-duty peace officers authorized to discharge duties in Lorain
County is provided, and if:
            1.   Such dispensing, use, drinking or consumption is pursuant to a
valid Class F, F-I, F-2, F-3, F-4, F-5, F-6, F-7 or F-8 liquor permit issued by
the Ohio Department of Commerce, Division of Liquor Control; or
            2.   Such dispensing, use, drinking or consumption is in
conjunction with a scheduled event held at Lake House, Assembly Hall (the
Folger Home), the Peter Miller House Museum, The Old Firehouse Community Center
or The Anchor at which alcoholic beverages will be provided at no charge to the
guests.
      (2)   The number of security persons to be provided and requirements
concerning their affiliation and enforcement authority must be approved in
advance by the Police Chief. The fee for utilizing Lake House, Assembly Hall
(the Folger Home), the Peter Miller House Museum, The Old Firehouse Community
Center or The Anchor for an event at which intoxicating liquor is to be
dispensed, used, drunk or consumed shall be as specified in the general fee
schedule set forth in §
208.01 of this code of ordinances.
   (j)   Damage to park property.
      (1)   No person shall destroy, damage or deface any city building,
structure, improvement, equipment or grounds in any park.
      (2)   No person shall destroy or remove any regulation posted in any
park.
      (3)   No person shall manually or mechanically fasten or attach a swing,
tree house or any other object to any tree on park grounds, parkways, boulevard
strips or street trees.
      (4)   No person shall erect a stand, tent or other temporary structure in
any park without prior permission from the Recreation Department.
   (k)   Permits and reservations.
      (1)   Permits for the exclusive use of a park or any portion thereof may
only be issued at the administrative office of the Recreation Department.
      (2)   Persons claiming to hold permits from the Recreation Department
must produce them for inspection upon demand. Permits issued are subject to
park rules and this section.
      (3)   Permits are not transferable.
      (4)   The permittee or a permittee’s designated representative shall be
in attendance at all times and have physical possession of the permit.
      (5)   Any permit at the permitted facility granted pursuant to this
section may be revoked for the violation of the permit by the permittee or
associated individual(s) of any provision of the permit or park rules. It shall
be unlawful for any person without a permit to occupy the area designated as
reserved by a permit. In all cases of disagreement, the reservation records
will be used to make the final determination regarding the appropriate permit
holder.
      (6)   Reservations may be made for all reservable pavilions and buildings
up to 12 months in advance.
      (7)   Reservations are not required for the use of outdoor grills and
other picnic facilities.
      (8)   Softball and baseball diamonds, athletic fields and tennis courts
may be reserved for exclusive use by leagues and/or individuals by obtaining a
permit issued at the administrative office of the Recreation Department.
      (9)   The tennis courts are to be used for tennis only. All other
activity is prohibited except as authorized by the Recreation Department. In
all cases of disagreements as to the use of the courts, the Director shall make
the final decision based on a priority basis where all Recreation Department
programs have first priority, individual permit holders have second priority
(during the time listed on their permit), and the walk-ons have third priority.
      (10)   League reservations will be accepted at a specified time prior to
the program season. Individual and practice permits will be issued no more than
two weeks in advance in a timely manner.
      (11)   The person or organization to which a permit or reservation is
issued is responsible for any damage to the building, equipment or grounds. The
permit holder is also responsible for routine cleaning necessary to restore the
premises to the condition in which they were received.
      (12)   No person or organization, without the prior written authorization
of the Recreation Department, shall charge a fee for admission to or
participation in an event at a park.
   (l)   Loss of property. The city is not responsible for the loss of any
personal property in a park.
   (m)   Fires.
      (1)   Open fires, except charcoal grills and ovens or when supervised
and/or authorized by Department staff, are not permitted in any park.
      (2)   Portable charcoal, gas or wood grills, stoves and ovens may not be
used inside pavilions or under roofs thereof. All such devices shall be
operated in a safe and proper manner.
      (3)   It is unlawful to leave a fire unattended or fail to fully
extinguish a fire. Proper ash/coal disposal is required.
   (n)   Golf. Golf is not allowed in parks.
   (o)   Boating. All boat operators shall comply with all existing state laws,
municipal ordinances, Coast Guard regulations and posted rules set forth by the
city. All boats are to be launched and docked in designated areas only.
   (p)   Playground rules.
      (1)   For personal safety and the protection of others, all persons using
swings, slides, climbing devices and other play apparatus on park owned or
controlled property must do so in a safe and appropriate manner and in
accordance with any rules and regulations which may be adopted and/or posted by
the Recreation Department.
      (2)   Pre-school children on playgrounds must be accompanied by an older
responsible person.
      (3)   No ball playing or other similar games are permitted in tot lots or
among playground apparatus areas. Batting of baseballs and softballs is
restricted to designated areas with appropriate backstops.
      (4)   Bicycles must be walked through a playground area.
      (5)   Pets are prohibited on playground equipment and the playground
surface.
   (q)   Recreation areas.
      (1)   Tennis courts. In-line skates, roller skates, skateboards and other
similar devices are prohibited from use on tennis court surfaces.
      (2)   Outdoor skating rink. The use of ponds, creeks or other ice areas
for skating, sledding or any other purpose shall be prohibited unless
designated for such activities by the Recreation Department.
   (r)   Swimming areas.
      (1)   Swimming in parks is permitted only in areas designated for such
purpose by the Recreation Department.
      (2)   No person is permitted to swim and/or enter the pool enclosure of
any city-operated swimming pool when closed.
      (3)   Swimming at Miller Road Park is prohibited after sunset and before
sunrise.
      (4)   Swimming at Veterans Memorial Park is discouraged when a lifeguard
is not on duty.
      (5)   All swimmers must obey the posted swim area rules.
      (6)   Fishing is prohibited in designated swimming areas, except as
authorized by the Recreation Department.
      (7)   Dogs and other domestic animals are prohibited in designated swim
areas, except as authorized by the Recreation Department.
   (s)   Conduct. All park visitors shall comply with all park rules.
   (t)   Motorized miniature vehicles. Gasoline engine or fuel-propelled model
airplanes, rockets and boats are prohibited at all parks except by permit.
   (u)   Use of tobacco and marihuana prohibited. The smoking or use of tobacco
or marihuana in parks is prohibited.
(Ord. 96-2017, passed 6-26-2017; Ord. 101-2018, passed 6-11-2018; Ord. 23-2019,
passed 3-1-2019; Ord. 2-2020, passed 1-13-2020; Ord. 24-17R, passed 2-12-2024)
§ 1070.03 VETERANS MEMORIAL PARK.
   (a)   The name of Municipal Park, which is located at Lake Road and State
Road 83, is hereby changed to Veterans Memorial Park.
   (b)   The Public Works Director is hereby directed to cause the name of the
Park hereby changed to be entered on all necessary and proper city maps and
records.
(Res. 29-82, passed 1-25-1982; Res. 48-82, passed 3-22-1982; Ord. 43-2014,
passed 4-14-2014)
§ 1070.04 VETERANS MEMORIAL PARK RULES.
   The following Veterans Memorial Park Rules are hereby enacted for compliance
by all persons who visit and use the area and facilities of such park. Such
rules are in addition and supplemental to the Municipal Park rules set forth in
§
1070.02, all of which shall remain applicable to Veterans Memorial Park.
   (a)   No person shall swim in any area other than an area designated as a
swimming area, which area is protected and supervised by lifeguard personnel.
   (b)   No person shall bring into and use or attempt to use in a designated
and protected swimming area any of the following: a ball of any kind, a boat, a
raft, an innertube and/or any other flotation device, except Coast Guard
approved flotation devices, or water vehicle. No person shall launch or throw
any such item from the beach area or any breakwall.
   (c)   Pets are not allowed in the designated swim area, the adjacent
swimming beach or within the Veterans Memorial structure. Pets may only enter
and exit the lake via the beach and adjacent shoreline area west of the Heider
Creek channel.
   (d)   No person shall run upon or dive or jump from any breakwall.
   (e)   No person shall launch or dock any boat from or upon any area of the
Park, nor shall any person haul a boat and/or trailer through or upon any area
of the park, or park any such item in any area of the park, except as may be
allowed by agreement with and permission of the city.
   (f)   No person shall bring any glass, metal bottle or can upon the park
beach area or cause the same to remain upon such area. No person shall cause or
start any fire of any kind in the park beach area.
   (g)   No person shall fish in any area of the Park, except as may be
permitted at designated times and at designated areas, as set forth in written
notices of such times and areas which may from time to time be posted in the
park area.
(Ord. 136-84, passed 10-8-1984; Ord. 167-08, passed 10-8-2008; Ord. 110-2012,
passed 7-9-2012)
§ 1070.05 BEACH PARK.
   (a)   The name of Point Park, which is located at the intersection of
Electric Boulevard and York Road, which property was purchased from Gilbert
Forthofer in January, 1971, is hereby changed to Beach Park.
   (b)   The City Engineer is hereby directed to cause the name of the Park
hereby changed to be entered on all necessary and proper city maps and records.
(Res. 124-79, passed 9-17-1979; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014)
§ 1070.06 MILLER ROAD PARK LAKE ERIE ACCESS FACILITY.
   (a)   The Public Service Committee of Council shall prepare and recommend to
Council rules and regulations for the Miller Road Park Lake Erie Access
Facility for the purpose of applying to all persons who visit and use such
Facility and the 4.9 acres which comprise the area of such facility.
Additionally, the Municipal Park rules set forth in §
1070.02 shall apply to all persons who visit and use such Facility, except as
may be amended by the adopted Facility rules and regulations. In such case, the
Municipal Park rules set forth in §
1070.02 shall remain applicable to all persons who visit and use the remaining
9.8 acres of the Miller Road Park passive area not included within such
Facility area.
   (b)   Upon approval of the rules and regulations prepared and recommended by
the Public Service Committee of Council, and upon adoption of the same by
ordinance of Council, such rules and regulations shall apply to all persons who
visit and use the Miller Road Park Lake Erie Access Facility, and a copy of the
same shall be available, at cost, from the office of the Clerk of Council.
   (c)   The Public Service Committee of Council may prepare and recommend
future amendments to such rules and regulations, which amendments shall be
subject to approval by Council and adoption by ordinance.
   (d)   No person shall violate any of such rules and regulations.
(Ord. 117-88, passed 6-27-1988)
§ 1070.07 SKATE PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Persons using this park do so at their own risk; this is an
unsupervised facility. Proper protective gear is recommended: helmets, pads,
wrist guards and the like. The city does not assume responsibility for injury.
   (b)   Adult supervision is recommended for children under the age of 12.
   (c)   No modification to any skating surface or feature is allowed.
   (d)   No motorized skateboards, bikes, scooters, cycles or vehicles are
permitted.
   (e)   The skate park is open daily from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. during
Eastern Standard Time, and from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. during Daylight Savings
Time.
   (f)   Failure to comply with the posted rules and regulations may result in
expulsion from the park.
(Prior Code, § 1070.08) (Ord. 134-06, passed 11-27-2006; Ord. 169-08, passed
12-8-2008; Ord. 96-2017, passed 6-26-2017)
§ 1070.08 VENDOR’S PERMITS.
   (a)   Every person who vends, sells or offers for sale from a vehicle, tent
or table, food, refreshments or goods and services in or upon any public park
or park facility shall, before engaging in such business, obtain from the
Recreation Department a permit to do so.
   (b)   The Recreation Department may limit the number of any type of permit
issued to a quantity sufficient to adequately serve the patrons of parks and
park facilities.
   (c)   The fees for a yearly vending permit for each motorized vending
vehicle, trailer or stand, (defined as a temporary structure, tent-table or
group of tables at a single location), for each non-motorized vending vehicle,
and for a one-day vending license, to cover a special event, shall be
established by the Recreation Department. Said fees may provide exemptions for
not-for-profit, charitable or religious organizations.
   (d)   All permits issued under this section shall be prominently displayed
and produced for inspection when requested by a police officer or park employee
or representative, are not transferable, and yearly permits expire on December
31 of the year in which issued.
   (e)   The Recreation Department shall designate, in writing, to each permit
holder, the specific times and areas in parks where vending may take place.
   (f)   No permit granted under this section shall be construed to entitle any
person to vend or sell in any place but in the areas specifically designated,
nor to sell items other than those designated in the permit.
   (g)   The Recreation Department reserves the right to negotiate and contract
with a concessionaire for the exclusive rights to vend food and refreshments in
certain park facilities where special vending times, quality or style of food
and refreshments are required.
   (h)   The permit of any person who violates or fails to comply with any
provision(s) of this section may be revoked by the Recreation Department.
(Prior Code, § 1070.09) (Ord. 170-2008, passed 12-8-2008)
§ 1070.09 RECKLESS OR HAZARDOUS OPERATION OF SKATEBOARDS AND IN-LINE SKATES,
OTHER WHEELING OR SIMILAR DEVICES PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      RECKLESS OR HAZARDOUS OPERATION. Operation of a skateboard, wheeling or
sliding device in a manner such that the wheels of a wheeling device leave the
ground or that the skateboard or sliding device is separated from the ground at
the same time (i.e., airborne). It is further defined to mean the use of
disability ramps, steps, walls, retention walls, doors, handrails, planters,
curb or gutter edges, banters and barricades, benches, picnic tables,
sculptures, stages, platforms, playground equipment or other devices or
structures which are not intended for pedestrian or vehicular traffic, jumping
or stepping on or off such devices or structures using wheeled equipment, or in
a manner that is likely to cause damage to property or to cause personal injury
or failing to yield the right-of-way to or otherwise interfere with pedestrian
traffic.
      SKATE PARK. The area located at Weiss Field for skateboard, roller skate
and in-line skate purposes.
      SKATEBOARD. A foot board mounted upon four or five wheels and usually
propelled by the user who sometimes stands, sits, kneels or lies upon the
device while it is in motion.
      WHEELING OR SLIDING DEVICES. Include, but are not limited to,
skateboards, roller skates, in-line skates or bicycles or any other device
containing wheels which can be ridden on or otherwise utilized by an individual
or individuals in order to move about other than walking.
   (b)   Operating a skateboard, wheeling or sliding device shall be prohibited
as follows:
      (1)   In certain commercial corridors, the operation of a skateboard,
wheeling or sliding device in a reckless or hazardous manner shall be
prohibited;
      (2)   Operating a skateboard, wheeling or sliding device on any property
where a sign or signs are posted by property owners prohibiting such operation
shall be prohibited. This provision shall be interpreted to mean that if a sign
is posted prohibiting skateboarding, it shall be deemed to apply to the
prohibition of all skateboard, wheeling or sliding devices;
      (3)   Notwithstanding the definition of skateboard, wheeling or sliding
device, nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of a wheelchair, a
stroller, or similar devices, for the purpose of helping an elderly, disabled
individual, infant, or other individual needing assistance in moving from place
to place; and
      (4)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to a skate park or
extreme sports facility operated by the Recreation Department.
(Prior Code, § 1070.10) (Ord. 171-08, passed 12-8-2008)
§ 1070.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter, for which no penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense.
   (b)   Whoever violates §
1070.06(d) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for a first offense and shall be
fined not more than $100. For each subsequent offense such person is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and shall be fined not more than $250 or
imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both.
   (c)   Whoever violates §
1070.02(i) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and shall be fined
not more than $250 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both.
(Ord. 117-88, passed 6-27-1988; Ord. 89-2015, passed 7-13-2015)
CHAPTER 1078: SWIMMING POOL
Section
1078.01 Definitions
1078.02 Rules and regulations
1078.03 Times of operation
1078.04 Admissions; fees
1078.05 Authority to close facilities
1078.06 Suspension of privileges
  § 1078.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GUEST. Any bona fide guest of a resident.
   IMMEDIATE FAMILY. Any spouse residing in a nonresident employee’s household
and any dependent children.
   NONRESIDENT EMPLOYEE. A full-time, part-time, seasonal employee of any
department, division, board, commission or officer of the city who does not
permanently reside within the geographical boundaries of the city.
   PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION. The body established as such by authority
of Council.
   RECREATION DIRECTOR. That person or his or her duly designated assistant who
has been so designated by the Mayor and Council.
   RESIDENT. Any natural person who has a bona fide domicile in the city.
   SWIMMING POOL FACILITIES. That portion of the city owned property adjacent
to the westerly line of city property known as Mannino Field (formerly named
Bleser Field) and further described in a warranty deed from the Prime Realty
Corporation to the city, dated March 12, 1962, and filed for record in the
County Deed Records Volume 818, Page 36, such facilities consisting of, among
other things, the main pool, bath house, wading pool, lawns, parking area,
roadways and walks.
(Ord. 50-62, passed 4-23-1962; Ord. 29-63, passed 3-11-1963; Ord. 60-2013,
passed 5-28-2013; Ord. 155-2013, passed 12-9-2013)
§ 1078.02 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (a)   The use of the swimming pool facilities shall be subject to such rules
and regulations as may from time to time be promulgated by the Recreation
Department not inconsistent with this chapter, and which shall be filed by it
with the Mayor and made available for public inspection. A copy of such rules
and regulations shall also be posted by the Department upon a bulletin board or
other conspicuous place as it may select at the swimming pool facilities.
   (b)   Such rules and regulations shall be enforced by the Recreation
Director, or, upon authorization of the Mayor, by any other person he or she
may authorize.
(Ord. 50-62, passed 4-26-1962; Ord. 29-63, passed 3-11-1963)
§ 1078.03 TIMES OF OPERATION.
   The swimming pool facilities shall be open on such days and during such
hours as are determined by the Recreation Director, and no person not
specifically authorized by him or her shall enter upon or use the facilities
except upon such days and within such hours.
(Ord. 50-62, passed 4-23-1962; Ord. 29-63, passed 3-11-1963)
§ 1078.04 ADMISSIONS; FEES.
   (a)   The use of the swimming pool facilities shall, because of limited
accommodations, be limited to residents of the city and their guests, and
nonresident employees of the city as provided in this section.
   (b)   Residents may use the swimming pool facilities only upon the purchase
of season admission tickets or single daily admission tickets from the
Recreation Department. Nonresident employees of the city and their immediate
families may use the swimming pool facilities without being accompanied by a
resident by purchasing daily admission tickets. The fees for such tickets shall
be as set forth in Chapter 208 of the Administration Code - the General Fee
Schedule.
   (c)   No season admission tickets will be sold to guests of residents, but
any such guests, when accompanying residents to the facilities, may be admitted
upon the purchase of and payment for single daily admission tickets at the
prevailing fee for the day.
   (d)   The Recreation Director may, from time to time, increase or decrease
any of the fees or charges established by Council with the approval of the
Mayor and Council.
   (e)   Lost season admission tickets may be reissued by the Recreation
Department upon satisfactory proof of such loss and upon the payment of a fee
as set forth in Chapter 208.
(Ord. 50-62, passed 4-23-1962; Ord. 29-63, passed 3-11-1963; Ord. 94-74, passed
6-10-1974; Ord. 60-2013, passed 5-28-2013)
Cross-reference:
   Pool fees, see §
208.01(e)(14)
§ 1078.05 AUTHORITY TO CLOSE FACILITIES.
   The Mayor, Safety Director or the Recreation Director, or in his or her
absence, the chief life guard or anyone authorized by the Director, may close
the swimming pool facilities whenever, in his or her judgment, such action is
deemed necessary or desirable for the protection of the health, safety or
welfare of the residents or guests entitled to use the swimming pool
facilities, or for the protection of the health, safety or welfare of the
people of the city at large. Such action shall in no way entitle the holders of
any admission tickets to any refund therefor.
(Ord. 50-62, passed 4-23-1962; Ord. 29-63, passed 3-11-1963)
§ 1078.06 SUSPENSION OF PRIVILEGES.
   The Mayor, the Recreation Director, any member of the Police Department, the
chief life guard or any other person authorized by the Mayor, shall have the
power and authority to prohibit any action or conduct which he or she considers
dangerous, improper or immoral or in violation of any rule or regulation
promulgated by the Recreation Department or in contravention of this chapter.
He or she shall have the power to suspend the privileges otherwise granted to
the holder of any admission ticket.
(Ord. 50-62, passed 4-23-1962; Ord. 29-63, passed 3-11-1963)
TITLE EIGHT - Other Public Services
      
Chap. 1090. Garbage and Rubbish Collection and Disposal.
      
Chap. 1096. Cemeteries.
      
Chap. 1098. Emergency Alarm Systems.
      
Chap. 1099. City Jail.
CHAPTER 1090: GARBAGE AND RUBBISH COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
Section
1090.01 Definitions
1090.02 Franchise for collection contractor
1090.03 Insurance required for collection contractor
1090.04 Equipment specifications and identity of collection contractor
1090.05 Performance bond required for collection contractor
1090.06 Container regulations
1090.07 Service and weekly collection mandatory
1090.08 Billing and collection
1090.09 Noncompliance, remedies, and costs
1090.10 Municipal landfill
1090.11 Regulations for multiple dwellings and commercial establishments
1090.12 Storage of residential solid waste and recyclable materials collection
containers
1090.99 Penalty
Editor’s note:
   Resolution 144-92, passed September 21, 1992, approved the Lorain County
Solid Waste Management District Final Plan. Resolution 210-98, passed December
7, 1998, approved the Lorain County Solid Waste Management District Draft Plan
Update. Resolution 23-159, passed October 23, 2023, approved the Lorain County
Solid Waste Management Plan.
§ 1090.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COLLECTION CONTRACTOR. An individual or entity selected by the city for the
collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste, recyclable materials
and yard waste generated at residential units, municipal facilities and during
special events within the city.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Solid waste that is, or may be, collected, sorted,
cleansed, treated or reconstituted for return to commerce. RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
include, but are not limited to: corrugated cardboard, office paper, newspaper,
fiber materials, glass containers, steel containers, aluminum containers (food
and beverage containers only), plastic containers (including plastics 1-7).
   RESIDENT. An adult occupant, owner or tenant of a residential unit.
   RESIDENTIAL UNIT. All occupied residential dwellings within the corporate
limits of the city, including residences of three units or less, single-family
homes, condominiums or town homes.
   SOLID WASTE. Such unwanted residual solid or semisolid material as results
from industrial, commercial, agricultural and community operations, excluding
earth or material from construction, mining or demolition operations, or other
waste materials of the type that would normally be included in demolition
debris, non-toxic fly ash, spent nontoxic foundry sand, and slag and other
substances that are not harmful or inimical to public health, and includes, but
is not limited to, garbage, tires, combustible and non-combustible material,
street dirt, and debris. SOLID WASTE does not include any material that is an
infectious waste or a hazardous waste.
   YARD WASTE. Solid waste consisting of all garden residues, leaves, grass
clippings, shrubbery and tree trimmings less than one-quarter inch in diameter
and similar material which has been separated at the point of generation or the
point of collection from other solid waste in a separated container dedicated
to yard waste collection. YARD WASTE mixed with other solid waste is solid
waste.
(Ord. 25-2014, passed 2-24-2014)
§ 1090.02 FRANCHISE FOR COLLECTION CONTRACTOR.
   (a)   In accordance with Chapter XI, Section 61 of the Charter, the city
shall authorize the issuance of a franchise by contract to a person, firm or
corporation designated as the collection contractor after advertising and
receiving bids as required by law, for the collection, transportation and
disposal of solid waste, recyclable materials and yard waste generated at
residential units, municipal facilities and during special events within the
city for a period not to exceed five years, subject to the provisions of this
chapter.
   (b)   The franchise shall entitle the holder thereof to be the only
collector of solid waste, recyclable materials and yard waste for hire from
residential units in the city, unless the collection of solid waste, recyclable
materials and yard waste is incidental to the primary service for hire, such as
lawn care or remodeling services.
   (c)   A franchise may be terminated by the city if any franchisee fails to
comply with the provisions of this chapter, the contract issuing the franchise,
or any other ordinance promulgated by Council.
(Ord. 25-2014, passed 2-24-2014)
§ 1090.03 INSURANCE REQUIRED FOR COLLECTION CONTRACTOR.
   The collection contractor shall secure, pay for and maintain until
completion of the contract, public liability, general liability, auto liability
and property damage insurance as shall protect the collection contractor and
the city, as additional insured, from claims for personal injury or property
damage which may arise because of the nature of the work or from operations
under the contract in accordance with the terms and conditions as provided in
the contract.
(Ord. 25-2014, passed 2-24-2014)
§ 1090.04 EQUIPMENT SPECIFICATIONS AND IDENTITY OF COLLECTION CONTRACTOR.
   The collection contractor shall use covered, leak proof and sanitary
collection vehicles with distinctive lettering identifying the collection
contractor for the performance of the services to be rendered. The collection
contractor shall cause all employees to be equipped with a uniform shirt or
jacket identifying employees as employed by the collection contractor. All
collection vehicles and other equipment shall have any required permits or
registrations and are subject to inspection by the Public Works Director or the
Director’s authorized representative to ensure the safe and sanitary condition
of such vehicles and equipment.
(Ord. 25-2014, passed 2-24-2014; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014)
§ 1090.05 PERFORMANCE BOND REQUIRED FOR COLLECTION CONTRACTOR.
   The collection contractor shall furnish, at least once annually, a
performance bond in the amount of 100% of the consideration for performance of
one year of the collection, transportation and disposal services, which shall
be forfeited to the city for failure to comply with the provisions of this
chapter and/or collection agreement. Such bond shall be submitted to the Public
Works Director and approved by the Law Director.
(Ord. 25-2014, passed 2-24-2014; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014)
§ 1090.06 CONTAINER REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Each residential unit shall be provided with a solid waste collection
container and a recyclable materials collection container by the collection
contractor. Residents may provide their own clearly labeled reusable yard waste
collection containers, or use biodegradable yard waste bags for yard waste
collection, which shall not exceed 50 pounds. Brush and tree limbs may also be
tied in four-foot bundles that do not exceed 50 pounds in weight.
   (b)   All such containers shall be taken to a single curbside location no
earlier than 5:00 p.m. the day before collection, unless because of sanitary,
safety or other factors, the Public Works Director by rule or regulation
designates that such containers shall be placed at the rear, or elsewhere at a
particular residential unit. After collection of solid waste, recyclable
materials and yard waste, a resident shall, within 24 hours, return such
containers to the garage, rear or other inconspicuous location at the
residential unit for storage.
   (c)   All solid waste and recyclable materials must be completely contained
in the collection contractor-provided collection containers (unless a resident
has subscribed to unlimited solid waste collection services), except that no
less than once per month, bulky items, including but not limited to stoves,
water tanks, washing machines, furniture, mattresses, televisions, and non-
chlorofluorocarbon gas (CFC or Freon) containing appliances may be placed at
the curb for collection. CFC-containing appliances placed for collection must
include proper certification of CFC removal attached by a resident.
   (d)   The above provisions do not apply to the placement of leaves or
branches within the public right- of-way for scheduled municipal collection.
(Ord. 25-2014, passed 2-24-2014; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014)
§ 1090.07 SERVICE AND WEEKLY COLLECTION MANDATORY.
   (a)   The collection contractor shall make at least one regular weekly
collection of solid waste and recyclable materials year round, and yard waste
from April through November, at each residential unit within the city.
   (b)   All owners of residential units are required to obtain solid waste,
recyclable materials and yard waste collection, transportation and disposal
services from the collection contractor, unless such owners can lawfully
dispose of solid waste, recyclable materials and yard waste in a commercial or
industrial collection container. Owners of residential units shall be permitted
to discontinue collection services on a temporary basis while a residential
unit is unoccupied because of extended vacations of three months (one quarter)
or more, or when the residential unit is vacant, upon notification provided to
the collection contractor. Owners of residential units that are unoccupied or
vacant shall not be charged for collection services when the contractor has
been duly notified. Under no circumstances may an owner of a residential unit
contract for residential solid waste, recyclable materials and yard waste
collection, transportation and disposal services with any person, firm or
corporation except with the collection contractor that has been granted a
franchise by the city for residential units.
(Ord. 25-2014, passed 2-24-2014)
§ 1090.08 BILLING AND COLLECTION.
   (a)   The collection contractor shall perform billing and collecting of fees
for services, including any service fee which the city requires. The rate per
quarter will be that which is established by the collection contractor’s bid,
and shall include any additional services that a resident selects and any
service fee which the city requires. The bills shall be sent to the owner of
the residential unit, as determined from the county tax records, at the address
listed in the county tax records.
   (b)   The collection contractor may discontinue service if an account
remains unpaid longer than 45 days after the due date. Prior to discontinuing
service, the collection contractor shall cause a “notice of discontinuation of
service” to be served, by ordinary mail, on the owner of the residential unit
at the address listed in the county tax records. The collection contractor
shall provide the city with a copy of the notice.
   (c)   Should such account remain unpaid after the sixtieth day after its due
date, the collection contractor shall cause a “final notice of payment due” to
be served by U.S. certified mail, return receipt requested, as established by
the county tax records, to the owner of the residential unit who shall, after
receipt of such notice, be responsible for any and all financial liabilities
incurred to the collection contractor for such account. The collection
contractor shall provide the city with a copy of the notice.
(Ord. 25-2014, passed 2-24-2014)
§ 1090.09 NONCOMPLIANCE, REMEDIES, AND COSTS.
   (a)   Upon receipt of a copy of a “notice of discontinuation of service”
that is properly transmitted pursuant to the provisions in this chapter from
the collection contractor due to non-payment, the Public Works Director and/or
the Director’s designee shall determine if an accumulation of uncollected solid
waste, recyclable materials or yard waste at a residential unit constitutes a
hazard and or public nuisance, and if warranted in his or her discretion, he or
she shall be authorized to enter the property and cause the hazard or public
nuisance to be eliminated and abated by use of municipal personnel and
equipment, or by the hiring of private individuals and equipment for such
elimination.
   (b)   In the event that the owner of a residential unit that is not
receiving solid waste, recyclable materials and yard waste collection service
from the collection contractor for non-payment fails to pay such expenses
incurred by the city pursuant to division (a) above, within five days after
being notified in writing of the amount due by the Public Works Director or the
Director’s designee, such expenses shall be certified by the Public Works
Director to the County Auditor and placed upon the tax duplicate for collection
as a special assessment and thereupon shall be collected as other taxes and
assessments. Such expenses shall include any administrative costs established
by the Director of Public Works, plus any other appropriate fees or fines. The
notification of expenses incurred by the Public Works Director or the
Director’s designee may be made by ordinary mail addressed to the owner at the
address listed in the county tax records.
   (c)   The recovery of costs by the city pursuant to this section is a remedy
in addition to any other penalty that may be imposed for a violation of this
chapter.
(Ord. 25-2014, passed 2-24-2014; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014; Ord. 114-2014,
passed 9-8-2014)
§ 1090.10 MUNICIPAL LANDFILL.
   The Public Works Director may create and enforce any rules and regulations
deemed necessary for the efficient and sanitary ongoing maintenance of the
closed Avon Lake Municipal Landfill, located at 750 Avon Belden Road. Such
rules and regulations, when not in conflict with the ordinances of the city,
the Constitution of the state and the City Charter, shall have the same
validity as municipal ordinances.
(Ord. 25-2014, passed 2-24-2014; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014)
§ 1090.11 REGULATIONS FOR MULTIPLE DWELLINGS AND COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (a)   No person, firm or corporation shall collect solid waste, recyclable
materials or yard waste from multiple unit dwellings or commercial
establishments without first obtaining a license as hereinafter provided.
   (b)   Applications for a license under this section shall be made with the
Public Works Director and shall include such data and information as the
Director may prescribe.
   (c)   The fee for such license shall be $100 per year, and the term of the
license shall be for a period of one year, commencing on January 1.
   (d)   The licensee shall obtain liability insurance in the amounts and under
the conditions specified by the Public Works Director.
   (e)   The licensee shall only use that type of vehicle which is approved by
the Public Works Director. All collection vehicles and other equipment are
subject to inspection by the Public Works Director or the Director’s designee
to ensure the safe and sanitary condition of such vehicles and equipment.
(Ord. 25-2014, passed 2-24-2014; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014)
§ 1090.12 STORAGE OF RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
COLLECTION CONTAINERS.
   All residential solid waste and recyclable materials collection containers
shall be placed inside the garage of a residential unit or to a location at the
side or rear of the residential unit.
(Ord. 25-2014, passed 2-24-2014)
§ 1090.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall by subject to the penalties provided in §
698.02. For a second offense within one year after the first offense, such
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. For a third offense
within one year after the first offense, such person is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the third degree.
(Ord. 25-2014, passed 2-24-2014)
CHAPTER 1096: CEMETERIES
Section
1096.01 Burials; care and custody
1096.02 Opening and closing times for Municipal Cemetery
1096.99 Penalty
§ 1096.01 BURIALS; CARE AND CUSTODY.
   (a)   There shall be no burials within the city except in property
specifically so dedicated by Council.
   (b)   Only that area of the existing Municipal Cemetery which is properly
and legally plotted for use as cemetery plots shall be available for and used
as burial sites.
   (c)   The section of the Municipal Cemetery which is not so plotted shall
not be used for interment of the dead.
   (d)   The care and custody of the Municipal Cemetery and any other
cemeteries or burial grounds which are established within the city shall be
under the direction and supervision of the person appointed to the position of
Sexton by Council. Such Sexton shall be under the direction of the Public Works
Director.
   (e)   The Sexton of such cemeteries or burial grounds may make by-laws and
regulations, as may be deemed necessary, not inconsistent with the ordinances
of the city and the Constitution and laws of the state, for the management and
protection of the burial grounds and cemeteries under his or her control, and
such by-laws and regulations shall have the same validity as the ordinances of
the city. The Sexton shall perform such other duties pertaining to the office
as Council, by ordinance, prescribes.
(Ord. 127-74, passed 8-26-1974; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014)
§ 1096.02 OPENING AND CLOSING TIMES FOR MUNICIPAL CEMETERY.
   (a)   The Municipal Cemetery located south and west of, and adjacent to,
Veterans Memorial Park on the northerly side of Lake Road within the city,
shall be open daily to all persons from 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. Park remains
open year-round.
   (b)   No person shall enter or remain on any area of such Cemetery at any
time when such area is closed pursuant to division (a) of this section.
(Ord. 135-84, passed 10-8-1984)
§ 1096.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100
for each offense.
CHAPTER 1098: EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
1098.01 Definitions
1098.02 Permits required
1098.03 Permit application
1098.04 Amendment to permit application
1098.05 Operation without valid permit
1098.06 Validity of permit
1098.07 Permit fee
1098.08 Nontransferability of permit
1098.09 Permit inspections
1098.10 Operation
1098.11 Repair
1098.12 Access or assistance to Police or Fire Department
1098.13 Requirements for installation
1098.14 Registration with Police Department and/or Fire Department
1098.15 Notification of change of licensed manager
1098.16 Information required for Police Department and/or Fire Department
1098.17 Business agreements
1098.18 Central stations and telephone answering services
1098.19 Intentional activations of alarm systems
1098.20 Charges for responses to alarms
1098.21 Permit revocation
1098.22 Written notice; revocation hearing
1098.23 Requirements after revocation
1098.24 Inspection requests
1098.99 Penalty
Editor’s note:
   This chapter, previously a codification of Ordinance 64-80, passed May 12,
1980, was re-enacted in its entirety by Ordinance 15-87, passed February 9,
1987.
§ 1098.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM SITE. The specific property or area of the premises upon or within
which an alarm system is or is to be installed.
   ALARM SYSTEM. Any device used to detect or prevent burglary, theft,
shoplifting, pilferage or other such emergency situations, which device, when
activated, causes notification to be made directly or indirectly to the Police
Department; any device or system designed primarily for the purpose of giving
an audible or visual signal of an attempted burglary, theft, shoplifting,
pilferage or other such emergency; or any other device which, when manually or
automatically activated, will sound an audio or visual warning on or off the
protected premises and which will cause notification to be made directly or
indirectly to the Fire Department in case of fire. ALARM SYSTEM shall not
include:
      (1)   An alarm installed on a motor vehicle; or
      (2)   An alarm designed so that notification is not given to the Police
Department or the Fire Department until after the occupant or an agent of the
owner or lessee has checked the alarm site and determined that there is
physical evidence at the site showing that the alarm was the result of criminal
activity, and if a person who is able to grant access to the alarm site remains
at such site until the Police Department or the Fire Department arrives
whenever it is notified after an alarm has been activated, and such person
renders access and such other assistance as he or she is able to give.
   ALARM SYSTEM BUSINESS. Any person who installs, services or responds to
alarm systems for remuneration.
   AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE. Any device connected to an alarm system which
automatically sends a prerecorded message or coded signal indicating the
activation of the alarm system to a predetermined location.
   BURGLAR ALARM. Any device intended to prevent or detect an unauthorized
entry or attempted unauthorized entry into the alarm site.
   CENTRAL STATION. That part of an alarm system business which intercepts
signals indicating the activation of an alarm device and relays this
information by live voice to the Police Department or the Fire Department.
   FALSE ALARM. Any alarm which was not the result of an emergency or threat of
emergency of the kind for which the alarm system was designed to give notice.
   FIRE ALARM. A functionally related group of devices that, when either
manually or automatically activated, will sound audio or visual warning devices
on or off the protected premises.
   HOLD-UP ALARM. Any device activated by human actions as a result of robbery
or attempted robbery at the alarm site.
   LOCAL ALARM. Any alarm emitting audible and/or visual signals in, at or on
the alarm site when activated and causing notification to be made directly or
indirectly to the Police Department or the Fire Department.
   PERMIT. A certificate of authorization issued by the Safety Director or his
or her designee to the person in control of the property, which certificate
authorizes the operation of an alarm system.
   PERMIT HOLDER. The person to whom an alarm system permit is issued.
   SAFETY DIRECTOR. The Safety Director of the city (Mayor as Safety Director)
and/or members of the Fire Department and Police Department, as may be
designated.
   TELEPHONE ANSWERING SERVICE. Any business, other than an alarm system
business, which intercepts signals indicating the activation of an alarm system
and which relays this information by live voice to the Police Department or the
Fire Department.
   THIRTY-MINUTE SHUT-OFF. An automatic device, associated with a local alarm,
which automatically causes the alarm to shut off and discontinue the emission
of an audible signal after not more than 30 minutes of continuous operation.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 2-9-1987)
§ 1098.02 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall operate, cause to be operated or permit the operation
of an alarm system, unless a current permit has been issued by the Safety
Director or his or her designee for such system. However, this division (a)
shall not be applicable to an alarm system business which monitors, services or
monitors and services an alarm system installed and designed to protect
property under the control of a person other than the alarm system business,
but the person in control of the property which the alarm system is designed to
protect shall be subject to prosecution if he or she permits the operation of
such system without a valid permit.
   (b)   The person in control of the property shall obtain a separate permit
for each alarm system on so much of one premises that is under direct control
of the applicant for the permit. A separate permit shall be obtained for Police
Department alarms and for Fire Department alarms.
   (c)   For purposes of the fees provided for in §
1098.07, an alarm system means and includes all alarms operated under one
permit.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 2-9-1987)
§ 1098.03 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   An application for an alarm system permit shall be made in writing by a
person having control over the property on which the alarm system is to be
installed and operated. Such application shall be to the Safety Director or his
or her designee on a form designated by the city for that purpose, and the
applicant shall set forth:
   (a)   The name, address and telephone number of each person in control of
the property;
   (b)   The street address of the property on which the alarm system is to be
installed and operated;
   (c)   Any business name used for the premises on which the alarm system is
to be installed and operated;
   (d)   Whether the alarm system is or is not a local alarm and the type of
emergency for which the alarm system is designed;
   (e)   The name of the person or alarm system business which had installed or
will install the alarm system;
   (f)   The names and telephone numbers of two persons, or of an alarm system
business, who or which has agreed to:
      (1)   Receive notification at any time;
      (2)   Come to the alarm site within one and one-half hours after
receiving a request therefor from a member of the Police Department or the Fire
Department; and
      (3)   Grant access to the alarm site and to deactivate the alarm system
if necessary.
   (g)   The name and telephone number of an alarm system business which is
able and has agreed to receive calls at any time and to give the Police
Department or the Fire Department the names of persons listed with that company
in divisions (g)(1) and (g)(2) of this section, if:
      (1)   The permit holder has given the alarm system business the names and
telephone numbers of two persons who have agreed to receive notification at any
time; to come to the alarm site within one and one-half hours after receiving a
request from a member of the Police Department or the Fire Department; and to
grant access to the alarm site and to deactivate the alarm system if necessary;
      (2)   Whenever a person listed with the alarm company pursuant to
division (g)(1) of this section is unwilling or unable to perform the duties
set out, the permit holder gives the alarm system business the name and
telephone number of another person who is able and willing to perform the
duties so that at least two persons able and willing to perform such duties are
listed with the alarm system business at all times; and
      (3)   The permit holder has authorized the alarm system business to
provide the names listed with that business pursuant to divisions (g)(1) and
(g)(2) of this section to the Police Department or the Fire Department whenever
the Department has requested that information in order to obtain assistance
after an alarm has been activated.
   (h)   Whether all fees charged such applicant under §
1098.07 have been paid.
      Such permit shall be subscribed to by the person making application for
the permit.
      The Safety Director or his or her designee shall issue a permit to the
person in control of the property upon submission of an application therefor in
accordance with this section and upon payment of the permit fee, unless the
Director or his or her designee finds that any statement made in the
application was incomplete or false.
      Immediately after receipt of the application for a permit and payment of
the permit fee, the Director or his or her designee shall forward the
application to the Police Department or the Fire Department. The Department
shall protect all information on such application as confidential information,
provided that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the use of such
information for legitimate law enforcement purposes and for enforcement of this
chapter.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 2-9-1987)
§ 1098.04 AMENDMENT TO PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Whenever a person listed on the application for an alarm system permit or
listed on an amendment to the application is unable or unwilling to perform the
duties set out in §
1098.03(f), the permit holder shall file an amendment to the permit application
listing a person or company who is able and will perform those duties so that
at all times the application on file with the Police Department or the Fire
Department designates at least two persons or an alarm system business who or
which is able and willing to perform such duties.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 2-9-1987)
§ 1098.05 OPERATION WITHOUT VALID PERMIT.
   No person shall operate or shall permit the operation of an alarm system
which was installed on his or her property prior to the effective date of this
chapter (Ordinance 15-87, passed February 9, 1987), unless a permit for such
alarm system is obtained within 180 days of the effective date of this chapter
(Ordinance 15-87, passed February 9, 1987). To obtain such a permit, the person
in control of the property shall file an application therefor pursuant to §
1098.03 and pay the permit fee. However, this section shall not be applicable
to an alarm system business which monitors, services or monitors and services
an alarm system installed and designed to protect property under the control of
a person other than the alarm system business, but the person in control of the
property which the alarm system is designed to protect shall be subject to
prosecution if he or she permits the operation of such system without a valid
permit.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 2-9-1987)
§ 1098.06 VALIDITY OF PERMIT.
   Each residential permit issued in accordance with this chapter shall be
valid until such time that the control of the property is transferred from the
permit holder. Upon such transfer of control of the property, a new permit
shall be obtained.
   A business permit shall be valid for a period of one year and must be
renewed annually. Upon transfer of control of the business, a new permit shall
be obtained.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 2-9-1987)
§ 1098.07 PERMIT FEE.
   The fee for a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be paid as
provided in Chapter 208 of the Administration Code - the General Fee Schedule.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 2-9-1987)
§ 1098.08 NONTRANSFERABILITY OF PERMIT.
   Each permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be personal to the permit
holder and is not transferable.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 2-9-1987)
§ 1098.09 PERMIT INSPECTIONS.
   The permit holder for an alarm system shall keep such permit at the alarm
site and shall produce such permit for inspection upon the request of any
member of the Police Department or the Fire Department.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 2-9-1987)
§ 1098.10 OPERATION.
   The person in control of the property on which an alarm system is installed
shall:
   (a)   Ensure that any person listed with the Police Department or the Fire
Department, pursuant to §§
1098.03 and
1098.04, is able:
      (1)   To receive notification at any time;
      (2)   To come to the alarm site within one and one-half hours after
receiving a request from a member of the Police Department or the Fire
Department to do so; and
      (3)   To grant access to the alarm site and to deactivate the alarm
system if necessary.
   (b)   Train all persons who may activate the alarm system in the proper
operation of the alarm system.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 2-9-1987)
§ 1098.11 REPAIR.
   The person in control of the property on which an alarm system is installed
shall ensure that the alarm system is repaired within 72 hours of the time
notification that such system is malfunctioning is given, in writing, on a form
designated by the Police Department or the Fire Department to him or her or to
his or her employee or his or her agent by a member of the Department
designated by the Police Chief or Fire Chief to give such notice.
   The person in control of the property may cause such system to be
deactivated rather than having such system repaired, if he or she so desires.
If he or she does deactivate such system rather than have it repaired, such
system shall not be reactivated until it has been repaired, excepting all
systems which are required by statute, ordinance or the Fire Prevention or
Building Codes.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 2-9-1987)
§ 1098.12 ACCESS OR ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OR FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   Any person who is notified by any member of the Police Department or the
Fire Department of the activation of an alarm system and who is able to give
access to the alarm site shall come to the alarm site within one and one-half
hours of the time such person is notified of such activation and shall provide
the Department any necessary access or assistance.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 2-9-1987)
§ 1098.13 REQUIREMENTS FOR INSTALLATION.
   (a)   No person shall install, cause to be installed or permit to be
installed an alarm system unless the requirements of this chapter are met.
   (b)   Any alarm system which may be activated as a result of different types
of emergency situations shall give a unique signal to designate activation as a
result of a holdup, a burglary, a fire or any other different type of emergency
situation so that proper notification and proper response can be made.
   (c)   Any local alarm system shall have a 30 minute shut-off.
   (d)   No person shall use or permit the use of any telephone device or
telephone attachment which automatically selects a telephone line leading into
the communication center of the Police Department or the Fire Department, or
any number leading into the city offices and then transmits any prerecorded
message or signal.
   (e)   The Police Chief or Fire Chief may set reasonable standards and
procedures to be followed by an alarm system business or telephone answering
service when giving notice to the Police Department or the Fire Department of
activation of an alarm system. Such standards and procedures shall be set out,
in writing, and made available to an alarm system business or telephone
answering service requesting the same and shall conform to the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 2-9-1987)
§ 1098.14 REGISTRATION WITH POLICE DEPARTMENT AND/OR FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   (a)   Prior to doing business within the city, an alarm system business
installing burglar or hold-up alarms shall register with the Police Department.
   (b)   Prior to doing business within the city, an alarm system business
installing fire alarms shall register with the Fire Department. Persons and
businesses who install, service, test or repair fire alarm systems, for profit,
shall be certified by the State Fire Marshal as required in R.C. § 3737.65.
   (c)   The business registration shall set forth:
      (1)   The full name and address of the alarm system business; and
      (2)   The full name, business address and home address of the business
manager who shall be licensed by the state.
      An alarm system business doing business in this city at the time this
chapter becomes effective (Ordinance 15-87, passed February 9, 1987), shall
have 30 days to register with the Police Department or the Fire Department as
required herein.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 2-9-1987)
§ 1098.15 NOTIFICATION OF CHANGE OF LICENSED MANAGER.
   Each alarm system business shall notify the Police Department and/or the
Fire Department, in writing, of any change of the licensed manager of the
business within 48 hours after such change and of any change in the telephone
number by which personnel can be reached, prior to such change.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 2-9-1987)
§ 1098.16 INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR POLICE DEPARTMENT AND/OR FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   (a)   Any alarm system business which installs an alarm system within the
city shall provide the Police Department or the Fire Department with the
following information on a form designated by the city:
      (1)   The address where such system is installed;
      (2)   The name and address of the person having control over the
property; and
      (3)   The type of alarm system.
   (b)   Such form shall be submitted to the Department not earlier than 20
days prior to the installation of such system and not later than 48 hours after
such system is installed. The Department shall protect such information as
confidential information, and its use shall be restricted to legitimate law
enforcement purposes and to enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 2-9-1987)
§ 1098.17 BUSINESS AGREEMENTS.
   Whenever an alarm system business agrees with any person to maintain or
service an alarm system, such business shall:
   (a)   Ensure that personnel of such business who are able to render
effective assistance arrive at such alarm site within one and one-half hours of
a request by a member of the Police Department or the Fire Department for
assistance, if such alarm system business has agreed with any person to respond
to such alarm system;
   (b)   Ensure that sufficient personnel of such business are available to
provide service and to repair any alarm system such business has agreed to
maintain or service within 72 hours after the notification that such system is
in need of repair is received from any person in control of the property or by
a member of the Department designated by the Police Chief or Fire Chief to give
such notice; and
   (c)   Keep a written record of the date and time of the repair and a
description of the specific repair which was performed on an alarm system when
such repair was made in response to notification by the person in control of
the property or a member of the Department that such alarm system was in need
of repair. Such written record shall be maintained for at least two years and
shall be made available for inspection and duplication by any member of the
Department designated by the Police Chief or Fire Chief to inspect such record
when such member of the Department makes demand at the office of the alarm
system business during regular business hours.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 2-9-1987)
§ 1098.18 CENTRAL STATIONS AND TELEPHONE ANSWERING SERVICES.
   Any alarm system business which operates a central station and any telephone
answering service shall:
   (a)   Have sufficient personnel trained in the procedures to be followed in
receiving and relating notice of the activation of any alarm system on duty at
all times to ensure that emergency messages or alarm signals received by such
business can be relayed immediately to the Police Department or the Fire
Department;
   (b)   Notify the person in control of the property or his or her designated
employee of the activation of the alarm system within 24 hours of the time the
alarm was activated, by telephone or by placing such notice in the mail
addressed to the person in control of the property;
   (c)   Keep a written record of the date and time each notification of the
activation of an alarm system is received, and the date, time and method by
which the person in control of the property or his or her designated employee
was notified. Such records shall be retained for at least two years and shall
be made available for inspection by any member of the Department designated by
the Police Chief or Fire Chief to inspect such records when such member of the
Department makes demand at the office of the alarm system business or telephone
answering service during regular business hours;
   (d)   Test or cause to be tested all equipment used by the Department or
telephone answering service relating to the receipt of notification of the
activation of an alarm system and the equipment used in relaying such
notification to the Department at least one time in every 12-month period and,
where a test result is unsatisfactory, correct or cause to be corrected, within
a reasonable period of time not to exceed seven days, the cause of the
unsatisfactory test result;
   (e)   Produce evidence of the results of tests conducted pursuant to
division (d) of this section upon request of a member of the Department
designated by the Police Chief or Fire Chief to inspect such evidence. The
requirements of this division (e) shall be satisfied if such results are made
available at the central station or telephone answering service on the next
regular business day after demand is made; and
   (f)   Not provide answering services for any alarm system business which is
not licensed by the state.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 2-9-1987)
§ 1098.19 INTENTIONAL ACTIVATIONS OF ALARM SYSTEMS.
   No person shall intentionally activate an alarm system for any purpose other
than an emergency or threat of emergency of the kind for which the alarm system
was designed to give notice. However, it shall be an affirmative defense to a
prosecution under this section that the alarm system was sounded solely for the
purpose of testing the alarm and the person who tested the alarm took
reasonable precautions to avoid any request being made to the Police Department
or the Fire Department to respond to such alarm.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 2-9-1987)
§ 1098.20 CHARGES FOR RESPONSES TO ALARMS.
   The city shall respond to proper notification of the activation of an alarm
system without charge, except that:
   (a)   The person in control of the property on which an alarm system is
installed will be charged $100 when he or she or his or her agent or employee
intentionally or knowingly activates the alarm system for any reason other than
an emergency or threat of an emergency of the kind for which the alarm system
was designed to give notice;
   (b)   The person in control of the property on which a police emergency
alarm system is installed will not be charged the first time, but will be
charged $25 the second time and each time thereafter, within a 12-month
period*, when the alarm system is unintentionally or unknowingly activated for
any reason other than an emergency or threat of an emergency of the kind for
which the alarm system was designed to give notice; and
   (c)   The person in control of the property on which a fire emergency alarm
system is installed will not be charged the first time, but will be charged
$100 the second time and each time thereafter, within a 12-month period*, when
the alarm system is unintentionally or unknowingly activated for any reason
other than an emergency or threat of an emergency of the kind for which the
alarm system was designed to give notice.
   (d)   *No fine for the first accidental alarm in a 12-month period.
   (e)   Any response by the city to notification of activation of an alarm
system prior to 60 days after the passage of this chapter (Ordinance 15-87,
passed February 9, 1987) will not be included in the charges set out in this
section.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 2-9-1987)
§ 1098.21 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   A permit for an alarm system may be revoked if mechanical malfunction or
faulty equipment has caused five or more false alarms by such alarm system in
the 12-month period immediately preceding the date of notice of a hearing.
However, a permit for an alarm system shall be revoked without a hearing if the
permit holder fails to pay the service charge within 30 days of receipt of
notice to pay for a false alarm. A protest may be filed and if, at a subsequent
hearing as provided in §
1098.22, the Safety Director or his or her designee determines that no service
charge is due, the city shall refund the same. “Mechanical malfunction” and
“faulty equipment” shall not relate, for purposes of this section, to false
alarms caused by human error or an act of God. A permit shall not be revoked if
the permit holder shows that since the most recent false alarm from such alarm
system, the system has been repaired, and the Police Department or the Fire
Department has inspected such alarm system and found it to have been properly
repaired.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 2-9-1987)
§ 1098.22 WRITTEN NOTICE; REVOCATION HEARING.
   (a)   Prior to the revocation of a permit for an alarm system, written
notice shall be given to the permit holder. Such notice shall set forth:
      (1)   The specific date on which there have been false alarms from such
alarm system which were caused by mechanical malfunction or faulty equipment;
      (2)   That a hearing will be held before the Safety Director or his or
her designated representative to determine whether the permit for such alarm
system should be revoked;
      (3)   The date, time and place of such hearing; and
      (4)   That the permit holder may appear in person and/or be represented
by counsel, may present testimony and may cross-examine all witnesses.
   (b)   All hearings shall be held by the Safety Director or his or her
designated representative. The official conducting the hearing shall be
referred to as the Hearing Officer. The Safety Director shall not designate any
person to perform the duties of Hearing Officer under this section who has
participated in the investigation of false alarms from the alarm site in
question or has prior knowledge of the allegations or circumstances discovered
in such investigation. The person designated as Hearing Officer may, prior to
the hearing, receive a copy of the notice given to the permit holder.
   (c)   A representative of the Law Director shall be present at such hearing
to advise the Hearing Officer as to procedural matters; however, such attorney
shall not partake in any determination of the facts.
   (d)   All hearings shall be conducted under rules consistent with the nature
of the proceedings, provided, however, that the following rules shall apply to
such hearings:
      (1)   All parties shall have the right to representation by a licensed
attorney, though an attorney is not required;
      (2)   Each party may present witnesses in his or her own behalf;
      (3)   Each party has the right to cross-examine all witnesses; and
      (4)   Only evidence presented before the Hearing Officer at such hearing
may be considered in rendering the order.
   (e)   If the permit holder fails to appear at the hearing at the time, place
and date specified, the city shall present sufficient evidence to establish a
prima facie case showing that mechanical malfunction or faulty equipment has
caused five or more false alarms in the 12-month period immediately preceding
the date of the notice of hearing.
   (f)   If the Hearing Officer finds that grounds exist for revocation of the
permit for the alarm system, he or she shall revoke such permit and shall give
written notice to the permit holder of such revocation. Upon receipt of such
notice, the permit holder shall disconnect such alarm system immediately and
shall surrender his or her permit to the Safety Director or his or her
designee.
   (g)   If the Hearing Officer does not find that grounds exist for revocation
of the permit for an alarm system, he or she shall give written notice of such
finding to the permit holder.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 2-9-1987)
§ 1098.23 REQUIREMENTS AFTER REVOCATION.
   After a permit for an alarm system has been revoked, the person in control
of the property on which the alarm system is located may request that an
inspection be made pursuant to §
1098.24 after the alarm system has been repaired. Such inspection shall be made
by the Police Department or the Fire Department as soon as possible after
receiving the request, but, in any event, not later than ten regular working
days after the person making the request has complied with §
1098.24. If, upon such inspection, it is found that the alarm system has been
properly repaired, the person in control of the property may apply for a new
permit for such alarm system.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 2-9-1987)
§ 1098.24 INSPECTION REQUESTS.
   (a)   A person may request that the city make an inspection of the alarm
system if:
      (1)   Mechanical malfunction or faulty equipment has caused five or more
false alarms in the 12-month period immediately preceding such request; or
      (2)   The permit for such system has been revoked.
   (b)   To request an inspection, the person in control of the property shall
submit to the Safety Director or his or her designee:
      (1)   Evidence as to the cause of such false alarms;
      (2)   Evidence that the mechanical malfunction or faulty equipment has
been repaired by a person qualified to make such repairs; and
      (3)   An inspection fee as provided in
Chapter 208 of the Administration Code - the General Fee Schedule.
   (c)   Upon receipt of such request for inspection, the Safety Director or
his or her designee shall forward such request to the Police Department or the
Fire Department within three working days, and an inspection of such alarm
system shall be made by the Department within ten working days thereafter.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 2-9-1987)
§ 1098.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $25
nor more than $100 for each offense.
   Each permit holder and each person having control over property on which an
alarm system is installed has an affirmative duty to comply with all provisions
of this chapter and it shall not be a defense to prosecution of such person
that he or she was acting without a culpable mental state.
(Ord. 15-87, passed 2-9-1987)
CHAPTER 1099: CITY JAIL
Section
1099.01 Designation as a 12-hour facility
Editor’s note:
   Resolution 38-96, passed February 12, 1996, authorized the Mayor to enter
into a Minimum Security Misdemeanant Jail Affiliation Agreement with the Lorain
County Commissioners for the purpose of constructing and operating a minimum
security misdemeanant jail facility. Copies of said resolution and of the
Agreement may be obtained, at cost, from the Clerk of Council.
§ 1099.01 DESIGNATION AS A 12-HOUR FACILITY.
   (a)   The City Jail is hereby designated as a 12-hour facility in accordance
with the requirements of the Ohio Minimum Jail Standards.
   (b)   All persons who are required to be incarcerated for periods of greater
than 12 hours shall be transferred to the County Jail or other appropriate
facility.
(Res. 116-89, passed 6-12-1989)
PART TWELVE - PLANNING AND ZONING CODE
      
Chap. 1210. General Provisions.
      
Chap. 1212. Administration and Decision-Making Bodies.
      
Chap. 1214. Review Procedures.
      
Chap. 1216. Zoning Districts and Principal Use Regulations.
      
Chap. 1218. Mixed-Use Overlay District (MUO).
      
Chap. 1220. Planned Unit Developments (PUD).
      
Chap. 1222. Residential Planned Development District (RPD).
      
Chap. 1224. Accessory and Temporary Use Regulations.
      
Chap. 1226. General Development Standards.
      
Chap. 1228. Architectural Standards.
      
Chap. 1230. Open Space and Recreation Impact Fee Requirements.
      
Chap. 1232. Landscaping and Screening Standards.
      
Chap. 1234. Parking, Access, and Mobility Standards.
      
Chap. 1236. Sign Standards.
      
Chap. 1238. Subdivision Design Standards.
      
Chap. 1240. Renewable Energy Systems.
      
Chap. 1242. Nonconformities.
      
Chap. 1244. Enforcement and Penalties.
      
Chap. 1246. Definitions.
CHAPTER 1210: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
1210.01 Purpose
1210.02 Short title
1210.03 Scope and authority
1210.04 Effective date
1210.05 Applicability
1210.06 Comprehensive land use plan and other city plans
1210.07 Interpretation and conflict
1210.08 Relationship with third-party agreements
1210.09 Severability
1210.10 Transitional rules
1210.11 Restoration of unsafe buildings
1210.12 Use of graphics, illustrations, figures and cross-references
1210.13 Burden of proof
§ 1210.01 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this planning and zoning code to promote and protect
the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the
people of Avon Lake through the establishment of minimum regulations governing
the subdivision, development and use of land. Furthermore, the more specific
purpose of this planning and zoning code is to:
   (a)   Implement the City of Avon Lake comprehensive land use plan, master
thoroughfare plan, comprehensive park and recreation master plan, and other
policies or plans adopted by the city as it relates to the development of land;
   (b)   Encourage and facilitate orderly, efficient and appropriate growth and
development;
   (c)   Protect the character and the values of the residential, business,
industrial and recreational areas and to assure the orderly and beneficial
development of these areas;
   (d)   Provide adequate open spaces for light and air for all residents;
   (e)   Protect private investment into properties and the resulting property
values;
   (f)   Establish appropriate development density and intensity in order to
prevent or reduce congestion and to secure the economy in the cost of providing
water supply systems, electricity, sewerage systems, streets, and highways,
fire and police protection, schools, parks and recreation facilities, and other
governmental services;
   (g)   Manage congestion on the streets, to improve the public safety by
locating buildings and uses adjacent to streets in such a manner that they will
cause the least interference with, and be damaged least by, traffic movements;
   (h)   Provide for adequate access to all areas of the city by people of all
abilities and by varied modes of transportation;
   (i)   Encourage interconnectivity of developments in order to provide
multiple access points in and out of developments for safety purposes and
traffic dispersion;
   (j)   Improve the quality of life through protection of the city’s total
environment, including, but not limited to, the prevention of air, water and
noise pollution;
   (k)   Avoid the inappropriate subdivision or development of lands and
provide for adequate drainage, curbing of erosion, and reduction of flood
damage; and
   (l)   Foster a more rational pattern of relationship between agricultural,
conservation, residential, business, commercial industrial and institutional
uses for the mutual benefit of all.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1210.02 SHORT TITLE.
   These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the “Planning and
Zoning Code of the City of Avon Lake”, or referred to as the “planning and
zoning code” or the “code”. This code may also be referred to as Part 12 of the
code of ordinances of the City of Avon Lake, Ohio.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1210.03 SCOPE AND AUTHORITY.
   (a)   General authority and scope.
      (1)   The authority for the preparation, adoption, and implementation of
this code is derived from R.C. Chapters 711 and 713, which permits the adoption
of uniform rules and regulations governing the zoning and subdivision of land,
and by the Charter of the City of Avon Lake.
      (2)   Nothing in this code shall be construed to limit City Council in
the exercise of all of the powers to zone or redistrict now or hereafter
authorized by the Ohio Constitution, Ohio statutes or the Charter of the City
of Avon Lake.
   (b)   References to the Ohio Revised Code or the Ohio Administrative Code.
Whenever any provision of this code refers to or cites a section of the Ohio
Revised Code (as amended) or the Ohio Administrative Code (as amended), and
that section is later amended or superseded, this code shall be deemed amended
to refer to the amended section or the section that most nearly corresponds to
the superseded section.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1210.04 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This code was originally adopted by City Council on March 22, 1999
(Ordinance 52-99), as amended. This code shall become effective 30 days after
the adoption by City Council.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1210.05 APPLICABILITY.
   (a)   General applicability.
      (1)   The provisions of this code shall apply to all land, buildings,
structures and uses of land, buildings and structures, or portions thereof,
located within the municipal boundaries of the City of Avon Lake. The
provisions of this code are the minimum requirements adopted to meet the
purposes of this code as established in §
1210.01: Purpose.
      (2)   The regulations established for each district in this code shall
apply uniformly to each class or type of use, land, building or structure,
unless modified, varied or waived as provided herein.
      (3)   No building, structure or land shall be used or occupied and no
building or structure or part thereof shall be structurally altered except in
conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in
which it is located.
   (b)   Essential services exempted.
      (1)   The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public
utilities or municipal departments, boards or commissions, of overhead, surface
or underground gas, electrical steam, or water, distribution or transmission
systems, collection, communications (except for wireless telecommunication
facilities as regulated in this code), supply or disposal systems, including
mains, sanitary sewers, water lines, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, tunnels,
wires, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants,
poles, electrical substation, gas regulator stations and other similar
equipment and accessories in connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the
furnishing of adequate service by such public utility or municipal department,
board or commission or for the public health, safety or general welfare, shall
be exempt from the regulations of this code. Provided, however, that the
installation shall conform to Federal Communications Commission and Federal
Aviation Agency rules and regulations, and those of other authorities having
jurisdiction.
      (2)   Buildings required in conjunction with an essential service
identified in division (b)(1) of this section shall be subject to the
regulations of this code and shall be reviewed as a principal use in accordance
with §
1216.05: Allowed Principal Uses. Utility structures, as defined in this code,
shall also be reviewed as an accessory use (in the right-of-way) in accordance
with §
1224.01: Accessory Uses and Structures.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1210.06 COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN AND OTHER CITY PLANS.
   The administration, enforcement and amendment of this code should be
consistent with the most recently adopted version of a comprehensive land use
plan for the City of Avon Lake, as amended and herein may be referred to as the
“comprehensive plan”, “comprehensive land use plan” or “land use plan”. Such
plan, or references to such plan, shall also include other adopted plans within
the city that related to development including, but not limited to, a
thoroughfare plan, parks and recreation plan and the like. Amendments to this
code should maintain and enhance the consistency between this code and the
comprehensive land use plan.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1210.07 INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICT.
   (a)   Interpretation of provisions. The provisions of this code shall be
held to be the minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public
health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience and general welfare.
   (b)   Conflict with other public laws, ordinances, regulations or permits.
This code is intended to complement other city, state and federal regulations
that affect land use and the division of land. This code is not intended to
revoke or repeal any other public law, ordinance, regulation or permit.
However, where conditions, standards or requirements imposed by any provision
of this code are more restrictive than comparable standards imposed by any
other public law, ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this code shall
govern.
   (c)   Repeal of conflicting ordinance. All ordinances or parts of ordinances
in conflict with this code or inconsistent with the provisions of this code are
hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this code full force and
effect.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1210.08 RELATIONSHIP WITH THIRD-PARTY AGREEMENTS.
   (a)   This code is not intended to interfere with or abrogate any third-
party private agreements including, but not limited to, easements, covenants or
other legal agreements between third parties. However, where this code proposes
a greater restriction or imposes higher standards or requirements than such
easement, covenant or other private third-party agreement, then the provisions
of this code shall govern.
   (b)   Nothing in this code shall modify or repeal any private covenant or
deed restriction, but such covenant or restriction shall not excuse any failure
to comply with this code.
   (c)   In no case shall the city be obligated to enforce the provisions of
any easements, covenants or other agreements between private parties, even if
the city is a named party in and has been granted the right to enforce the
provisions of such agreement.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1210.09 SEVERABILITY.
   (a)   If any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates any provision of
this code, then such judgment shall not affect the validity and continued
enforcement of any other provision of this code.
   (b)   If any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates the application of
any provision of this code to a particular property, structure or situation,
then such judgment shall not affect the application of that provision to any
other property, structure or situation not specifically included in that
judgment.
   (c)   If any court of competent jurisdiction judges invalid any condition
attached to the approval of a development review application, then such
judgment shall not affect any other conditions or requirements attached to the
same approval that are not specifically included in that judgment.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1210.10 TRANSITIONAL RULES.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of these transitional rules is to resolve the
status of properties with pending applications or recent approvals, and
properties with outstanding violations, on the effective date of this code.
   (b)   Violations continue.
      (1)   Any violation that existed at the time this amendment became
effective shall continue to be a violation under this code and is subject to
penalties and enforcement under
Chapter 1244: Enforcement and Penalties unless the use, development,
construction or other activity complies with the provisions of this code.
      (2)   Payment shall be required for any civil penalty assessed under the
previous regulations, even if the original violation is no longer considered to
be a violation under this code.
   (c)   Nonconformities continue.
      (1)   Any legal nonconformity that existed at the time this amendment
became effective shall continue to be a legal nonconformity under this code as
long as the situation that resulted in the nonconforming status under the
previous code continues to exist, and shall be controlled by
Chapter 1242: Nonconformities.
      (2)   If a legal nonconformity that existed at the time this amendment
became effective becomes conforming because of the adoption of this amendment,
then the situation will be considered conforming and shall no longer be subject
to the regulations pertaining to nonconformities.
   (d)   Processing of applications commenced or approved under previous
regulations.
      (1)   Pending projects.
         A.   Any complete application that has been submitted or accepted for
approval, but upon which no final action has been taken by the appropriate
decision-making body prior to the effective date of this code, shall be
reviewed in accordance with the provisions of the regulations in effect on the
date the application was deemed complete by the city.
         B.   If a complete application is not filed within the required
application filing deadlines in effect prior to the adoption of this code, the
application shall expire and subsequent applications shall be subject to the
requirements of this code.
         C.   Any re-application for an expired project approval shall meet the
standards in effect at the time of re-application.
         D.   An applicant with a pending application may waive review
available under prior regulations through a written letter to the city and
request review under the provisions of this code.
      (2)   Approved projects.
         A.   Approved site plans, variances, certificates of appropriateness,
conditional uses, zoning permits or other approved plans or permits that are
valid on the effective date of this code shall remain valid until their
expiration date, where applicable.
         B.   Any building or development for which a permit or certificate was
granted prior to the effective date of this code shall be permitted to proceed
to construction, even if such building or development does not conform to the
provisions of this code, as long as the permit or certificate remains valid.
         C.   If the development for which the permit or certificate is issued
prior to the effective date of this code fails to comply with the time frames
for development established for the permit or certificate, the permit or
certificate shall expire, and future development shall be subject to the
requirements of this code.
         D.   Planned unit developments that were approved prior to the
effective date of this code shall conform to the approved general development
plan and shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 1220: Planned Unit
Developments (PUD).
   (e)   Vested rights. The transitional rule provisions of this section are
subject to the state’s vested rights laws.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1210.11 RESTORATION OF UNSAFE BUILDINGS.
   Nothing in this code shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be
unsafe by an official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of
such official.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1210.12 USE OF GRAPHICS, ILLUSTRATIONS, FIGURES AND CROSS-REFERENCES.
   (a)   Graphics, illustrations and figures are provided for illustrative
purposes only and shall not be construed as regulations. Where a conflict may
occur between the text and any graphic, illustration or figure, the text shall
control.
   (b)   In some instances, cross-references between chapters, sections and
divisions are provided that include the chapter, section or division number
along with the name of the reference. Where a conflict may occur between the
given cross-reference number and name, the name shall control.
   (c)   A table shall be considered text for the purposes of this code unless
specifically identified as a figure.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1210.13 BURDEN OF PROOF.
   The burden of demonstrating that an application or any development subject
to this code complies with applicable review and approval standards is on the
applicant. The burden is not on the city or other parties to show that the
standards have not been met by the applicant or person responsible for the
development.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
CHAPTER 1212: ADMINISTRATION AND DECISION-MAKING BODIES
Section
1212.01 Purpose
1212.02 Review authority names, references, and delegation
1212.03 City Council
1212.04 Review boards
1212.05 Code Administrator
1212.06 Development Review Committee
§ 1212.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the powers and duties of the
City Council, Municipal Planning Commission, Historical Preservation
Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, Code Administrator and Development Review
Committee with respect to the administration and enforcement of the provisions
of this code.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1212.02 REVIEW AUTHORITY NAMES, REFERENCES, AND DELEGATION.
   (a)   Review authority names and references. For the purposes of this code,
the formal names of the administration and decision-making authorities
identified above may also be referred to abbreviated names as identified below:
      (1)   The City of Avon Lake City Council may be hereafter referred to as
“City Council” or “Council”.
      (2)   The City of Avon Lake Municipal Planning Commission may be
hereafter referred to as the “Planning Commission”.
      (3)   The City of Avon Lake Historical Preservation Commission may be
hereafter referred to as the “Historical Preservation Commission” or “HPC”.
      (4)   The City of Avon Lake Zoning Board of Appeals may be hereafter
referred to as the “ZBA”.
      (5)   The City of Avon Lake Code Administrator may be hereafter referred
to as the “Code Administrator”.
      (6)   The City of Avon Lake Development Review Committee maybe hereafter
referred to as the “Development Review Committee” or “DRC”.
   (b)   Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or another officer or employee of the city to perform an
act or duty, that provision shall be construed as authorizing the department
head or officer to delegate the responsibility to subordinates, unless the
terms of the provision specify otherwise.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1212.03 CITY COUNCIL.
   In addition to any other authority granted to the City Council by Charter,
ordinance or state law, the City Council shall have the following powers and
duties, as it relates to this code:
   (a)   Initiate, hear, review and make decisions related to amendments to the
text of this code or the zoning map;
   (b)   Review and confirm or reject recommendations on conditional uses from
the Planning Commission in accordance with §
1214.03: Conditional Uses;
   (c)   Hear, review, and make decisions on MUO development plans in
accordance with
Chapter 1218: Mixed-Use Overlay District (MUO);
   (d)   Hear, review, and make decisions related to previously approved
Planned Unit Developments in accordance with
Chapter 1220: Planned Unit Developments (PUD);
   (e)   Hear, review, and make decisions related to Residential Planned
Developments in accordance with
Chapter 1222: Residential Planned Development District (RPD);
   (f)   Review and accept, where appropriate, any proposed dedication of
streets, utilities and other public improvements required by this code;
   (g)   Establish fees for development review procedures, certificates and
permits outlined in this code;
   (h)   Initiate, hear, review and make decision related to the designation of
historic sites and districts; and
   (i)   Perform any other duties related to the administration and enforcement
of this code as authorized by the Charter, this code, and the Ohio Revised
Code.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1212.04 REVIEW BOARDS.
   For the purposes of this code, there shall be review boards established for
the administration and enforcement of this code including the Planning
Commission, HPC and the ZBA.
   (a)   General rules and regulations for all review boards. The following
shall apply to the Planning Commission, HPC and ZBA.
      (1)   Members of a board shall serve without compensation.
      (2)   With the prior approval of City Council, any expense incurred by a
review board, or the members of such board, in the performance of their duties,
shall be paid from the Municipal Treasury.
      (3)   All members, at the date of their respective appointments, shall
have been qualified electors of the city for the previous two years and shall
continue to be qualified electors of the city during the terms of their office.
      (4)   Except where the organizational requirements of this section
mandate membership by an elected official, members of the review boards shall
not otherwise be employed or appointed to any other municipal office.
      (5)   Members of a board may be removed for misfeasance, malfeasance or
nonfeasance by City Council.
      (6)   A vacancy occurring during the term of any member of the board
shall be filled through the same manner as the position was originally filled,
for the unexpired term in a manner authorized for the original appointment.
      (7)   The Planning Commission, HPC and ZBA may, by a majority vote of its
entire membership, adopt by-laws or rules for the governance of said board,
provided they are consistent with state law and with any ordinances of the
city.
      (8)   The boards shall keep minutes of their meetings and hearings, which
shall be a public record.
      (9)   All meetings of the boards shall be open to the public, except as
exempted by law.
      (10)   The departments, divisions and agencies of the city shall
cooperate with and assist the boards in implementing the purposes for which
they are formed.
      (11)   Review boards may subpoena witnesses and require the production of
records in accordance with Chapter 268 of the code of ordinances of the city.
      (12)   Alternates.
         A.   City Council may appoint up to two alternate members to each
review board for a term of two years each.
         B.   An alternate member shall take the place of an absent regular
member at any meeting of the applicable review board.
         C.   An alternate member shall meet the same appointment criteria as a
regular member.
         D.   When attending a meeting on behalf of an absent member, the
alternate member may vote on any matter the absent member is authorized and
eligible to vote for and provided the member attended all pertinent public
meetings or hearings.
         E.   When a vacancy occurs, alternate members do not automatically
become full members of the applicable review board. Alternate members have to
be appointed to replace a full member upon a vacancy.
      (13)   Meetings.
         A.   Each board shall hold such meetings as it may require for
conducting its business. Prior to the end of each year, the members shall, by
motion, determine the dates of its regular meetings for the succeeding year.
         B.   The Chairperson of each board may cancel a meeting if there is no
pending business to be conducted, after consulting with the Code Administrator.
         C.   Special meetings may be called by the chairperson or by two
members of the individual board after consulting with the Code Administrator,
or by a vote of the applicable board at its regular meeting.
         D.   At either the first meeting or the last regular meeting of each
year, each board shall elect a Chairperson who shall serve for one-year terms.
The boards may also elect a Vice-Chairperson and Secretary. These officers
shall be elected from among the members of the applicable boards. During the
temporary absence of the Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson, where elected,
shall fulfill the duties of the Chairperson.
      (14)   Quorums and decisions.
         A.   Any combination of four or more regular or alternate members of
the Planning Commission shall constitute a quorum. Any combination of three or
more regular or alternate members of the ZBA or HPC shall constitute a quorum.
         B.   A motion made on a decision shall carry when at least four
members of the Planning Commission or three members of the HPC or ZBA concur.
         C.   Non-decision items, such as continuance or approval of minutes,
shall only require a majority of the quorum of the individual board to concur.
         D.   A member of a board shall not be qualified to vote if that member
did not attend the public hearing of the applicable case subject to a decision
unless he or she has read or listened to the transcript of the public hearing.
   (b)   Organization and roles of the Planning Commission.
      (1)   Establishment. The Municipal Planning Commission is hereby
established by City Council pursuant to the Charter of the city.
      (2)   Membership and terms. Membership on the Planning Commission shall
be in accordance with §§
41 and
42 of the Charter.
      (3)   Roles and powers of the Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission shall have the following roles and powers:
         A.   Initiate, hear, review and make recommendations to City Council
for a comprehensive land use plan and other plans for the future physical
development and improvement of the city, based upon utility, convenience and
beauty, physical needs, density and the social welfare and physical well-being
of the people;
         B.   Initiate, hear, review and make recommendations to City Council
related to amendments to the text of this code or the zoning map;
         C.   Hear, review and make recommendations on MUO development plans in
accordance with
Chapter 1218: Mixed-Use Overlay District (MUO);
         D.   Hear, review and make recommendations or decisions related to
Planned Unit Developments in accordance with
Chapter 1220: Planned Unit Developments (PUD);
         E.   Hear, review and make recommendations or decisions related to
Residential Planned Developments in accordance with
Chapter 1220: Planned Unit Developments (PUD);
         F.   Hear, review, and make recommendations to City Council on
conditional uses in the respective zoning district;
         G.   Review and make decisions on site plan applications;
         H.   Review and make decisions on alternative equivalency review
applications, simultaneously with an associated site plan application;
         I.   Review and make decisions on the preliminary subdivision plats
and final subdivision plats for major subdivisions;
         J.   Review any proposed construction, alteration, opening, widening,
narrowing, relocation, vacation or change in publicly owned property which is
not in conformity with the approved comprehensive land use plan, or other plans
adopted by the city. The Planning Commission shall act upon such a proposal
within 60 days from the date of referral unless a time extension has been
mutually agreed upon. If the Planning Commission fails to act it shall be
deemed to have approved said proposal;
         K.   Review and make decisions on requests for subdivision
modifications;
         L.   Consider, investigate and report upon any special matter or
question coming within the scope of its work as requested by City Council, or
the administration; and
         M.   Perform any other duties related to the administration and
enforcement of this code as authorized by the Charter, this code, by ordinance
of City Council, and/or the Ohio Revised Code.
      (4)   Special provisions for Planning Commission hearings related to
conditional use review. As stated in
Chapter 1214: Review Procedures, a conditional use shall be reviewed through an
adjudication hearing that allows the Planning Commission to have the following
additional powers as part of the review of any conditional use application.
         A.   The Planning Commission shall make findings and conclusions which
support its decisions. The findings and conclusions shall set forth and
demonstrate the manner in which the decision carries out and helps to
administer and enforce the provisions of this code including the application of
any review criteria for the subject application.
         B.   The Planning Commission may subpoena witnesses and require the
production of records in accordance with
Chapter 268 of this code of ordinances.
         C.   The privilege of cross-examination of witnesses shall be accorded
all interested parties or their counsel in accordance with the rules of the
Planning Commission.
   (c)   Organization and roles of the Historical Preservation Commission
(HPC).
      (1)   Establishment. The city’s Historical Preservation Commission is
hereby established by City Council.
      (2)   Membership and terms. The membership of the HPC shall be as
follows.
         A.   The HPC shall be composed of a total of five members, each of
whom shall have demonstrated a special interest, experience or knowledge of
history, architecture or a related discipline.
         B.   At least two members of the HPC shall be preservation-related
professional members to the extent such professionals are available in the
community. Preservation-related professions shall include, but are not limited
to, the professions of architecture, architectural history, history,
archaeology, interior design with a specialization in historic preservation,
planning or a related discipline.
         C.   City Council shall appoint three members to the HPC and the Mayor
shall appoint two members to the HPC. The two members appointed by the Mayor
are subject to confirmation and approval by Council.
         D.   The Planning Commission shall designate one member of said
commission as a non-voting liaison to the HPC.
         E.   The City Council shall designate one member of Council to serve
as a non-voting liaison to the HPC.
         F.   The length of appointments to the HPC shall be two years with
staggered terms and with no limits on the number of consecutive appointments.
In the first year, two City Council appointees and one Mayoral appointee shall
serve a one-year term; thereafter, all appointees shall serve two-year terms.
      (3)   Roles and powers of the Historical Preservation Commission. The
Historical Preservation Commission shall have the following roles and powers:
         A.   Review and make decisions with respect to certificates of
appropriateness regarding any change, demolition, construction, preservation,
restoration, reconstruction and rehabilitation of any structure or property
within its jurisdiction;
         B.   Make recommendations regarding amendments to this code as they
affect historic districts or landmarks;
         C.   Establish the procedures for evaluating applications for
certificates of appropriateness;
         D.   Conduct or cause to be conducted a continuing survey of cultural
resources in the community, according to the guidelines established by the Ohio
Historic Preservation Office;
         E.   Act in an advisory role to other officials and departments of
local government regarding the protection of local cultural resources;
         F.   Act as a liaison on behalf of the local government to individuals
and organizations concerned with historic preservation;
         G.   Conduct or encourage members to attend educational sessions at
least once a year or an in-depth consultation with the Ohio Historic
Preservation Office pertaining to the work and functions of the HPC or on
specific historic preservation issues;
         H.   Educate property owners/applicants on the benefits and possible
limitations of their property being declared historic;
         I.   Maintain a system for the survey and inventory of historic
properties;
         J.   Review applications for designation as a historic landmark or
historic district according to the procedures and criteria in this chapter; and
         K.   Perform any other duties related to the administration and
enforcement of this code as authorized by the charter, this code, by ordinance
of City Council, by mutual agreement with the Ohio Historic Preservation Office
(OHPO), and/or the Ohio Revised Code.
   (d)   Organization and roles of the Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA).
      (1)   Establishment. The city’s Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby
established.
      (2)   Membership.
         A.   The ZBA shall be composed of a total of five members with two
members being appointed by the Mayor and three members being appointed by City
Council. The two members appointed by the Mayor are subject to confirmation and
approval by Council.
         B.   The ZBA members shall serve a term of five years each, with terms
staggered so that there is an appointment every year.
      (3)   Roles and powers of the ZBA. The ZBA shall have the following roles
and powers to:
         A.   Hear, review and decide on appeals of any administrative decision
where it is alleged there is an error in any administrative order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the Planning Commission, Code Administrator
or other staff member authorized to make such decisions or orders, unless
another appeals board is established by this code;
         B.   Hear, review and decide on variance requests in accordance with
the applicable provisions of this code;
         C.   Resolve any disputes with respect to the precise location of a
zoning district boundary, using, where applicable, the standards and criteria
of §
1216.03: Zoning District Map and District Boundaries;
         D.   To permit the completion, restoration, reconstruction, expansion
or extension of a nonconforming use where the enforcement of the regulations
pertaining to nonconforming lots or buildings will result in unnecessary
hardship; and
         E.   Perform any other duties related to the administration and
enforcement of this code as authorized by the charter, this code, or the Ohio
Revised Code.
      (4)   Special provisions for ZBA hearings.
         A.   The ZBA shall make findings and conclusions which support all of
its decisions. The findings and conclusions shall set forth and demonstrate the
manner in which the decision carries out and helps administer and enforce the
provisions of this code, including the application of any review criteria for
the subject application.
         B.   The ZBA may subpoena witnesses and require the production of
records in accordance with
Chapter 268 of the Code of ordinances.
         C.   The privilege of cross-examination of witnesses shall be accorded
all interested parties or their counsel in accordance with the rules of the
ZBA.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1212.05 CODE ADMINISTRATOR.
   (a)   Establishment. The position of city’s Code Administrator shall be
established to aid in the administration and enforcement of this code. The Code
Administrator may be provided with the assistance of such other persons as the
Mayor may direct.
   (b)   Roles and powers of the Code Administrator. The Code Administrator
shall have the following roles and powers to:
      (1)   Enforce the provisions of this code. The Code Administrator shall
have all necessary authority on behalf of the city to administer and enforce
the provisions of this code. Such authority shall include the ability to order,
in writing, the remedy of any condition found in violation of this code and the
ability to bring legal action to ensure compliance with the provisions
including injunction, abatement, or other appropriate action or proceeding. All
officials and employees of the city may assist the Code Administrator by
reporting to the Code Administrator any new construction, reconstruction, land
uses, or violations that are observed;
      (2)   Review and make decisions on zoning permits and other permits
reviewed in the manner of the zoning permit as may be allowed by this code;
      (3)   Review and make decisions on questions of interpretation related to
this code;
      (4)   Maintain in current status the “Official Zoning District Map” of
the city;
      (5)   Accept, review for completeness and respond to questions regarding
review procedure applications established in this code;
      (6)   Participate in any pre-application meetings as may be requested by
a property owner or potential applicant in accordance with this code;
      (7)   Participate in the Development Review Committee, as established in
this code;
      (8)   Review and make decisions on minor subdivision applications
following input from the Development Review Committee;
      (9)   Develop and recommend the city requirements, stormwater management
standards and other documents related to subdivision improvement specifications
that may be adopted or approved outside of this code;
      (10)   Review and make decisions on improvement plans and construction
drawings for major subdivisions;
      (11)   Refer requests for appeals of decisions to the ZBA;
      (12)   Provide such technical and consultation assistance as may be
required by the ZBA, the Planning Commission, HPC and City Council, in the
exercise of their duties relating to this code;
      (13)   Review, inspect property and make decisions on compliance with the
provisions of this code;
      (14)   Maintain permanent and current records of all applications;
      (15)   Investigate complaints and issue citations or other forms of
enforcement and penalties for any violations and keep adequate records of all
violations;
      (16)   Inspect, or cause to be inspected, all construction or
installation work related to public improvements as required by these
regulations.
      (17)   Order discontinuance of any illegal work being done;
      (18)   Revoke a permit or approval issued contrary to this code or based
on a false statement or misrepresentation on the application; and
      (19)   Take any other action authorized by this code to ensure compliance
with or to prevent violation(s) of this code.
   (c)   Decisions of the Code Administrator. A decision of the Code
Administrator may be appealed to the ZBA in accordance with §
1214.11: Appeals unless another appeals board is established by this code.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1212.06 DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE.
   (a)   Establishment.
      (1)   The city’s Development Review Committee shall be established to aid
in the administrative review of certain review procedures as set forth in this
code. The Mayor shall appoint members to the committee that will include, at a
minimum, the Code Administrator, Economic Development Director and the Law
Director, along with any other administrative staff as may be appropriate to
provide assistance on development applications.
      (2)   The Development Review Committee shall be an administrative
committee responsible for the administrative level review related to the
procedures set out in this code. Meetings of the Development Review Committee
are not public meetings and are not subject to public notice.
   (b)   Chairperson. Each year, the Development Review Committee shall select
a member to be the Chairperson of the committee. The Chairperson shall be
responsible for organizing meetings and ensuring that members receive needed
materials in a timely manner.
   (c)   Roles and powers of the Development Review Committee. The Development
Review Committee shall have the following powers and duties related to this
code:
      (1)   Review and provide comments and reports, as needed, for the various
procedures where the Planning Commission, HPC, ZBA or City Council reviews an
application;
      (2)   Distribute any comments, responses or revisions made by applicants
to any agency that provided initial comments on an application.
      (3)   Request that the applicant revise any application materials that
may be missing material information or demonstrate problems with compliance
with this code; and
      (4)   Participate in any pre-application meetings requested by a property
owner or potential applicant in accordance with this code.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
CHAPTER 1214: REVIEW PROCEDURES
Section
1214.01 Common review requirements
1214.02 Code text and map amendments
1214.03 Conditional uses
1214.04 Minor subdivisions
1214.05 Major subdivisions
1214.06 Site plans
1214.07 Certificate of appropriateness (COA)
1214.08 Designation of historic landmarks and historic districts
1214.09 Variances
1214.10 Zoning permit
1214.11 Appeals
1214.12 Interpretation of the code
§ 1214.01 COMMON REVIEW REQUIREMENTS.
   The requirements of this section shall apply to all applications and
procedures subject to development review procedures established in this code,
unless otherwise stated. While most review procedures are established within
this chapter, the procedures for the Mixed-Use Overlay District and the Planned
Unit Development review are established in separate chapters.
   (a)   Summary of review procedures. Table 1214-1 provides a list of all
review procedures utilized in the administration and enforcement of this code,
the applicable review authority, the type of review hearing or meeting, and the
decision-making responsibility of each review authority.
 
Table 1214-1: Summary of Review Procedures and Meeting/Hearing Type
Review          See     City    Planning   Zoning   Historic     Code
Procedure       Section Council Commission Board of Preservation Administrator
                                           Appeals  Commission
Code text or    1214.02 PH/D    PM/R
map amendment
Conditional use 1214.03 PM/D    AH/R
Minor           1214.04                                          D
subdivision
Major
subdivision:    1214.05 PM/D    PM/R
preliminary
plat
Major
subdivision:    1214.05 PM/D    PM/R
improvement
plans
Major
subdivision:            PM/D    PM/R
final plat
Site plan       1214.06         PM/D
Certificate of  1214.07                             PM/D
appropriateness
Designation of
landmark or     1214.08 PH/D    PH/R                PM/R
historic
district
Variance        1214.09                    AH/D
Zoning permit   1214.10                                          D
Appeals         1214.11                    AH/D
Interpretation  1214.12                                          D
of the code
MUO development 1218.03 PH/D    PM/R
plan
PUD             1220.03 See §
modification            1220.03
RPD development 1222.03 PH/D    PH/R
plan
Abbreviations:
PH = Public Hearing            R = Recommendation                
AH = Adjudication              D = Decision                      
Hearing
PM = Public Meeting                                           
 
   (b)   Authority to file applications.
      (1)   Unless otherwise specified in this code, applications for
development review procedures defined in this code may be initiated by:
         A.   An owner of the property that is the subject of the application;
or
         B.   An agent authorized in writing by the owner, which may include a
lessee of the property, attorney, or other representative.
      (2)   Property owners or their authorized agents of all the lots subject
to the review or submittal shall be required to sign the application or provide
written documentation that all property owners wish to proceed with the
application.
      (3)   The Planning Commission or City Council may initiate code text and
map amendments under this code with or without written authorization or
application from the property owner who may be affected.
   (c)   Application submission schedule for the ZBA. The schedule for the
submission of applications in relation to scheduled meetings and hearings of
the ZBA shall be established by the Code Administrator and made available to
the public.
   (d)   Application contents.
      (1)   Applications required under this code shall be submitted to the
member of the DRC responsible for such applications, as determined by the DRC.
      (2)   All applications shall be in a form and in such numbers as
established by the DRC, and made available to the public.
      (3)   Applications shall be accompanied by a fee as established by City
Council pursuant to division (g): Fees of this section.
      (4)   Complete application determination.
         A.   The responsible DRC member shall only initiate the review and
processing of applications submitted under this chapter if such application is
determined to be complete.
         B.   An application shall be determined to be complete if the
applicant has submitted all of the forms, maps and other submittal requirements
required for the specified application.
         C.   The responsible DRC member shall make a determination of
application completeness within five business days of the application filing.
         D.   If the application is determined to be complete, the application
shall then be processed according to the procedures and timelines set forth in
this code.
         E.   If an application is determined to be incomplete, the responsible
DRC member shall provide written notice to the applicant along with an
explanation of the application’s deficiencies. No further processing of an
incomplete application shall occur until the deficiencies are corrected and the
responsible DRC member determines that the application is complete.
         F.   The city shall not be required to process an incomplete
application, forward an incomplete application to any decision-making body, or
be subject to any required timelines of review for incomplete applications.
         G.   If the applicant fails to correct all deficiencies and submit a
complete application within 60 days of the notice provided by the responsible
DRC member, the incomplete application shall not be reviewed, the applicant’s
original filing fee shall be forfeited, and the incomplete application shall be
deemed withdrawn. The responsible DRC member may grant one 60-day extension if
just cause is shown.
         H.   No reconsideration of an incomplete application shall occur after
expiration of the 60-day period, and an applicant in need of further
development approval under the code shall, pursuant to all of the original
requirements this chapter, submit a new application, and submit a new filing
fee.
         I.   If any false or misleading information is submitted or supplied
by an applicant on an application, that application shall be deemed incomplete.
   (e)   Simultaneous processing of applications.
      (1)   Whenever two or more forms of review and approval are required by
review boards under this code, the DRC shall determine the order and timing of
review.
      (2)   The DRC may authorize a simultaneous review of applications, so
long as all applicable requirements are satisfied for all applications.
   (f)   Pre-application conferences or meetings.
      (1)   Prior to filing an application, an applicant may be required to
meet with the Development Review Committee or, when not required, may request a
meeting with the Committee or with any individual member of the Committee.
      (2)   Where a pre-application meeting is required (i.e., mandatory), such
requirement may be waived if the Development Review Committee unanimously
agrees that the proposed development or work subject to review is of a small-
enough scale as to not warrant a preliminary meeting of the Development Review
Committee or that the proposal appears to generally meet all requirements upon
an initial review.
      (3)   An applicant may request a pre-application meeting with a review
board for any review procedure in this task. The applicant may request such
meeting by submitting a written request to the Development Review Committee for
placement on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting or any special
meeting that may be called by the applicable review board.
      (4)   The purpose of the pre-application conference or meeting shall be
to discuss the proposed application or project, review submittal requirements
and discuss compliance with the provisions of this code and the comprehensive
land use plan prior to the submission of an application.
      (5)   No action can be taken by the staff and/or any review boards until
the applicant submits an actual application and/or plan to the city pursuant to
the laws and policies of the city. Therefore, all discussions that occur
between the applicant and/or applicant’s representative(s) and staff, and/or
city review boards, that occur prior to the date the applicant submits an
actual application and/or plan including, but not limited to, any informal
meetings with city staff, review boards, any pre-application conferences or
meetings, are not binding on the city and do not constitute official assurances
or representations by the city or its officials regarding any aspects of the
plan or application discussed.
   (g)   Fees.
      (1)   Any application for development review under this code shall be
accompanied by such fee as shall be specified from time to time by ordinance of
City Council. There shall be no fee, however, in the case of applications filed
by the Mayor, City Council or the Planning Commission.
      (2)   The fees shall be in addition to any other fees that may be imposed
by the city, state, Lorain County or other agency having jurisdiction.
      (3)   Such fees are adopted to cover the cost to the city for
investigations, legal advertising, postage and other expenses resulting from
the administration of planning and zoning activities.
      (4)   Unless otherwise identified in the fee schedule adopted by City
Council, no application shall be processed or determined to be complete until
the established fee has been paid.
      (5)   If the city determines that the costs on a particular application
will exceed the filing fee as established by City Council as a result of
preparation of legal descriptions, maps, studies or other required information,
or as a result of the need for professional expert review, study or testimony,
the responsible DRC member is authorized to collect such additional costs from
the applicant.
      (6)   Application fees are not refundable except where the responsible
DRC member determines that an application was accepted in error, or the fee
paid exceeds the amount due, in which case the amount of the overpayment will
be refunded to the applicant.
      (7)   Subdivision related fees. All application fees established in
division (g): Fees of this section are due upon submission of the application.
Additional fees related to the subdivision process are due as established below
or otherwise approved as part of the preliminary plat.
         A.   Fees for inspections made during and upon completion of all
public improvements for subdivisions shall be paid, in full, at the time the
final plat is submitted to City Council.
         B.   All required engineering review fees shall be paid, in full, at
the time the final plat is submitted to City Council.
   (h)   Public notification for public meetings. For all public meetings
required by this code, the city shall comply with this code and all applicable
state notice requirements.
   (i)   Public notification for public hearings.
      (1)   Applications. Applications for development approval that require
public hearings, including all adjudication hearings, shall comply with all
applicable state requirements and the public meeting notice requirements
established in division (h): Public Notification for Public Meetings of this
section.
      (2)   Notice. The responsible DRC member shall be responsible for
providing the required notice as specified in Table 1214-2.
      (3)   Content. Notices for public hearings, whether by publication or
mail (written notice), shall, at a minimum:
         A.   Provide the name of the applicant or the applicant’s agent;
         B.   Indicate the date, time and place of the public hearing;
         C.   Describe the land involved by street address, Lorain County
parcel identification number or by legal description;
         D.   Describe the nature, scope and purpose of the application or
proposal;
         E.   Identify the location (e.g., the offices of the Code
Administrator) where the public may view the application and related documents;
         F.   Include a statement that the public may appear at the public
hearing, be heard and submit evidence and written comments with respect to the
application; and
         G.   Include a statement describing where written comments will be
received prior to the public hearing.
      (4)   Notice requirements. Published and mailed notice for public
hearings shall be provided as defined in Table 1214-2.
 
Table 1214-2: Notice Requirements
Development Review      Published Notice            Written (Mailed) Notice
Procedure
                                                    No written notice is
Code text amendment                                 required for a text
                                                    amendment.
Zoning map amendment                                Written notice shall be
                                                    sent to all owners of
                                                    property within 300 feet
                                                    from the boundary of all
                        Published notice required a properties subject to the
                        minimum of 10 days before   rezoning application. The
                        the initial public hearing  notice shall be required a
RPD development plan                                minimum of 10 days before
                                                    the initial public hearing
                                                    Written notice shall not be
                                                    required where the
                                                    application involves more
                                                    than 10 separate lots.

MUO development plan                                Written notice to the
Conditional use                                     applicant and all property
Major PUD or RPD                                    owners within 300 feet from
modification            Published notice required a the boundary of all
                        minimum of 10 days before a properties subject to the
                        public hearing              application shall be
Appeals                                             required a minimum of 10
                                                    days prior to a public
                                                    hearing.

                                                    Written notice to the
                                                    applicant and all property
                                                    owners within 300 feet from
Variance or subdivision No published notice is      the boundary of all
modifications           required                    properties subject to the
                                                    application shall be
                                                    required a minimum of 10
                                                    days prior to the hearing.
                                                    Written notice shall be
                                                    provided to all property
                                                    owners within a proposed
                                                    historic district at least
                                                    10 days prior to a public
                                                    hearing. Additionally, a
Historic landmark or    Published notice required a public notice shall be
historic district       minimum of 10 days before a posted on the property
nomination              public hearing              proposed for a landmark
                                                    designation or on 4
                                                    cornering properties
                                                    proposed for a historic
                                                    district designation at
                                                    least 10 days before a
                                                    public hearing.
 
      (5)   Published notice.
         A.   Published notice shall be provided in a newspaper of general
circulation and the city may also provide additional published notice by
electronic media including, but not limited to, posting online at the city’s
website.
         B.   The content and form of the published notice shall be consistent
with the requirements of this section and state law.
      (6)   Written (mailed) notice.
         A.   Written notification of property owners shall apply only to the
initial presentation of the application for the public hearing in front of the
applicable review board.
         B.   Written notice shall be postmarked no later than the amount of
days specified in Table 1214-2 prior to the hearing date at which the item will
be considered.
      (7)   Constructive notice.
         A.   Minor defects in any notice shall not impair the notice or
invalidate proceedings pursuant to the notice if a bona fide attempt has been
made to comply with applicable notice requirements. Minor defects in notice
shall be limited to errors in a legal description, typographical or grammatical
errors, or errors of actual acreage that do not impede communication of the
notice to affected parties. Failure of a party to receive written notice shall
not invalidate subsequent action. In all cases, however, the requirements for
the timing of the notice and for specifying the time, date and place of a
hearing shall be strictly construed. If questions arise at the hearing
regarding the adequacy of notice, the decision-making body shall direct the
department having responsibility for notification to make a formal finding as
to whether there was substantial compliance with the notice requirements of
this code, and such finding shall be made available to the decision-making body
prior to final action on the request.
         B.   When the records of the city document the publication, mailing
and/or posting of notices as required by this chapter, it shall be presumed
that notice of a public hearing was given as required by this section.
   (j)   Conduct of public hearing.
      (1)   Rights of all persons at public hearings. Any person may appear at
a public hearing and submit information or evidence, either individually or as
a representative of a person or an organization. Each person who appears at a
public hearing shall be identified, state his or her address, and if appearing
on behalf of a person or organization, state the name and mailing address of
the person or organization being represented.
      (2)   Continuance of a public hearing or deferral of application review.
         A.   An applicant may request that a review or decision-making body’s
consideration of an application at a public hearing be deferred by submitting a
written request for deferral to the Code Administrator prior to the publication
of notice as may be required by this code. The Code Administrator may grant
such requests, in which case, the application will be considered at the next
regularly scheduled meeting.
         B.   A request for deferral of consideration of an application
received by the Code Administrator after publication of notice of the public
hearing as required by this code shall be considered as a request for a
continuance of the public hearing, and may only be granted by the review or
decision-making body.
         C.   The review or decision-making body conducting the public hearing
may, on its own motion or at the request of the applicant, continue the public
hearing to a fixed date, time and place provide the date, time and place is
publicly announced at the time of continuance.
   (k)   Withdrawal of application. Any request for withdrawal of an
application shall be either submitted in writing to the Code Administrator or
made through a verbal request by the applicant prior to action by the review or
decision-making body.
      (1)   The Code Administrator shall approve a request for withdrawal of an
application if it has been submitted prior to publication of notice for the
public hearing on the application in accordance with this code.
      (2)   If the request for withdrawal of an application is submitted after
publication of notice for the public hearing in accordance with this code, the
request for withdrawal shall be placed on the public hearing agenda and acted
upon by the review or decision-making body.
   (l)   Examination and copying of application and other documents. Documents
and/or records may be inspected and/or copied as provided for by state law.
   (m)   Notification of decisions.
      (1)   When City Council is responsible for making a final decision on any
application, the Clerk of Council shall be responsible for providing notice of
the decision to the applicant.
      (2)   When Planning Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals is
responsible for making a final decision on any application, the secretary or
clerk of each board shall be responsible for providing notice of the decision
to the applicant. Where a secretary or clerk is not appointed, the Code
Administrator may designate a staff member to provide notice to the applicant.
   (n)   Effect of any approvals.
      (1)   The issuance of any approval or permit under this code shall
authorize only the particular development, alteration, construction or use
approved in the subject application.
      (2)   All approvals shall run with the land or use and shall not be
affected by change in ownership.
   (o)   Modifications or amendments of approved applications.
      (1)   For any review procedure, the Code Administrator is authorized to
allow minor changes related to design of an approved application where the
change is insignificant and has minimal impact to the overall design of the
development or subdivision. This shall not give the Code Administrator the
authority to vary the requirements of this code or any conditions of approval.
      (2)   Where the Code Administrator determines that the proposed
modification, amendment or change is not minor, the applicant shall be required
to resubmit an application and payment of additional fees for the application
to be reviewed in accordance with the procedures and standards established for
its original approval.
   (p)   Reapplication after denial of an application. If an application is
denied, the applicant may:
      (1)   Appeal the decision in accordance with the applicable appeals
procedure established in this code;
      (2)   Make changes to the application that will fully address all issues
and findings identified for the denial and resubmit a new application,
including any required fees. Any such resubmission shall contain evidence that
shows how the new application has substantially changed to address each of the
findings of the original decision. The Development Review Committee shall have
the authority to determine if the evidence submitted substantially changes the
application to address all issues as part of the complete application
determination in division (d)(4) of this section. If it does not, the
Development Review Committee shall return the application, with reasons for
their determination in writing, along with any paid fees; or
      (3)   Submit the same application after a 24-month waiting period; or
      (4)   Submit a new application if the proposed use and design of the site
will be substantially different than the denied application.
   (q)   Subsequent development.
      (1)   Development authorized by any approval under this section and this
code shall not be carried out until the applicant has secured all other
approvals required by this code or any other applicable provisions of the
city’s code of ordinances.
      (2)   The granting of any approval or permit shall not guarantee the
approval of any other required permit or application.
      (3)   The city shall not be responsible for reviewing the application for
compliance with any permits, certificates or other approvals that may be
required by Lorain County, the state or other agencies having jurisdiction.
   (r)   Records. The city shall maintain permanent and current records of all
applications and the decisions related to those applications in City Hall.
   (s)   Computation of time.
      (1)   In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this code,
the date of the application, act, decision or event, from which the designated
period of time begins shall not be included. The last date of the period of
time to be computed shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, a Sunday or a
legal holiday observed by the city where the city administrative offices are
closed for the entire day, in which case the period runs until the end of the
next day which is not a Saturday, a Sunday, or a legal holiday.
      (2)   When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days,
intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded from the
computation (i.e., business days and not calendar days).
      (3)   When the city offices are closed to the public for the entire day
which constitutes the last day of the period of time, then such application,
act, decision or event may be performed on the next succeeding day which is not
a Saturday, a Sunday, or a legal holiday observed by the city in which the city
administrative offices are closed for the entire day.
      (4)   All days shall be calendar days, including weekends, unless
otherwise stated as business days, in which case the time excludes weekends.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021; Ord. 25-109, passed 6-23-2025)
§ 1214.02 CODE TEXT AND MAP AMENDMENTS.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of the code text and zoning map amendment
procedure is to provide a process for amending the zoning map and text of this
code.
   (b)   Applicability. This section shall apply to requests to amend the text
of this code or amend the Official Zoning District Map of the City of Avon
Lake, Ohio, hereafter referred to as the “zoning map.”
   (c)   Initiation.
      (1)   For a zoning map amendment of a specific property, any person who
has authority to file an application for such property may initiate an
amendment by filing an application with the Code Administrator.
      (2)   Only members of the Development Review Committee, City Council or
the Planning Commission may initiate code text amendments.
      (3)   City Council may initiate a code text or map amendment by referring
a recommendation on an amendment to the Planning Commission.
      (4)   The Planning Commission may initiate a code text or map amendment
by adopting a motion to make such amendment.
   (d)   Code text or map amendment review procedure. The review procedure for
a code text or map amendment shall be as follows:
      (1)   Step 1 - Pre-application meeting (required). An applicant shall be
required to have a pre-application meeting with the Development Review
Committee to informally discuss the application and any concept plans. Such
meeting shall be subject to §
1214.01(f).
      (2)   Step 2 - Application.
         A.   For amendments that are not initiated by the Planning Commission
or City Council, the applicant shall submit an application in accordance with §
1214.01: Common Review Requirements, and with the provisions of this section.
         B.   Amendments initiated by City Council shall be referred to the
Planning Commission for initiation of review.
      (3)   Step 3 - Development Review Committee review.
         A.   Upon determination that a text or zoning map amendment
application is complete, the Development Review Committee shall review the
application and may distribute the application to other departments or agencies
for review and comment.
         B.   The Development Review Committee will review the application and
provide a summary report of comments to the applicant.
         C.   Upon receipt of comments, the applicant shall have the option to
make revisions to the application and plans based on the comments prior to
being forwarded to the Planning Commission or may request that the application
be forwarded to the Planning Commission without revisions. In all cases, the
Development Review Committee will forward their report to the Planning
Commission.
      (4)   Step 4 - Planning Commission review and recommendation.
         A.   The Planning Commission shall review the application at its next
regularly scheduled meeting, or at a special meeting, after the application is
determined to be complete.
         B.   In reviewing the application, Planning Commission shall at a
minimum, consider the review criteria of this section.
         C.   Within 45 days of the initial meeting to review the application,
the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to City Council on the
application. In making its recommendation, the Planning Commission may
recommend approval, approval with some modification, or denial of the
application.
         D.   If the Planning Commission fails to make a recommendation within
the established timeframe, or an extended timeframe approved by the applicant,
the application will move forward to Step 5 with a recommendation of approval.
      (5)   Step 5 - City Council review and decision.
         A.   Following receipt of the recommendation from the Planning
Commission (Step 4), the application shall be placed on City Council’s agenda
for the next regularly scheduled meeting, if in compliance with notification
requirements, or City Council shall set a time for a public hearing on the
proposed amendment that is no more than 60 days from receipt of the Planning
Commission’s recommendation.
         B.   Notification of the public hearing shall be provided in
accordance with §
1214.01(i).
         C.   City Council shall review a text or zoning map amendment
application during a public hearing. In reviewing the application, City Council
shall at a minimum, consider the recommendation from Planning Commission and
the review criteria of this section.
         D.   City Council shall adopt, adopt with some modification, or deny
the recommendation of the Planning Commission. Such action shall only require
concurring vote of a simple majority of City Council unless the City Council
votes to approve, in any form, an application where the Planning Commission
recommended denial, in which case the approval shall require a three-fourths
majority vote of City Council.
         E.   If the City Council fails to make a decision within 180 calendar
days, or an extended timeframe approved by the applicant, the application shall
be deemed approved.
         F.   The effective date of any amendment shall be in accordance with
the applicable provisions of the Charter.
   (e)   Review criteria. Recommendations and decisions on code text or map
amendment applications shall be based on consideration of the following review
criteria. Not all criteria may be applicable in each case, and each case shall
be determined on its own facts:
      (1)   The proposed amendment is consistent with the comprehensive land
use plan, other adopted city plans, and the stated purposes of this code;
      (2)   The proposed amendment is necessary or desirable because of
changing conditions, new planning concepts or other social or economic
conditions;
      (3)   The proposed amendment will promote the public health, safety and
general welfare;
      (4)   The proposed amendment, if amending the zoning map, is consistent
with the stated purpose of the proposed zoning district;
      (5)   The proposed amendment, if to the zoning map, follows lot lines or
the centerlines of streets, railroads or other rights-of-way.
      (6)   The proposed amendment is not likely to result in significant
adverse impacts upon the natural environment, including air, water, noise,
stormwater management, wildlife and vegetation, or such impacts will be
substantially mitigated;
      (7)   The proposed amendment will not constitute spot zoning where
special treatment is given to a particular property or property owner that
would not be applicable to a similar property, under the same circumstances;
and/or
      (8)   The proposed amendment is not likely to result in significant
adverse impacts upon other property in the vicinity of the subject tract.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021; Ord. 23-46, passed 3-13-2023)
§ 1214.03 CONDITIONAL USES.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of a conditional use procedure is to allow
consideration for certain uses that due to their unique and special nature
relative to location, design, size, operations, circulation and general impact
on the community, need to be evaluated on an individual basis.
   (b)   Applicability. This section shall apply to all applications for
establishment of a conditional use as may be identified in this code.
   (c)   Conditional use review procedure. The review procedure for a
conditional use review shall be as follows:
      (1)   Step 1 - Pre-application meeting (required). An applicant shall be
required to have a pre-application meeting with the Development Review
Committee to informally discuss the application and any concept plans. Such
meeting shall be subject to §
1214.01(f).
      (2)   Step 2 - Application. The applicant shall submit an application in
accordance with §
1214.01: Common Review Requirements, and with the provisions of this section.
      (3)   Step 3 - Development Review Committee review.
         A.   Upon determination that a conditional use application is
complete, the Development Review Committee shall review the application and may
distribute the application to other departments or agencies for review and
comment.
         B.   The Development Review Committee will review the application and
provide a summary report of comments to the applicant.
         C.   Upon receipt of comments, the applicant shall have the option to
make revisions to the application and plans based on the comments prior to
being forwarded to the Planning Commission or may request that the application
be forwarded to the Planning Commission without revisions. In all cases, the
Development Review Committee will forward their report to the Planning
Commission.
      (4)   Step 4 - Planning Commission review and recommendation.
         A.   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
conditional use application at its next regularly scheduled meeting, or at a
special meeting, after the application is determined to be complete.
         B.   Notification of the public hearing shall be provided in
accordance with §
1214.01(i).
         C.   See § 1212.04(b)(4) for special provisions provided to the
Planning Commission as part of a conditional use review.
         D.   In reviewing the application, the Planning Commission shall at a
minimum, consider the review criteria of this section.
         E.   Within 60 days of the close of the public hearing, the Planning
Commission shall make a recommendation on the application to City Council. In
making its recommendation, the Planning Commission may approve, approve with
modifications or supplementary conditions, or deny the application.
         F.   If the Planning Commission fails to make a recommendation within
the established timeframe, or an extended timeframe approved by the applicant,
the application shall be deemed approved.
      (5)   Step 5 - City Council review and confirmation or rejection.
         A.   City Council shall review the Planning Commission’s
recommendation at a regularly scheduled meeting or special meeting.
         B.   By a majority vote, City Council may:
            1.   Confirm the recommendation of Planning Commission; or
            2.   Reject the recommendation of the Planning Commission.
         C.   Failure of City Council to act within 90 days from the date City
Council receives the recommendation from the Planning Commission, shall be
deemed a confirmation of the Planning Commission’s recommendation.
   (d)   Review criteria. Decisions on a conditional use application shall be
based on consideration of the following review criteria. All conditional uses
shall be subject to review under the criteria of this section, as applicable,
and may be subject to additional use-specific standards.
      (1)   The proposed conditional use is established as an allowed
conditional use in the applicable zoning district;
      (2)   The proposed use is consistent with the spirit, purpose and intent
of the comprehensive land use plan, the general purpose of this code, and the
purpose of the zoning district in which the conditional use will be located;
      (3)   The proposed use complies with any use-specific standards as may be
established for the use;
      (4)   The establishment, maintenance or operation of the conditional use
will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety or general
welfare;
      (5)   The proposed use will comply with all applicable development
standards;
      (6)   The proposed use will be harmonious with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity, and such use will not change the essential
character of the same area;
      (7)   The conditional use will not be hazardous or disturbing to the
existing and future use and enjoyment of property in the immediate vicinity for
the uses permitted, nor substantially diminish or impair property values within
the neighborhood;
      (8)   The proposed use will not involve uses, activities, processes,
materials, equipment and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to
any person, property or the general welfare by reason of excessive production
of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare or odors;
      (9)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or necessary
facilities have been or are being provided;
      (10)   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress
and egress designed to minimize traffic congestion on the surrounding public
streets; and considering the proximity of access drives to street intersections
relative to the anticipated volume of traffic.
      (11)   The design of the buildings, structures and site will not result
in the destruction, loss or damage of a natural, scenic or historic feature of
major importance;
      (12)   The establishment of the conditional use will not be detrimental
to the economic welfare of the community by creating excessive additional
requirements at public cost for public facilities such as police, fire and
schools;
      (13)   There is minimal potential for future hardship on the conditional
use that could result from the proposed use being surrounded by uses permitted
by right that may be incompatible; and
      (14)   Wherever no specific areas, frontage, height, or setback
requirements are specified for a specific conditional use, then such use shall
be subject to the lot and site regulations for the applicable zoning district.
   (e)   Additional criteria and conditions. The Planning Commission may impose
such conditions, guarantees and safeguards as it deems necessary to protect the
general welfare and individual property rights, and to ensure that the
conditional use will meet the intent and purposes of this code.
   (f)   Revocation of a conditional use approval. The breach of any condition,
safeguard or requirement shall automatically invalidate the conditional use
approval, and shall constitute a violation of this code. Such violation shall
be punishable as specified in
Chapter 1244: Enforcement and Penalties.
   (g)   Time limit.
      (1)   A conditional use approval shall be deemed to authorize only one
particular conditional use and said permit shall automatically expire if, for
any reason, the conditional use shall cease for more than two years.
      (2)   The applicant shall submit a completed application for a zoning
permit within one year of the date the conditional use was approved or the
approval shall expire.
      (3)   Upon expiration of a conditional use approval, a new application,
including all applicable fees, shall be required before a conditional use
application will be reviewed.
      (4)   Upon written request, one extension of one year may be granted by
the Code Administrator if the applicant can show good cause for a delay.
      (5)   As part of the conditional use approval, the Planning Commission
may authorize alternative time limits for zoning permit issuance based on the
scale of the proposed development.
   (h)   Appeals. Any person or entity claiming to be injured or aggrieved by
any final action of City Council shall have the right to appeal the decision
the Court of Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapters 2505 and 2506.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021; Ord. 24-33, passed 3-25-2024)
§ 1214.04 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of the minor subdivision process is to allow for
small subdivisions of land, consolidation of lots or transfer of a portion of a
lot to an adjacent lot where there will not be the creation of a new street,
dedication of right-of-way or a need for any public improvements.
   (b)   Applicability.
      (1)   For the purposes of these regulations, a minor subdivision is a lot
split, lot consolidation (including combination of lots into a zoning lot) or
transfer of land between adjacent property owners that complies with all of the
following requirements:
         A.   The subdivision shall not result in or create more than five
lots, including the remainder of the original lot (e.g., four new lots and the
remainder of the original lot);
         B.   The subdivision shall be in compliance with all applicable site
development standards in this code or with any approved variance from such
standards;
         C.   All lots resulting from the minor subdivision shall have frontage
and access on an existing street and shall not require the construction,
expansion, or improvement of any street;
         D.   The subdivision shall not require any public improvements or the
dedication of rights-of-way;
         E.   The property has been surveyed and a survey sheet or record plan,
in the form provided for in this code, and a full legal description of the
changes resulting from the split, are submitted with the application; and
         F.   No landlocking of parcels shall occur without adequate reciprocal
easement agreements or common ownership arrangements that allow for all parcels
to have access to a public right-of-way.
      (2)   A minor subdivision also includes the recombination of land,
consolidation of lots, transfer of property from one lot to an adjacent lot,
and for the dedication of additional land for the widening of existing streets,
where no new lots are created.
   (c)   Minor subdivision review procedure. The review procedure for a minor
subdivision shall be as follows:
      (1)   Step 1 - Application.
         A.   The applicant shall submit an application in accordance with §
1214.01: Common Review Requirements, and with the provisions of this section.
         B.   The application shall include a deed or other instrument of
conveyance in compliance containing an accurate and current legal description
based on a boundary survey, of each proposed new lot.
         C.   If the minor subdivision involves the transfer of land area from
one lot to an adjacent lot, both property owners shall be required to authorize
the application instruments of conveyance shall be submitted for both resulting
lots.
      (2)   Step 2 - Development Review Committee review. Upon determination
that the application for a minor subdivision is complete, the Development
Review Committee shall review the application and may distribute the
application to other departments or agencies for review and comment prior to
the decision in Step 3.
      (3)   Step 3 - Review and decision.
         A.   Within 30 days of the determination that the application (Step 1)
is complete, the Development Review Committee shall review the application and
make a recommendation to the Code Administrator who shall have the authority to
make the decision to approve or deny the application for a minor subdivision
based on the review criteria established below. An extension on the decision
may be granted with approval from the applicant.
         B.   If the Code Administrator denies an application for a minor
subdivision, the Code Administrator shall provide the applicant with written
finding for the denial.
         C.   If the application is approved, the Code Administrator and City
Engineer shall be required to sign the conveyance.
      (4)   Step 4 - Recording.
         A.   If the application is approved, the Code Administrator and City
Engineer shall sign and date all required deeds in the minor subdivision, or
other forms of conveyance allowed by the Lorain County Auditor.
         B.   The subdivider shall then be responsible for submitting the
signed conveyance with the Lorain County Auditor for the transfer of property
and to the Lorain County Recorder for the recording of the lots as legal lots
of record and providing a copy of said conveyance to the Code Administrator,
after recording.
         C.   In the case of a transfer of land between two adjacent lots, the
recording of the revised lots shall take place simultaneously.
         D.   If the application includes a consolidation of lots to create a
zoning lot, then the applicant shall be required to conduct a legal survey of
the consolidated lot to submit to the county. See § 1226.01(b)(2).
         E.   Within 30 days after all required deeds are recorded in the
office of the County Recorder, the applicant shall provide the Code
Administrator with all new permanent parcel numbers assigned to the new lots by
Lorain County.
   (d)   Review criteria. In order for a minor subdivision to be approved, the
Development Review Committee shall review and make recommendations, and the
Code Administrator must determine the following:
      (1)   The Development Review Committee unanimously agrees on a
recommendation to approve the application;
      (2)   That the minor subdivision complies with all applicable provisions
of this code including, but not limited to, the development standards of §
1226.01: Lot and Principal Building Regulations;
      (3)   That the minor subdivision complies with all other applicable
regulations of the city; and
      (4)   That all valid objections to the minor subdivision raised by the
departments of the city have been or will be satisfactorily resolved by the
applicant.
   (e)   Variances. If the proposed subdivision requires a deviation from the
minimum site development standards (e.g., lot area, lot width and the like) or
other standards mandated by this code in §
1226.01: Lot and Principal Building Regulations, the applicant will be required
to apply for and receive variance approvals prior to approval of the minor
subdivision. (See § 1214.09: Variances.)
   (f)   Time limit. The minor subdivision approval shall expire one year after
the Code Administrator signs and dates the minor subdivision unless the minor
subdivision is recorded in the office with the Lorain County Recorder during
said period.
   (g)   Appeals. Any person or entity claiming to be injured or aggrieved by
any final action with respect to the proposed minor subdivision shall have the
right to appeal the decision to the ZBA as established in §
1214.11: Appeals.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1214.05 MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of the major subdivision process is to provide a
method of review for any subdivision that exceeds the scope of a minor
subdivision.
   (b)   Applicability. Any subdivision of land or replat of an existing
subdivision that does not meet the applicability requirements of a minor
subdivision in §
1214.04(b), shall be subject to the requirements of this section.
   (c)   Major subdivision review procedure. The review procedure for a major
subdivision shall be as follows:
      (1)   Step 1 - Pre-application meeting (required). An applicant shall be
required to have a pre-application meeting with the Development Review
Committee to informally discuss the application and any concept plans. Such
meeting shall be subject to §
1214.01(f).
      (2)   Step 2 - Application and filling of the preliminary plat.
         A.   The applicant shall submit an application, including a
preliminary plat, in accordance with §
1214.01: Common Review Requirements, and with the provisions of this section.
         B.   The preliminary plat shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by an
engineer or surveyor who is qualified and registered in the state.
      (3)   Step 3 - Development Review Committee review.
         A.   Upon determination that the application for a major subdivision
is complete, Development Review Committee shall review the application and may
distribute the application to other departments or agencies for review and
comment.
         B.   The Development Review Committee will review the application and
provide a summary report of comments to the applicant.
         C.   Upon receipt of comments, the applicant shall have the option to
make revisions to the application and plans based on the comments prior to
being forwarded to the Planning Commission or may request that the application
be forwarded to the Planning Commission without revisions. In all cases, the
Development Review Committee will forward their report to the Planning
Commission.
      (4)   Step 4 - Review and recommendation on the preliminary plat by the
Planning Commission.
         A.   The Planning Commission shall review the preliminary plat
application at its next regularly scheduled meeting, or at a special meeting,
after the application is determined to be complete.
         B.   In making its recommendation, the Planning Commission shall
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the preliminary plat. The Planning
Commission may also continue the meeting if questions regarding the plat are
not satisfactorily addressed by the applicant.
         C.   The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation within 60
days of the filing of the preliminary plat (Step 2) unless the Planning
Commission and subdivider agree to an extension of this time frame. If the
Planning Commission fails to act within the 60 days or there is no agreement
for an extension of time, the application for a preliminary plat will be
considered approved.
      (5)   Step 5 - Review and decision on the preliminary plat by City
Council.
         A.   The City Council shall review the preliminary plat application at
its next regularly scheduled meeting, or at a special meeting, following the
receipt of recommendation from the Planning Commission
         B.   In making its decision, the City Council shall approve, approve
with conditions, or deny the preliminary plat. The City Council may also
continue the meeting if questions regarding the plat are not satisfactorily
addressed by the applicant.
         C.   The City Council shall make a decision within 60 days of the
filing of the preliminary plat (Step 2) unless the City Council and subdivider
agree to an extension of this time frame. If the City Council fails to act
within the 60 days or there is no agreement for an extension of time, the
application for a preliminary plat will be considered approved.
         D.   If the City Council denies the preliminary plat, the applicant
shall not move forward in the review process until a preliminary plat is
approved by the City Council.
         E.   In the event the City Council denies the preliminary plat or
approves with conditions, the Code Administrator, on behalf of the City Council
shall provide the subdivider with a statement in writing setting forth the
reasons for the denial or the conditions of approval.
         F.   Approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council does not
constitute approval of the subdivision, but is merely an authorization to
proceed with the preparation of the final plat and improvement plans.
      (6)   Step 6 - Submission of improvement plans and final plat.
         A.   The applicant shall submit the final plat and related improvement
plans and specifications in accordance with §
1214.01: Common Review Requirements, and with the provisions of this section.
The submission of the improvements plans may occur prior to the final plat or
simultaneously. Such improvement plans must be approved prior to the final
plat’s review by Planning Commission.
         B.   The submission shall also include a subdivider’s agreement in
conformance with §
1238.05: Subdivider’s Agreement. Such agreement shall be considered a part of
the improvement plans and must be approved with such improvement plans.
         C.   If a preliminary plat has been previously approved, the final
plat shall have incorporated all changes required in the preliminary plat
approval.
         D.   The applicant shall submit all necessary improvement plans,
subdivider’s agreement (see §
1238.05: Subdivider’s Agreement), and a final plat for review within two years
of the decision on the preliminary plat unless an alternative schedule is
approved as part of the preliminary plat approval or the subdivider can show
just cause for extending the deadline. For phased subdivisions, the deadline
shall apply to the first phase of the subdivision. Failure to submit the final
plat within this time frame shall void the preliminary plat approval and the
subdivider will be required to submit a new application in accordance with
these regulations.
         E.   If the applicant proposes to provide a financial guarantee for
the public improvements in lieu of installing all public improvements prior to
approval of the final plat, the applicant shall be required to provide all
information required as part of §
1238.06: Pavement Guarantee and Financial Guarantees.
         F.   Upon determination by the Code Administrator that the improvement
plans and final plat has been properly submitted, the final plat shall be
accepted as being filed.
         G.   In cases where the applicant proposes to develop the subdivision
in phases, the final plat and improvement plans shall be submitted for each
individual phase.
         H.   The final plat and improvement plans shall be prepared, signed
and sealed by an engineer or surveyor who is qualified and registered in the
state.
      (7)   Step 7 - Development Committee Review on the final plat and
improvement plans.
         A.   Upon determination that the submission of the final plat and
improvement plans, including the subdivider’s agreement, is complete, the
Development Review Committee shall review the application and plans, and may
distribute the application and plans to other departments or agencies for
review and comment.
         B.   The Development Review Committee will review the application and
provide a summary report of comments to the applicant.
         C.   Upon receipt of comments, the applicant shall have the option to
make revisions to the final plat and plans based on the comments prior to being
forwarded to the Planning Commission or may request that the application be
forwarded to the Planning Commission without revisions. In all cases, the
Development Review Committee will forward their report to the Planning
Commission.
         D.   Construction of improvements. All improvements shall be
constructed in accordance with the subdivider’s agreement in §
1238.05: Subdivider’s Agreement.
      (8)   Step 8 - Review and recommendation on the final plat or improvement
plan by the Planning Commission.
         A.   The Planning Commission shall review the final plat or
improvement plan at its next regularly scheduled meeting, or at a special
meeting, after the final plat or improvement plan is submitted and determined
to be complete.
         B.   The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the final plat or improvement plan. The
Planning Commission may also continue the meeting if questions regarding the
final plat or improvement plan are not satisfactorily answered by the
applicant.
         C.   The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation within 60
days of the filing of the final plat (Step 6) or a complete application for an
improvement plan unless the Planning Commission and subdivider agree to an
extension of this time frame. If the Planning Commission fails to act within
the 60 days or there is no agreement for an extension of time, the application
for the final plat or improvement plan will be considered approved.
         D.   If the Planning Commission denies the final plat or improvement
plan, the applicant shall not move forward in the review process until a final
plat has a recommendation for approval by the Planning Commission.
      (9)   Step 8 - City Council review and decision on final plat and
acceptance of improvements by City Council.
         A.   The City Council shall review the final plat at its next
regularly scheduled meeting, or at a special meeting, following the review and
recommendation from the Planning Commission (Step 8).
         B.   The City Council shall make a decision within 60 days of the
receiving the final plan and recommendation from the Planning Commission unless
the City Council and subdivider agree to an extension of this time frame. If
the City Council fails to act within the 60 days or there is no agreement for
an extension of time, the application for a preliminary plat will be considered
approved.
         C.   If City Council denies the final plat, the applicant shall not
move forward in the review process until a final plat and the improvement plans
are approved by City Council.
         D.   The city, through action by the City Council, may approve the
final plat and accept public improvements made by a subdivider that meet the
following conditions:
            1.   The public improvements have been made in accordance with the
requirements of this code, and any other manuals or documents referenced in §
1238.03: Conformity with Plans and Regulations;
            2.   Installation of the public improvements has been completed in
accordance with the applicable design standards;
            3.   All final inspections required by these regulations have been
carried out by the city, and said public improvements were found to be
acceptable by the Code Administrator; and
            4.   After all public improvements have been installed to the
satisfaction of the city, the subdivider shall submit an original copy of as-
built improvement plans (showing how all public improvements were actually
installed) to the Code Administrator in a format acceptable to the Code
Administrator.
         E.   After all public improvements have been installed in accordance
with the subdivider’s agreement and these regulations and the subdivider has
complied with this section, the City Council may, by ordinance, accept the
public improvements for maintenance with any applicable financial guarantee.
      (10)   Step 9 - Disposition of approved plat and recordation.
         A.   All required deeds, agreements and other required legal
instruments shall be submitted to the Code Administrator within 45 days from
the date of the Planning Commission’s approval or such approval shall
thereafter be rendered null and void.
         B.   Before an approved plat can be recorded, it shall be signed by
the Code Administrator, the Clerk of Council and the Law Director only provided
that all conditions imposed by the Planning Commission and Council, as
applicable, have been met. Any plat recorded which has not been approved
according to the regulations in this chapter shall be considered invalid.
         C.   The subdivider shall then be responsible for submitting the
signed plat to the Lorain County Recorder for the recording of the lots as
legal lots of record and providing a copy of said plat to the city after
recording.
         D.   The approval of a plat shall expire within 120 days after City
Council approval is effective unless the plat has been duly filed and recorded,
by the applicant as required by law.
   (d)   Review criteria. In order to approve a major subdivision, the Planning
Commission and City Council, as appropriate, shall determine the following:
      (1)   That the major subdivision complies with all applicable provisions
of this code;
      (2)   That the major subdivision does not conflict with other
regulations, plans or policies of the city;
      (3)   That the proposed subdivision is designed to be harmonious with the
existing immediate or surrounding area or in keeping with the intended
character of such area;
      (4)   That the proposed streets are in accordance with the master
thoroughfare plan and have been coordinated with existing streets and that
adequate measures have been taken to provide ingress and egress so as to
minimize traffic congestion in public streets;
      (5)   That the proposed subdivision will not adversely affect the
delivery of governmental services;
      (6)   That any comments from applicable review agencies been adequately
considered and addressed by the applicant; and
      (7)   That the final plat and improvement plans conform to the approved
preliminary plat, if submitted and approved.
   (e)   Amendments and withdrawal of application.
      (1)   No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made in
any plat of a subdivision after final approval has been given by the Planning
Commission and an endorsement is made in writing on the plat, unless the plat
is first resubmitted and the changes approved by the Planning Commission.
      (2)   If the applicant finds, in the process of preparing improvement
plans, that the approved preliminary plat, if submitted, is not workable and
changes in layout are required, the applicant shall inform the Code
Administrator. The Code Administrator may require that a revised preliminary
plat be submitted for re-approval following the review procedure in division
(c) of this section if the changes significantly alter the design of the
subdivision. If the proposed changes are technical or minor and do not
substantively alter the approved preliminary plat, the Code Administrator may
approve the revisions. Failure to submit and receive approval of a revised
preliminary plat shall void approval of the preliminary plat and any new
submission shall be subject to a new application.
      (3)   During the final plat process, the Code Administrator are
authorized to allow minor changes related to the public improvements or design
where there is minimal impact to the overall design of the subdivision. This
shall not give the Code Administrator the authority to vary the requirements of
this code.
      (4)   Before approval of the final plat, the submitted plat may be
withdrawn or modified. If modified, the review process shall be repeated. If
the application is withdrawn, any application fees shall be forfeited.
      (5)   If during the course of construction, any changes or modifications
are encountered that are not in conformance with the original approved
improvement plans, the subdivider shall submit the modified improvement plans
(which have now become as-built drawings) to the Code Administrator, who, if in
agreement with such modifications, shall sign these drawings to indicate
approval of the modifications. If the Code Administrator does not approve the
modifications, the applicant shall be required to bring the improvements into
compliance with the approved improvement plans or the city may utilize the
financial guarantee to correct the issue.
   (f)   Subdivision modifications.
      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of a subdivision modification is to provide
limited relief from standards that apply to the subdivision of land including
standards for improvements. Subdivision modifications are intended for those
cases where strict application of a particular requirement will create a
practical difficulty or extraordinary hardship prohibiting the use of land in a
manner otherwise allowed under these regulations. It is not intended that
modifications be approved merely to remove inconveniences or financial burdens
that the requirements of these regulations may impose on property owners or
subdividers in general.
      (2)   Applicability.
         A.   If the proposed subdivision requires a deviation from the minimum
site development standards (e.g., lot area, lot width and the like) or other
standards identified in §
1226.01: Lot and Principal Building Regulations, the applicant will be required
to apply for and receive all the necessary variance approvals prior to approval
of a preliminary plat. (See §
1214.09: Variances.)
         B.   If the applicant seeks a modification of standards required by
Chapter 1238: Subdivision Design Standards, then the request for a modification
shall be accomplished through the procedure outlined in this section.
      (3)   Subdivision modification review.
         A.   A request for a subdivision modification shall be reviewed as
part of the preliminary plat review procedure.
         B.   The Planning Commission shall review the subdivision modification
application at a public hearing that shall be noticed in accordance with §
1214.01(i).
         C.   In reviewing the application, the Planning Commission shall at a
minimum, consider the review criteria of this section.
         D.   The Planning Commission shall review the request and may approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the request to modify any or all of the
modifications.
         E.   In approving a modification, the Planning Commission may impose
conditions on the approval as it determines are required to ensure compliance
with the provisions and purpose of these regulations.
         F.   If the preliminary plat is denied or if the approval of the
preliminary plat expires, so does the approval of the subdivision modification.
Any future request for preliminary plat approval that includes the same
modifications shall require a new review and decision on the request for
modifications.
      (4)   Review criteria. The review criteria for a subdivision modification
shall be the same as those for a variance as established in §
1214.09(c).
   (g)   Appeals. Any person or entity claiming to be injured or aggrieved by
any final action of the Planning Commission shall have the right to appeal the
decision to the ZBA as established in §
1214.11: Appeals.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021; Ord. 24-33, passed 3-25-2024; Ord. 25-109,
passed 6-23-2025)
§ 1214.06 SITE PLANS.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of the site plan review procedure is to ensure
that multi-family residential development and all nonresidential developments
comply with the development and design standards of this code. Zoning permits
for any building, structure, expansions, or use of land subject to this
section, shall not be issued without an approved site plan.
   (b)   Applicability. The following forms of development shall require site
plan review by the Planning Commission in accordance with this section:
      (1)   New construction, structural alterations and site improvements of
all uses in nonresidential zoning districts and in R-2 and R-3 Districts;
      (2)   All conditional uses, in all zoning districts;
      (3)   Improvements to public property;
      (4)   Any proposal to alter, reconstruct, or otherwise modify any
existing or previously approved site plan for a permitted use, conditional use
or similar use that increases the number of dwelling units in a multi-family
development; or changes the use in a manner which requires an increase in the
amount of parking or a change in the site’s circulation; and
      (5)   Exemptions. The following forms of development within the above
zoning districts shall be exempt from site plan review:
         A.   Single-family dwellings; and
         B.   Re-occupancy of an existing building or the internal construction
or change in floor area of a building or structure that does not increase the
gross floor area, increase the intensity of use, or affect parking or
landscaping requirements on a site that meets all of the development standards
of this code; and
         C.   Accessory and temporary uses as established in
Chapter 1224: Accessory and Temporary Use Regulations.
   (c)   Site plan review procedure. The site review procedures shall proceed
as follows:
      (1)   Step 1 - Pre-application meeting (required). An applicant shall be
required to have a pre-application meeting with the Development Review
Committee to informally discuss the application and any concept plans. Such
meeting shall be subject to §
1214.01(f).
      (2)   Step 2 - Application. The applicant shall submit an application in
accordance with §
1214.01: Common Review requirements, and with the provisions of this section.
      (3)   Step 3 - Development Review Committee review.
         A.   Upon determination that a site plan application is complete, the
Development Review Committee shall review the application and may distribute
the application to other departments or agencies for review and comment.
         B.   The Development Review Committee will review the application and
provide a summary report of comments to the applicant.
         C.   Upon receipt of comments, the applicant shall have the option to
make revisions to the application and plans based on the comments prior to
being forwarded to the Planning Commission or may request that the application
be forwarded to the Planning Commission without revisions. In all cases, the
Development Review Committee will forward their report to the Planning
Commission.
      (4)   Step 4 - Planning Commission review and decision.
         A.   The Planning Commission shall review the site plan application at
its next regularly scheduled meeting, or at a special meeting, after the
application is determined to be complete. If the site plan application includes
an application for alternative equivalency review (see division (e) of this
section), then such applications shall be simultaneously reviewed as part of
this procedure.
         B.   In reviewing the application, the Planning Commission shall at a
minimum, consider the review criteria of this section.
         C.   Within 60 days of the Code Administrator determining that the
application is complete, the Planning Commission shall make a decision on the
application. In making its decision, the Planning Commission may approve,
approve with modifications or supplementary conditions, or deny the
application.
         D.   If the Planning Commission fails to make a recommendation within
the established timeframe, or an extended timeframe approved by the applicant,
the application shall be deemed approved.
   (d)   Review criteria. In order to approve a site plan, the Planning
Commission shall determine that:
      (1)   The proposed development is consistent with all the requirements of
this code, and other related codes and ordinances of the city;
      (2)   The proposed development is in compliance with the applicable
zoning district regulations;
      (3)   The proposed development complies with any established standards or
requirements in the approved comprehensive land use plan or thoroughfare plan;
      (4)   The proposed development meets all the requirements or conditions
of any applicable development approvals (e.g., previously approved planned
developments, conditional use approvals, variance approvals and the like);
      (5)   The development will result in a harmonious grouping of buildings
within the proposed development and in relationship to existing and proposed
uses on adjacent property;
      (6)   The development will preserve and be sensitive to the natural
characteristics of the site in a manner that complies with the applicable
regulations set forth in this code;
      (7)   Adequate provision is made for safe and efficient pedestrian and
vehicular circulation within the site and to adjacent property;
      (8)   The development will provide adequate lighting for safe and
convenient use of the streets, walkways, driveways and parking areas;
      (9)   Upon review and recommendation of the Code Administrator, points of
ingress/egress to the development shall be controlled and designed in such
manner as to minimize conflicts with adjacent properties and developments;
      (10)   Adequate provision is made for emergency vehicle access and
circulation; and
      (11)   If the project is to be carried out in progressive stages, each
stage shall be so planned that the foregoing criteria are complied with at the
completion of each stage.
   (e)   Alternative equivalency review.
      (1)   Purpose. Alternative equivalency review is a procedure that allows
applicants to propose unique design options as an alternative to a development
standard established in this code provided it meets or exceeds the intent of
the design-related provisions. It is not a variance, waiver or weakening of
regulations; rather, this procedure permits a site-specific plan that is equal
to or better than the strict application of a design standard specified in this
code. Alternative equivalency review shall apply only to the specific site for
which it is requested and does not establish a precedent for assured approval
of other requests.
      (2)   Applicability. 
         A.   The alternative equivalency review procedure shall be available
only for the following sections of this code:
            1.   Setbacks and yards as established in §
1226.01: Lot and Principal Building Regulations provided the adjustment to the
setback or yard is less than 20% of the applicable requirements.
            2.   Section
1226.03: Fences and Walls;
            3.   Section
1226.04: Outdoor Lighting;
            4.   
Chapter 1228: Architectural Standards;
            5.   
Chapter 1232: Landscaping and Screening Standards; and
            6.   
Chapter 1234: Parking, Access, and Mobility Standards.
         B.   Where an applicant is seeking a variance of standards that is not
an alternative equivalency review, such application shall comply with §
1214.09: Variances.
      (3)   Review timing and decisions.
         A.   A request for alternative equivalency review shall be made
concurrently with the applicable site plan application.
         B.   The Planning Commission shall have the authority to work with an
applicant on an alternative equivalency approach to meeting the applicable
standards as part of site plan review, regardless if a formal application is
made.
         C.   The Planning Commission shall have the authority to approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the alternative equivalency review
application. Such action shall be separate from the decision on the applicable
site plan application.
      (4)   Review criteria. Decisions on an alternative equivalency review
application shall be based on consideration of the following criteria:
         A.   That the proposed alternative achieves the intent of the subject
design or development standard to the same or better degree than the subject
standard;
         B.   That the proposed alternative achieves the goals and policies of
the comprehensive plan to the same or better degree than the subject standard;
         C.   That the proposed alternative results in benefits to the
community that are equivalent to or better than compliance with the subject
standard; and
         D.   That the proposed alternative imposes no greater impacts on
adjacent properties than would occur through compliance with the specific
requirements of this code.
      (5)   Conditions. The Planning Commission may impose conditions on an
approval for alternative equivalency review provided such conditions are
related to ensuring the performance of the alternative equivalency review to
meet or exceed the subject standard. Such conditions may include required
timeframes, amendments or revisions to the proposal, or the ability to revoke
an approval for alternative equivalency review.
      (6)   Decisions. Any decision on an alternative equivalency review
application shall not be binding on the city related to future applications
requesting an alternative to any of the applicable standards. Each case shall
be reviewed and decided upon based on the individual circumstances.
      (7)   Time limit.
         A.   An approval of an alternative equivalency review application
shall expire if the site plan approval or zoning permit approval such
alternative equivalency review application is associated with expires.
         B.   Upon expiration of an alternative equivalency review approval, a
new application, including all applicable fees, shall be required before a new
application will be reviewed.
      (8)   Appeals. Any person or entity claiming to be injured or aggrieved
by any final action of the Planning Commission shall have the right to appeal
the decision to the ZBA as established in §
1214.11: Appeals.
   (f)   Significance of an approved site plan.
      (1)   An approved site plan shall become, for the proposed development, a
binding commitment of the specific elements approved for development. The
approved site plan may be transferred to another person, corporation or group
of individuals or corporations prior to the issuance of a building permit.
      (2)   All construction and development under any zoning permit and
building permit shall be in accordance with the approved site plan. Any
departure from such plan shall be cause for revocation of the zoning permit
and/or building permit, and the property owner or other responsible parties are
subject to penalties as prescribed by this code.
   (g)   Time limit.
      (1)   The applicant shall submit a completed application for a zoning
permit within one year of the date the site plan was approved or the site plan
approval shall expire.
      (2)   Upon expiration of a site plan approval, a new application,
including all applicable fees, shall be required before a new site plan will be
reviewed.
      (3)   Upon written request, one extension of six months may be granted by
the Code Administrator if the applicant can show good cause for a delay.
      (4)   The Planning Commission may authorize alternative time limits for
zoning permit issuance, as part of its approval, based on the scale of the
proposed development.
   (h)   Appeals. Any person or entity claiming to be injured or aggrieved by
any final action of the Planning Commission shall have the right to appeal the
decision to the ZBA as established in §
1214.11: Appeals.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1214.07 CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS (COA).
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of the COA is to provide a procedure by which to
review construction, renovation, expansion and demolition projects within a
locally or nationally designated historic district or for locally or nationally
designated historic properties. In an effort to preserve the character of these
properties and districts, the city has established reasonable development
standards and design guidelines for buildings and structures and this procedure
allows for a comprehensive review of the activities against the adopted
standards and guidelines.
   (b)   Applicability.
      (1)   No person shall make any exterior construction, reconstruction,
alteration or demolition of a structure on any property within a locally or
nationally designated historic district or on a locally or nationally
designated historic property unless a COA has been approved by the HPC and a
zoning permit, if required, has also been issued.
      (2)   Minor site improvements such as the establishment of a paved
surfaces with less than 200 square feet of surface areas, landscaping or other
minor site work or changes to components of a property not specifically
identified by the ordinance that applies to the historic district or property,
shall not require a COA.
      (3)   Projects and activities that are exempt from the COA review
procedure include:
         A.   The reconstruction, alteration or demolition of a structure or
feature which has been ordered by the Chief Building Official upon
certification of an unsafe condition constituting an emergency;
         B.   Painting or general maintenance of a structure that does not
alter exterior architectural features including not altering the materials or
color of such architectural features;
         C.   Changes in occupancy not involving structural or exterior work;
and
         D.   Any interior renovations which will not alter and/or affect the
exterior elevations and facade of the building or structure or any
architectural features that are visible from the outside.
   (c)   COA review procedure. The review procedure for a COA shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Step 1 - Pre-application meeting (optional). An applicant may
request to have a pre-application meeting with the HPC to informally discuss
the application and any concept plans. Such meeting shall be subject to §
1214.01(f).
      (2)   Step 2 - Application.
         A.   The applicant shall submit an application in accordance with §
1214.01: Common Review Requirements, and with the provisions of this section.
         B.   In making application, the Code Administrator or the HPC may
request that the applicant provide exhibits, sketches, examples of materials,
renderings or other documentation to assist in their decision.
      (3)   Step 3 - Staff review. Upon determination that a COA application is
complete, the Code Administrator shall refer the application to the HPC.
      (4)   Step 4 - HPC Review and decision.
         A.   The HPC shall review the COA application at its next regularly
scheduled meeting, or at a special meeting, after the application is determined
to be complete.
         B.   The HPC shall at a minimum, consider the review criteria of this
section.
         C.   Notification of the public meeting shall be provided in
accordance with §
1214.01(h).
         D.   Within 60 days after the COA application is determined to be
complete or is forwarded to them by the Code Administrator, the HPC shall hold
a public meeting to review the application and make a decision on the
application. In making its decision, the HPC may approve, approve with
modifications, or deny the application. The HPC shall make every effort to work
with the applicant within this time period to develop a proposal that the HPC
can approve or approve with modifications.
         E.   If a COA is denied, the city shall not issue any permits that
would allow modifications for which the COA was denied. In cases where the HPC
has denied a COA, the HPC shall state the reasons for such disapproval in
writing and transmit the written statement to the applicant together with any
recommendation the HPC may have made for appropriate changes.
         F.   If the HPC fails to make a recommendation within the established
timeframe, or an extended timeframe approved by the applicant, the application
shall be deemed approved.
         G.   If a zoning permit is required for the subject work, the
applicant may proceed with applying for the zoning permit following approval of
the COA. Such zoning permit applications shall comply with the COA approval and
any related modifications.
   (d)   Determining the significance of a structure.
      (1)   When making decisions or recommendations about changes to
structures in the applicable historic districts or on historic properties, the
HPC shall have the authority to make a determination of the historical or
architectural significance of the structure based on this section.
      (2)   For structures that the HPC finds are not historically or
architecturally significant, the HPC may relax or waive the standards or
guidelines that apply to the project.
      (3)   If the HPC finds that the structure is historically or
architecturally significant, the standards and guidelines of this code shall be
fully applied as determined by the HPC.
      (4)   The HPC shall determine whether a structure or site is significant
based on the structure’s:
          A.   Value as a reminder of the cultural, historical or
archaeological heritage of the city, state or nation;
         B.   Location as a site of a significant local, state or national
event;
         C.   Identification with a person or persons who significantly
contributed to the development of the city, state or nation;
         D.   Identification as the work of a master builder, designer or
architect whose individual work has influenced the city, state or nation;
         E.   Value as a building that is recognized for the quality of its
architecture and that it retains sufficient elements showing such architectural
significance;
         F.   Example of an architectural style or period; and/or
         G.   Character as a contributing element in a locally or nationally
designated historic district.
   (e)   Review criteria. Decisions on a COA application shall be based on
consideration of the following criteria:
      (1)   The proposed development is in compliance with all the requirements
of this code and other related codes and ordinances enforced by the city;
      (2)   The proposed development incorporates any applicable standards or
guidelines (see §
1228.05(b)), to the maximum extent feasible;
      (3)   The proposed development meets all the requirements or conditions
of any applicable development approvals (e.g., PUD approvals, RPD approvals,
conditional use approvals, variance approvals and the like); and
      (4)   There is no feasible and prudent alternative alteration or change
which would conform to the guidelines, and adhering to the guidelines would
deny the owner a reasonable rate of return on the real property or amount to a
taking of property without just compensation.
   (f)   Denial of a COA application for demolition. In the case of a denial of
a COA for demolition:
      (1)   The HPC and applicant shall undertake meaningful and continuing
discussion to find a means of preserving the property;
      (2)   If the applicant fails to meet with the HPC in good faith and at
specified times, then denial of the application will stand;
      (3)   After meeting with the applicant, if the HPC determines that denial
would create a substantial hardship to the applicant, it shall propose a
compromise which relieves the hardship, if it exists;
      (4)   If, after meeting with the applicant, the HPC has not reached a
compromise with the applicant that relieves substantial hardship, then the
applicant may appeal the decision, within 30 days of the said meeting, directly
to the city. City Council may affirm, modify or reverse the HPC’s decision; and
      (5)   In the specific cases of demolition, the HPC may delay a decision
for up to 180 days upon finding that a structure is of such importance that
alternatives to demolition should be actively pursued by both the HPC and the
applicant. Alternate steps to be investigated include, but are not limited to:
         A.   Consultation with civic groups, public agencies and interested
citizens;
         B.   Recommendations for acquisition of the property by public or
private bodies; and
         C.   Exploration of the possibility of moving one or more structures
or other features.
   (g)   Compliance and modifications of a COA.
      (1)   The Code Administrator shall review the construction drawings,
final plans and other similar documents for compliance with an approved COA,
any conditions attached thereto, and any approved or required modifications
thereof.
      (2)   If it is determined that a deviation from an approved COA is
planned or constructed, a stop work order shall be issued by the Code
Administrator.
      (3)   The Code Administrator and the HPC Chair together shall determine
the impact of the modification with regard to the intent of an approved COA.
Such determination shall be made within 72 hours following the issuance of a
stop work order, if possible.
      (4)   Any modification may be approved administratively and the stop work
order lifted if the Code Administrator and the HPC Chair determine that it is a
minor modification to the approved COA.
      (5)   Any modification that is determined to be a major modification or
that does not satisfy the intent of the approved COA will require a new
application for a COA. The stop work order shall not be lifted until the new
application has been heard and approved by the HPC.
   (h)   Time limit.
      (1)   The applicant shall submit a completed application for a zoning
permit within one year of the date the COA was approved or the approval shall
expire. The date of approval shall be the date the Code Administrator issues
the COA.
      (2)   Upon expiration of a COA, a new application, including all
applicable fees, shall be required before a new application will be reviewed.
      (3)   Upon written request, one extension of one year may be granted by
the HPC if the applicant can show good cause for a delay.
      (4)   The HPC may authorize alternative time limits for zoning permit
issuance based on the scale of the proposed development.
   (i)   Appeals. Any person or entity claiming to be injured or aggrieved by
any final action of the HPC shall have the right to appeal the decision to the
City Council in a manner similar to the appeals process established for the ZBA
in §
1214.11: Appeals.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1214.08 DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC LANDMARKS AND HISTORIC DISTRICTS.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this designation procedure is to provide a
clear method by which certain sites, buildings and larger districts are
considered for formal designation as a historic landmark or historic district
within the city, subject to enhanced review to ensure that the sites,
buildings, or districts retain their historic significance.
   (b)   Historic landmark and historic district designation procedure. The
review procedure for the designation of a historic landmark or historic
district shall be as established in this section.
      (1)   Step 1 - Nomination.
         A.   The nomination for a single property, structure, landscape, site
element or object in the city for historic landmark designation may be
initiated by any of the following with written consent from all property owners
specified in the nomination:
            1.   The owner of any property included in the nomination;
            2.   One or more HPC members;
            3.   One or more City Council members;
            4.   The Mayor; or
            5.   An organization or individual with a stated interest.
         B.   The nomination for an area to in the city for historic district
designation may be initiated by a petition signed by the owners of no less than
75% of the total square footage of the area to be included in the district and
shall include verification of such requirements with reference to the Lorain
County Auditor’s real property records.
      (2)   Step 2 - HPC review and recommendation.
         A.   The HPC shall review the nomination at its next regularly
scheduled meeting, or at a special meeting, after the application is determined
to be complete.
         B.   Within 60 days after the nomination is determined to be complete,
the HPC shall consider the nomination and forward the nomination and the HPC’s
recommendation to the Planning Commission.
      (3)   Step 3 - Planning Commission review and recommendation.
         A.   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
nomination at its next regularly scheduled meeting, or at a special meeting,
after the HPC’s recommendation.
         B.   Notification of the public hearing shall be provided in
accordance with §
1214.01(i).
         C.   The applicant(s) shall be exempt from the Planning Commission
agenda fee.
         D.   Within 60 days after HPC makes its recommendation (Step 2), the
Planning Commission shall consider the nomination and the HPC recommendation
and recommend to City Council that the nomination be approved, approved with
some modification, or denied.
      (4)   Step 4 - City Council review and decision.
         A.   The City Council shall hold a public hearing on the nomination at
its next regularly scheduled meeting, or at a special meeting, after the
Planning Commission’s recommendation.
         B.   Notification of the public hearing shall be provided in
accordance with §
1214.01(i).
         C.   Within 60 days after the Planning Commission makes a
recommendation (Step 3), City Council shall consider the nomination, the HPC’s
recommendation, and the Planning Commission’s recommendation and make one of
the following decisions:
            1.   Approve the nomination as requested and designate the landmark
or district as a historic property. Approval shall require a two-thirds
majority to override a proposal previously denied by the Planning Commission;
or
            2.   Deny the proposal.
         D.   After a decision by City Council, the Clerk of Council shall
notify all persons known to have a legal or equitable interest in said
property. The Planning Commission, the Code Administrator, and HPC shall also
be notified.
         E.   The Clerk of Council shall notify any appropriate county, state
or federal offices after a designation is approved. The Clerk of Council shall
cause to be recorded in the office of the Lorain County Recorder a copy of each
ordinance designating a preservation district or landmark.
         F.   Designation of a historic district or landmark shall be
considered a district overlay with the regulations of the underlying zoning
district remaining in effect for any property designated as a landmark or
included in a historic district.
         G.   Following the designation of the landmark property, the HPC may
place or cause to be placed on such landmark an official city plaque,
indicating that such property or part thereof has been designated a landmark in
the city. In case of designation of a district, the HPC may place or cause to
be placed official city plaques at appropriate location(s) near all
entranceways to the new district. Plaques shall be installed subject to the
provisions of
Chapter 1236: Sign Standards. These official plaques shall remain the property
of the city.
   (c)   Review criteria. In considering the designation of any building,
structure, site, work of art or object as a landmark or any area which contains
within definable geographic boundaries, buildings, structures or sites of
historic architectural or archaeological significance as a historic district,
the HPC shall apply the following criteria:
      (1)   The character, interest or value of the area, property, or site as
part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the city,
state or nation;
      (2)   The location as a site of a significant historic event;
      (3)   The identification with a person or persons significant in our
past;
      (4)   The exemplification by the area, property, or site of the cultural,
economic or social heritage of the city, state or nation;
      (5)   The portrayal of a group of people in an era of history,
characterized by a distinctive architectural style;
      (6)   The embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of a building type
or architectural style;
      (7)   The embodiment of elements of architectural design, detail,
materials or craftsmanship, which represent architecture of significant
character;
      (8)   The identification as the work of an architect or master builder
whose work has influenced the city, state or nation;
      (9)   The potential to yield information important in prehistory or
history; and
      (10)   A unique location or singular physical characteristic representing
an established and familiar visual feature of a neighborhood or of the city.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1214.09 VARIANCES.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of a variance is to provide limited relief from
the requirements of this code in those cases where strict application of a
particular requirement will create a practical difficulty or unnecessary
hardship prohibiting the use of land in a manner otherwise allowed under this
code. It is not intended that a variance be granted merely to remove
inconveniences or financial burdens that the requirements of this code may
impose on property owners in general. Variances are intended to address
extraordinary, exceptional or unique situations that were not caused by the
applicant’s act or omission.
   (b)   Variance review procedure. The review procedure for a variance shall
be as follows:
      (1)   Step 1 - Application. The applicant shall submit an application in
accordance with §
1214.01: Common Review Requirements, and with the provisions of this section.
      (2)   Step 2 - Staff review.
         A.   Upon determination that a variance application is complete, the
Code Administrator shall distribute the application, and all related plans, to
applicable city departments for internal review.
         B.   The Code Administrator will provide the ZBA with a summary of
comments received from the city departments.
         C.   Upon receipt of comments, the applicant shall have the option to
make revisions to the application and plans based on the comments prior to
being forwarded to the ZBA or may request that the application be forwarded to
the ZBA without revisions.
      (3)   Step 3 - ZBA Review and decision.
         A.   The ZBA shall hold a public hearing within 45 days of the filing
of the variance application provided adequate notification is provided pursuant
to § 1214.01(i).
         B.   In reviewing the application, the ZBA shall at a minimum,
consider the review criteria of this section.
         C.   The ZBA may request that the applicant supply additional
information that the Board deems necessary to review and evaluate the request
for a variance.
         D.   In making its decision, the ZBA may approve, approve with
modifications or supplementary conditions, or deny the application.
         E.   In making its decision, the ZBA shall make specific findings of
fact based directly on the particular evidence presented that the reasons set
forth in the application and as presented by the applicant during the public
hearing, justify the approval, approval with modifications or supplementary
conditions, or denial of the variance application that will make possible a
reasonable use of the land, building, or structure.
         F.   Within 60 days of the close of the public hearing, the ZBA shall
render a decision on the variance application. The Code Administrator shall
notify the appellant in writing of the decision of the ZBA.
         G.   If the ZBA fails to make a recommendation within the established
timeframe, or an extended timeframe approved by the applicant, the application
shall be deemed approved.
         H.   The decision of the ZBA shall become effective immediately.
         I.   In approving a variance, the ZBA may impose conditions on the
approval, the proposed use and the premises to be developed or used pursuant to
such approval as it determines are required to be ensure compliance with the
standards of this section and the purpose of this code. Any conditions
established by the ZBA shall relate directly to the requested variance.
         J.   Any violation of the conditions of approval shall be a violation
of this code, subject to the enforcement and penalties of
Chapter 1244: Enforcement and Penalties.
   (c)   Review criteria.
      (1)   Area or dimensional variance. Where an applicant is seeking an area
or dimensional variance, the following factors shall be considered and weighed
by the ZBA to determine if a practical difficulty exists that would justify
approval of the variance. However, no single factor listed below may control,
and not all factors may be applicable in each case. Each case shall be
determined on its own facts:
         A.   Whether special conditions and circumstances exist which are
peculiar to the land or structure involved and which are not applicable
generally to other lands or structures in the same zoning district. Examples of
such special conditions or circumstances are exceptional irregularity,
narrowness, shallowness or steepness of the lot, or proximity to nonconforming
and inharmonious uses, structures or conditions;
         B.   Whether the property in question will yield a reasonable return
or whether there can be any beneficial use of the property without the
variance;
         C.   Whether the variance is substantial and is the minimum necessary
to make possible the reasonable use of the land or structures;
         D.   Whether the essential character of the neighborhood would be
substantially altered or whether adjoining properties would suffer substantial
detriment as a result of the variance;
         E.   Whether the variance would adversely affect the delivery of
governmental services such as water, sewer, trash pickup;
         F.   Whether special conditions or circumstances exist as a result of
actions of the applicant (actions of the applicant shall not include the
purchase or acquisition of the property);
         G.   Whether the property owner’s predicament feasibly can be obviated
through some method other than a variance;
         H.   Whether the spirit and intent behind the zoning requirement would
be observed and substantial justice done by granting a variance;
         I.   Whether the granting of the variance requested will confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this regulation to other
lands, structures, or buildings in the same district; and
         J.   Whether a literal interpretation of the provisions of this code
would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in
the same district under the terms of this code.
      (2)   Use variance. In order to grant a use variance, the ZBA shall
determine that strict compliance with the terms of this code will result in
unnecessary hardship to the applicant. The applicant must demonstrate such
hardship by clear and convincing evidence that all of the following criteria
are satisfied:
         A.   The property cannot be put to any economically viable use under
any of the permitted uses in the zoning district in which the property is
located;
         B.   The variance requested stems from a condition which is unique to
the property at issue and not ordinarily found in the same zone or district;
         C.   The hardship condition is not created by actions of the applicant
(actions of the applicant shall not include the purchase or acquisition of the
property);
         D.   The granting of the variance will not adversely affect the rights
of adjacent property owners or residents;
         E.   If there is an existing building on the lot, such building, due
to its design, cannot be reasonably reused for a permitted use in the district;
         F.   The granting of the variance will not adversely affect the public
health, safety or general welfare;
         G.   The variance will be consistent with the general spirit and
intent of this code; and
         H.   The variance sought is the minimum that will afford relief to the
applicant.
   (d)   Time limit.
      (1)   The applicant shall obtain applicable building permit(s) within one
year of the date the variance was approved or the approval shall expire.
      (2)   Upon expiration of a variance approval, a new application,
including all applicable fees, shall be required before a variance application
will be reviewed.
      (3)   Upon written request, one extension of one year may be granted by
the Code Administrator if the applicant can show good cause for a delay.
      (4)   As part of the variance approval, the ZBA may authorize alternative
time limits for zoning permit issuance based on the scale of the proposed
development.
   (e)   Appeals. Any person or entity claiming to be injured or aggrieved by
any final action of the ZBA shall have the right to appeal the decision the
Court of Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapters 2505 and 2506.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021; Ord. 25-109, passed 6-23-2025)
§ 1214.10 ZONING PERMIT.
   (a)   Purpose. A zoning permit shall be required in accordance with the
provisions of this section in order to ensure that proposed development
complies with the standards of this code, and to otherwise protect the public
health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city.
   (b)   Applicability.
      (1)   No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, altered or
added to, nor shall any building, structure or land be used without a zoning
permit issued by the Code Administrator.
      (2)   Any change in use within an existing building shall require a
zoning permit with the exception that a change in tenancy or ownership of a
residential dwelling unit shall not be required to receive a zoning permit.
      (3)   A zoning permit may be required for the establishment of certain
temporary or accessory use as established in
Chapter 1224: Accessory and Temporary Use Regulations.
      (4)   The use of vacant land shall require the issuance of a zoning
permit.
      (5)   Unless otherwise specifically exempted in
Chapter 1236: Sign Standards, signs shall require a zoning permit.
      (6)   Zoning permits shall be issued only in conformity with the
provisions of this code unless the application is subject to an approval by the
ZBA or Planning Commission providing for additional standards, conditions or
modifications, in which case, the zoning permit shall be issued in conformity
with the provisions of those approvals, as applicable.
      (7)   Failure to obtain a zoning permit shall be a violation of this code
subject to the provisions of
Chapter 1244: Enforcement and Penalties.
   (c)   Terminology. For the purposes of this code, the zoning permit review
shall be an administrative review that may be applied to permits or
certificates of other names (e.g., sign permits, temporary use permits, zoning
occupancy permit and the like) if stated in this code. In such cases, the
procedure of this section shall still apply.
   (d)   Zoning permit review procedure. The review procedure for a zoning
permit shall be as follows.
      (1)   Step 1 - Application. The applicant shall submit an application in
accordance with §
1214.01: Common Review Requirements, and with the provisions of this section.
      (2)   Step 2 - Code Administrator review and decision.
         A.   The Code Administrator may distribute the application to other
staff members and other city departments to solicit comment on the zoning
permit application.
         B.   For any zoning permit application for development or applicable
activities in a special flood hazard area, the Code Administrator shall be
required to also review and make a decision on the zoning permit application as
it relates to any flood-related regulations.
         C.   Within 30 days after the application is determined to be
complete, the Code Administrator shall make a decision either approving or
denying the permit application. An extension on the decision may be granted
with approval from the applicant. Where the proposed development is within a
special flood hazard area, the Code Administrator shall be required to make a
decision within the same timeframe.
         D.   Prior to finalizing approval of the application, the Code
Administrator shall have the authority to provide comments to the applicant
regarding necessary revisions to bring the application into full compliance.
The application shall not be deemed formally approved until the applicant makes
all of the appropriate changes and submits all necessary revised forms, maps
and documents to the Code Administrator.
   (e)   Review criteria. In order to approve any zoning permit, the Code
Administrator shall determine the following:
      (1)   The application complies with all applicable provisions of this
code and the applicable zoning district; and
      (2)   The application complies with all approved plans, conditions, or
other development approvals.
   (f)   Time limit and abandoned or suspended work.
      (1)   The applicant shall obtain an approved building permit, and begin
construction, within one year of the date the zoning permit is approved or the
approval shall be revoked. The date of approval shall be the date the Code
Administrator provides a signed copy of the permit to the applicant.
      (2)   For activities that do not require a building permit, the activity
shall have been substantially begun within one year of approval and is
thereafter pursued to completion, as determined by the Code Administrator.
      (3)   The deadlines in divisions (f)(1) or (f)(2) of this section may be
reduced if the work is mandated by this code or by order of the Code
Administrator or ZBA. In such cases, the deadline for construction shall be
noted on the zoning permit.
      (4)   Time limits for permitted temporary uses and structures shall be as
authorized in §
1224.02: Temporary Uses and Structures. An approval of a zoning permit for a
temporary use shall include the approved start and end dates for the proposed
temporary use.
      (5)   If construction activities for which a zoning permit has been
issued are abandoned or suspended for a period of six months after the time of
commencing the work, the zoning permit approval shall be revoked. ABANDONMENT
shall be defined as the lack of building activity or progress towards achieving
the scope of work defined in the zoning permit.
      (6)   Upon written request, up to two extensions of six months may be
granted by the Code Administrator if the applicant can show good cause for a
delay.
      (7)   The Code Administrator shall notify the application of the
revocation of a zoning permit including notice that further work as described
in the canceled permit shall not proceed unless and until a new zoning permit
has been obtained or extension granted.
      (8)   Upon revocation of a zoning permit approval, a new application,
including all applicable fees, shall be required before a new zoning permit
application will be reviewed.
      (9)   The above time limits shall not apply if alternative time limits
have been approved by Planning Commission or City Council as part of a site
plan or Planned Unit Development approval.
      (10)   For the purposes of this section, construction is deemed to have
begun when all necessary excavation and piers or footings for one or more
principal buildings included in the plan shall have been completed.
   (g)   Revoking a zoning permit. A zoning permit shall be revocable, if among
other things, the actual development activity does not conform to the terms of
the application and permit granted thereon. In the event of the revocation of a
permit, an appeal may be taken to the ZBA in accordance with §
1214.11: Appeals, of this code.
   (h)   Appeals. Any person or entity claiming to be injured or aggrieved by
any final action of the Code Administrator shall have the right to appeal the
decision to the ZBA as established in §
1214.11: Appeals.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1214.11 APPEALS.
   (a)   Purpose. This section sets out the procedures to follow when a person
claims to have been aggrieved or affected by an administrative decision made in
the administration or enforcement of this code.
   (b)   Applicability.
      (1)   An appeal may be made regarding any administrative decision made in
the administration and enforcement of this code including administrative
decisions by the Planning Commission or Code Administrator.
      (2)   An appeal may not be made to the ZBA when the Planning Commission
is making a recommendation to City Council as part of a legislative action such
as a code text or map amendment.
   (c)   Initiation. Appeals shall be initiated by the person aggrieved or
affected by any order, decision, determination or interpretation made by the
authority having jurisdiction who is charged with the administration or
enforcement of this code.
   (d)   Appeals review procedure. The review procedure for appeals shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Step 1 - Submission of appeal. Within 30 days of the administrative
order, decision, determination or interpretation, the person appealing the
decision or their authorized agent shall submit all required information to the
Code Administrator in accordance §
1214.01: Common Review Requirements.
      (2)   Step 2 - Forwarding of the record to the ZBA. Upon receiving the
written appeal of an administrative decision or determination, the Code
Administrator shall transmit the written appeal with all papers, documents and
other materials related to the appealed decision or determination to the ZBA.
This material shall constitute the record of the appeal.
      (3)   Step 3 - ZBA review and decision.
         A.   The ZBA shall hold a public hearing within 45 days of the filing
of the appeal provided adequate notification is provided pursuant to §
1214.01(i).
         B.   In reviewing the appeal, the ZBA shall at a minimum, consider the
review criteria of this section.
         C.   Within 60 days of the close of the public hearing, the ZBA shall
render a decision on the appeal. The Code Administrator shall notify the
appellant in writing of the decision of the Board.
         D.   If the ZBA fails to make a recommendation within the established
timeframe, or an extended timeframe approved by the applicant, the application
shall be deemed denied.
         E.   The decision of the ZBA shall become effective immediately.
   (e)   Review criteria. A decision or determination shall not be reversed or
modified unless there is competent, material and substantial evidence in the
record that the decision or determination fails to comply with either the
procedural or substantive requirements of this code.
   (f)   Stay. A properly submitted appeal shall stay all administrative
proceedings by the city in furtherance of the action appealed, unless the Code
Administrator certifies to the ZBA that a stay would cause imminent peril to
life or property, in which case the administrative proceedings shall not be
stayed unless a restraining order is granted by the ZBA or by a court of
competent jurisdiction, for good cause shown.
   (g)   Appeals of ZBA decisions. Any person or entity claiming to be injured
or aggrieved by any final action of the ZBA shall have the right to appeal the
decision the Court of Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapters 2505 and 2506.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1214.12 INTERPRETATION OF THE CODE.
   It is the intent of this code that all questions of interpretation related
to the administration and enforcement of this code shall be first presented to
the Code Administrator, and that such questions shall be presented to the ZBA
only on appeal from the decision of the Code Administrator. Such appeals shall
be in accordance with §
1214.11: Appeals.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
CHAPTER 1216: ZONING DISTRICTS AND PRINCIPAL USE REGULATIONS
Section
1216.01 Purpose
1216.02 Establishment of zoning districts
1216.03 Zoning district map and district boundaries
1216.04 Zoning district purpose statements
1216.05 Allowed principal uses
1216.06 Use-specific standards
§ 1216.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to set out the individual purpose statements
for each of the city’s zoning districts as well as the list of uses that are
allowed within each zoning district. The uses are either prohibited or allowed,
and where they are allowed, they may be permitted, permitted with additional
standards, or conditionally permitted with additional review. Finally, this
chapter includes use-specific standards for a variety of uses that apply to the
those uses alone in addition to all other applicable standards of this code.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1216.02 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (a)   Districts established. The city hereby establishes the following
zoning districts to carry out the purposes of this code, and to assist in the
implementation of the comprehensive land use plan.
 
Table 1216-1: Zoning Districts
Abbreviation District Name
Residential Zoning Districts
R-1A         Single-Family Residence District
R-1B         Single-Family Residence District
R-1C         Single-Family Residence District
R-1D         Cottage District
R-2          Multi-Family Residence District
R-3          Multi-Family Residence District
Nonresidential Zoning Districts
B-1          Limited Business District
B-2          General Commerce District
B-3          Special Commerce District
I-1          Light Industrial District
I-2          General Industrial District
Special Districts
P-I          Public and Institutional District
PUD          Planned Unit Development District
RPD          Residential Planned Development District
MUO          Mixed-Use Overlay District
 
   (b)   References to previous zoning districts. Some of the district
classifications and names established within this code differ from previous
versions of this code. Table 1216-2 identifies how each of the previous
district classifications was renamed for this code. This table shall be used
for comparison purposes only.
 
Table 1216-2: District Transition Table
Zoning Districts in the Planning and    Zoning Districts in the Land
Zoning Code Effective Prior to January  Development Code Effective January 1,
1, 2022                                 2022
Abbrev. District Name                   Abbrev. District Name
R-1     Single-Family Residence         R-1A    Single-Family Residence
        District                                District
R1A     Single-Family Residence         R-1B    Single-Family Residence
        District                                District
R1B     Single-Family Residence         R-1C    Single-Family Residence
        District                                District
R1C     Cottage District                R-1D    Cottage District
R2      Multi-Family Residence District R-2     Multi-Family Residence District
R3      Multi-Family Residence District R-3     Multi-Family Residence District
O1      Office District                 B-1     Limited Business District
B1      Limited Business District
B2      General Commerce District       B-2     General Commerce District
B3      Special Commerce District       B-3     Special Commerce District
LI      Light Industrial District       I-1     Light Industrial District
I       Industrial District             I-2     General Industrial District
No Previous District                    P-I     Public and Institutional
                                                District
No Previous District                    PUD     Planned Unit Development
                                                District
No Previous District                    RPD     Residential Planned Development
                                                District
No Previous District                    MUO     Mixed-Use Overlay District
 
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1216.03 ZONING DISTRICT MAP AND DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   (a)   Zoning district map. All land within the city shall be placed into at
least one of the zoning districts established in Table 1216-1, and such zoning
shall be shown on the Zoning District Map of Avon Lake, Ohio. The zoning
district map, together with all explanatory data thereon, including all changes
thereof as hereinafter provided, shall be incorporated and made a part of this
code, thereby having the same force and effect is if fully described in
writing.
   (b)   Interpretation of zoning district boundaries. The boundaries of the
zoning districts are shown upon the zoning district map. When uncertainty
exists with respect to the boundaries of zoning districts as shown on the
zoning district map, the following rules shall apply.
      (1)   Where zoning district boundary lines are indicated as approximately
following a lot line, such lot line shall be the zoning district boundary.
      (2)   Where zoning district boundary lines are indicated as approximately
following a centerline of a street or highway, alley, railroad easement or
other right-of-way, or a river, creek, or other watercourse, such centerline
shall be the zoning district boundary. In the event of a natural change in the
location of such streams, rivers or other watercourses, the zoning district
boundary shall be construed as moving with the channel centerline.
      (3)   Where zoning district boundary lines are indicated as approximately
following city limits, such city limits shall be the zoning district boundary.
      (4)   When the actual street, right-of-way, property line boundary or
other existing ground condition is in conflict with that shown on the zoning
district map, the ZBA shall provide the necessary interpretation. The person
contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to present their case to the city and to submit technical evidence
if so desired pursuant to the appeals process as established in §
1214.11: Appeals.
   (c)   Vacation of public rights-of-way. Whenever any street, alley or other
public way is vacated in a manner authorized by law, the zoning district
adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way shall be automatically
extended to the center of such vacation and all areas included in the vacation
shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended
district.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1216.04 ZONING DISTRICT PURPOSE STATEMENTS.
   In addition to the overall purpose of this code as established in §
1210.01: Purpose, the following are the purpose statements for the individual
zoning districts in the city.
   (a)   Single-Family Residential Districts (R-1A, R-1B, and R-1C). The
purpose of the R-1A, R-1B and R-1C Residential Zoning Districts is to provide
for the development and use of land for primarily single-family, detached
residential uses reflective of the primary residential land uses in the city.
These districts are intended to establish standards for the design, use and
location of principal and accessory buildings to maintain high-quality
neighborhoods.
   (b)   Cottage District (R-1D). The purpose of the R-1D Residential Zoning
District is similar to the R-1A, R-1B and R-1C Districts in that it is intended
to allow for the use of land primarily for single-family, detached residential
uses. The R-1D District recognizes that parts of the city have site
characteristics reflective of denser development patterns that were common
among the cottage developments along Lake Erie. Development in these areas is
far more compact than in other single-family residential districts and the
purpose of this district is to protect the characteristics of these dense
neighborhoods in Avon Lake.
   (c)   Multi-Family Residential Districts (R-2 and R-3). The purpose of the
R-2 and R-3 Multi-Family Residential Districts is to provide for residential
areas in the city that provide for attached housing options, which in turn
promote more diverse housing choices and that may serve as a transitional use
between lower-density residential uses and the city’s business activity areas.
The purpose of the regulations in these districts is to ensure the long-term
viability of uses that are designed in a manner that will contribute to the
community aesthetic.
   (d)   Limited Business District (B-1). The purpose of the B-1 District is to
provide areas for small-scale business development, a limited range of office
uses, as well as convenience goods and services to serve the day-to-day needs
of those living in the city. The design of uses is focused on small-scale
developments on large parcels while specifically excluding outdoor storage
activities and automotive-related uses.
   (e)   General Commerce District (B-2). The purpose of the B-2 District is to
accommodate professional offices, general commercial uses, and larger scale
businesses that sell goods and provide services to the general public in the
city and to the greater region. While pedestrian level activity and access is
highly encouraged, the city recognizes that vehicular access is also important
to the businesses in the city’s large-scale business areas.
   (f)   Special Commerce District (B-3). The purpose of the B-3 District is to
accommodate the unique development characteristics of special business areas
within the city including the Lear/Electric and Lake/Moore (Old Avon Lake
Shopping Center) areas by tailoring site development standards to the
predominant urban form and refining design requirements to address the compact
building areas. This district is intended to allow for a broad range of
professional offices and small-scale commercial uses that sell goods and
provide services to residents of the city. Pedestrian-scale design is highly
encouraged with a recognition for the need to accommodate vehicular access.
   (g)   Light Industrial District (I-1). The purpose of the I-1 District is to
provide an area to accommodate manufacturing, general businesses, offices,
service and repair businesses, and warehousing uses in a form that largely
takes place within enclosed buildings to allow for quiet and clean industrial
areas. It is the intent of this district to allow for a broad range of these
light industrial type uses.
   (h)   General Industrial District (I-2). The purpose of the I-2 District is
to provide for industrial and other uses that, by virtue of their external
effects, noise, glare, fumes, smoke, dust, odors and truck and/or rail traffic,
should be isolated from residential uses. These uses perform essential
functions for the city, including employment, and should be provided for in
areas that are best suited for industrial development by reason of location,
topography, soil conditions and the availability of adequate utilities and
transportation systems.
   (i)   Public and Institutional District (P-I). The purpose of the P-
I District is to establish sites for various governmental, institutional,
educational or other public or quasi-public uses that are integral parts of the
community while also ensuring compatibility with the surrounding neighborhoods.
   (j)   Mixed-Use Overlay District (MUO). The purpose statement and district-
specific standards for Mixed-Use Overlay District (MUO) district is located in
Chapter 1218: Mixed-Use Overlay District (MUO).
   (k)   Planned Unit Developments (PUD). The purpose statement and district-
specific standards for the Planned Unit Development (PUD) district is located
in
Chapter 1220: Planned Unit Developments (PUD).
   (l)   Residential Planned Developments (RPD). The purpose statement and
district-specific standards for the Residential Planned Development) (RPD)
district is located in
Chapter 1222: Residential Planned Development District (RPD).
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1216.05 ALLOWED PRINCIPAL USES.
   (a)   Generally. Table 1216-3 lists the principal uses allowed within the
various zoning districts, except for uses allowed in RPD Districts.
Chapter 1222: Residential Planned Development District (RPD) identifies the
uses that are allowed in RPDs.
   (b)   Explanation of table of permitted uses.
      (1)   Permitted uses.
         A.   A “P” in a cell indicates that a use type is allowed by-right in
the respective zoning district. Permitted uses are subject to all other
applicable standards of this code.
         B.   Permitted uses are approved administratively by the Planning
Commission through the site plan review process or by the Code Administrator
through the zoning permit procedure, unless subject to additional reviews
(e.g., variance and the like).
      (2)   Permitted uses with standards.
         A.   A “PS” in a cell indicates that a use type is allowed by-right in
the respective zoning district if it meets the additional standards as
identified in the last column of Table 1216-3. Permitted uses with standards
are subject to all other applicable standards of this code.
         B.   Uses permitted with standards are approved administratively by
the Planning Commission through the site plan review process or by the Code
Administrator through the zoning permit procedure, unless subject to additional
review (e.g., variance and the like).
      (3)   Conditional uses.
         A.   A “C” in a cell indicates that a use may be permitted if approved
by the Planning Commission through the conditional use review procedure.
Conditional uses may be subject to use-specific standards as identified in the
last column of Table 1216-3. Conditional uses are subject to all other
applicable standards of this code.
         B.   The existence or lack of additional use-specific standards in
this code shall not be implied to be the only standards the use is required to
meet. Any conditional use listed in the table shall be subject to the general
review standards for all conditional uses established in §
1214.03(d).
         C.   Where a use is listed as P/C or PS/C, there may be certain
circumstances in which a conditional use approval may be required rather than
the use being permitted or permitted with standards. The specific approval
required shall be as established in the use-specific standards.
      (4)   Prohibited uses.
         A.   A blank indicates that a use is prohibited in the respective
zoning district.
         B.   Any use not specifically listed shall be considered prohibited
unless allowed in accordance with division (d) of this section.
      (5)   Use-specific standards.
         A.   The numbers contained in the “Use-Specific Standards” column are
references to additional standards and requirements that apply to the use type
listed. Standards referenced in the “Use-Specific Standards” column apply in
all zoning districts unless otherwise expressly stated.
         B.   Use-specific standards shall only apply if the use is permitted
with standards (PS) or a conditional use (C). If the use is permitted with
standards in some districts and conditional in other districts, the use-
specific standards shall apply to both the districts where it is permitted with
standards and where it is conditionally permitted.
         C.   This section provides site planning, development and/or operating
standards for certain land uses that are permitted with standards or
conditionally permitted in Table 1216-3.
         D.   The land uses and activities covered by this section shall comply
with the applicable use-specific standards in all districts unless otherwise
specified, in addition to all other applicable provisions of this code.
   (c)   Multiple uses. If multiple uses are proposed on a single lot or in a
single building then each of the individual uses has to be allowed in the
applicable zoning district and reviewed in accordance with how the individual
use is allowed in the district (i.e., permitted, permitted with standards, or
conditional use).
   (d)   Use determination and unlisted uses.
      (1)   The Code Administrator shall make the determination if a proposed
use is permitted, permitted with standards, a conditional use, or a prohibited
use under the provisions of this section.
      (2)   The Code Administrator may determine that a proposed use is
substantially similar to a use that is permitted, permitted with standards, or
a conditional use established in Table 1216-3 based on the proposed use
activities, character of the business, similarity to existing uses within the
city, or information on the use as may be available from third-party land use
resources such as documentation from the American Planning Association, Urban
Land Institute or similar organizations. If the Code Administrator finds that
the proposed use is substantially similar to a use established in Table 1216-3,
the application shall be processed in the same manner as the similar use.
      (3)   In finding that a proposed use is similar to a use established in
Table 1216-3, the Code Administrator shall make a note of the similar use in
the approved application form.
      (4)   If the Code Administrator makes the determination that a use is
prohibited, the application shall not be processed and the application fee
shall be returned.
      (5)   If the applicant disagrees with the Code Administrator’s
determination regarding the proposed use, the applicant may choose to take one
of the following actions:
         A.   The applicant may appeal the determination of the Code
Administrator to the ZBA pursuant to §
1214.11: Appeals; or
         B.   The applicant may present their case to the Planning Commission
and/or City Council to request that the city initiate a text amendment to
address the proposed use and applicable standards.
 
Table 1216-3: Principal Uses
Land Uses                                                             Use-
P=Permitted Use   R-  R-  R-  R-                                      Specific
PS=Permitted Use  1A  1B  1C  1D  R-2 R-3 MUO B-1 B-2 B-3 I-1 I-2 P-I Standards
with Standards                                                        See Sec.:
C=Conditional Use
Agricultural Uses
Agricultural      C   C                                               1216.06
                                                                      (a)
Residential Uses
Bed and breakfast C                                                   1216.06
establishments                                                        (b)
Dwellings, multi-                 P   P   P
family
Dwelling, single- P   P   P   P
family
Residential       PS  PS  PS  PS  C   C   C                           1216.06
facilities                                                            (c)
Skilled nursing                                                       1216.06
or personal care                  C   C   C   C   PS  C           PS  (d)
facilities
Public, Institutional and Recreational Uses
Active                                                                1216.06
recreational      C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C   PS  (e)
facilities
Cemeteries        C   C   C   C   C   C                           P
Cultural          C   C   C   C   C   C   P   P   P   P           P
facilities
Educational
institutions                                      P               P
(higher
education)
Educational
institutions      C   C   C   C   C   C                   C       P   1216.06
(preschool and K-                                                     (f)
12)
Essential         P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P
services
Fraternal,
charitable, and                           C   C   C   C           PS  1216.06
service oriented                                                      (g)
clubs
Government
offices and
buildings (no     C   C   C   C   C   C   P   P   P   P   P   P   P
outdoor
activities)
Hospitals                                     C   C               PS  1216.06
                                                                      (h)
Passive parks,
open space, and   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P
natural areas
Places of worship C   C   C   C   C   C   P   P   P   P           P
Public utility
buildings and     C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C   P   P   P
facilities
Residential       C   C   C   C   C   C   P                           1216.06
community centers                                                     (i)
Wireless          PS/ PS/ PS/ PS/ PS/ PS/ PS/ PS/ PS/ PS/ PS/ PS/ PS/ 1216.06
telecommunication C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C   (j)
facilities
Commercial, Office, and Mixed Uses
Administrative,
business, or                              P   P   P   P   P   P   PS  1216.06
professional                                                          (k)
offices
Adult                                                                 1216.06
entertainment                                                 PS      (l)
business
Animal boarding,
training, or                                  C   C       PS          1216.06
daycare                                                               (m)
facilities
Animal hospital/
clinics and                               P   P   P   P
animal grooming
Assembly halls or
conference                                C       C   C
centers
Automobile,
motorcycle,                                                           1216.06
recreational                                      C                   (n)
vehicle sales and
leasing
Automotive repair                                                     1216.06
and service                                   C   PS  C   PS          (o)
(minor)
Automotive repair                                                     1216.06
and service                                       C       PS  PS      (p)
(major)
Boat rental and                                   C   C
charter
Commercial and
business support                          P   P   P   P   P
services
Commercial
recreational                                      C       C
facilities
(indoors)
Commercial
recreational                                              C   C       1216.06
facilities                                                            (e)
(outdoors)
Financial                                 P   P   P   P
institutions
Fuel stations                                 C   PS  C               1216.06
                                                                      (o)
Funeral homes                                 PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  1216.06
                                                                      (q)
Hotels and motels                         C       C   C               1216.06
                                                                      (r)
Medical/dental                            P   C   P   C
clinics
Microbrewery,                                                         1216.06
microdistillery                           PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  PS      (s)
or microwinery
Mixed use                                 P
buildings
Multi-tenant use                          P   P   P   P
Nursery schools                                                       1216.06
and day care      PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  PS          PS  (t)
centers
Parking lot                               C   C   C   C   C   C       1216.06
                                                                      (u)
Personal services                         P   P   P   P   PS  PS      1216.06
                                                                      (v)
Restaurants                               P   P   P   P               1216.06
                                                                      (v)
Retail businesses                         P   P   P   P   PS  PS      1216.06
                                                                      (v)
Taverns or bars                           P   C   P   P
Vehicle washing                                   C                   1216.06
establishments                                                        (w)
   Industrial Uses
Contractor
equipment and                                             P   P
storage yards
Industrial                                                P   P
service uses
Industrial uses,                                              P
heavy
Industrial uses,                                          P   P
light
Metal salvage and                                             C       1216.06
junk storage                                                          (x)
Recycling center                                          P   P
Research and
development                                               P   P
facilities
Self-storage                                                          1216.06
facilities                                                PS  PS      (y)
(indoor)
Self-storage                                                          1216.06
facilities                                        C       C   C       (y)
(outdoor)
Truck and heavy                                           P   P
equipment sales
Truck terminals                                           PS  PS      1216.06
                                                                      (z)
Warehouses                                                P   P
Wholesale                                                 P   P
establishments
 
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1216.06 USE-SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   (a)   Agricultural.
      (1)   Agricultural uses shall be restricted to the raising of crops and
the raising livestock limited to those animals identified in Table 1216-4 and
excluding roosters.
      (2)   The minimum lot area for the use shall be five acres.
      (3)   There shall be a maximum of nine animal units permitted for every
five acres of land. Animal units are a unit of measure used to compare the
differences in the production of animal wastes, the standard of which is the
amount of waste produced on a regular basis by a slaughter steer or heifer.
Slaughter steers and heifers are assigned the base unit of 1.0 animal unit.
Table 1216-4 identifies the multipliers used to determine animal units for
other types of animals. For all other animals, the Code Administrator shall
have the authority to consult outside source information on the appropriate
animal unit multiplier.
 
Table 1216-4: Animal Units
Animal                       Animal Unit Multiplier
Slaughter steers and heifers 1.0
Cow-calf                     1.3
Dairy cattle                 1.4
Horse                        0.75
Swine                        0.4
Sheep                        0.4
All fowl and rabbits         0.05
 
      (4)   All structures designed to house livestock, either permanently or
temporarily, shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines. All
other structures related to the agricultural use of the property shall be set
back a minimum of 50 feet from all lot lines.
      (5)   Fence enclosures that are designed to corral animals or enclose
pasture areas shall be located in the side or rear yard, and set back a minimum
of 20 feet from all lot lines.
      (6)   Off-street parking related to agricultural uses shall be located as
far from existing, adjacent residential uses as practicable.
      (7)   Outdoor displays of products offered for sale or activities
associated with processing or marketing or the indoor sale of products,
including the serving of food or drink produced on site, may be approved by the
Planning Commission and Council when they determine that such display area is
consistent with the purposes of this section and will have no deleterious
impact on surrounding properties.
   (b)   Bed and breakfast establishments.
      (1)   The minimum lot area shall be one-half of an acre.
      (2)   The building utilized for the bed and breakfast establishment shall
have been originally designed as a single-family dwelling structure prior to
1960.
      (3)   The dwelling shall have frontage on Lake Road, Walker Road, Moore
Road, Miller Road, Avon Belden Road or Lear Road.
      (4)   The facility must be operated and managed by the property owner or
leaseholder, who must reside on the premises while the bed and breakfast
establishment is in operation.
      (5)   Only overnight guests shall be served meals unless otherwise
authorized as part of the conditional use approval.
      (6)   All activities related to the establishment shall take place within
the principal dwelling and not within a garage or accessory building.
Furthermore, all access to rooms shall be from within the principal building.
      (7)   The facility shall be limited to no more than four guestrooms with
a maximum guest capacity as determined by fire and building regulations.
      (8)   There shall be no exterior evidence of the use except that the
owner may provide one wallmounted sign with a maximum sign area of one square
foot in addition to any other signs allowed for single-family dwellings in
Chapter 1236: Sign Standards.
      (9)   No building additions or alterations may be undertaken for the sole
purpose of expanding the bed and breakfast use unless approved as part of the
conditional use review.
      (10)   A minimum of one off-street parking space for each guestroom and
two off-street parking spaces for the resident owner-manager shall be required.
All parking areas for five or more vehicles shall meet the applicable standards
of Chapter 1234: Parking, Access, and Mobility Standards.
   (c)   Residential facilities.
      (1)   Where a person may operate a residential facility, as defined in
R.C. § 5123.19, that is of a size that is required to be allowed where single-
family dwellings are permitted, such use shall be deemed a permitted use in the
R-1A, R-1B, R-1C and R-1D Districts. Such facilities must comply with the site
development standards (See §
1226.01: Lot and Principal Building Regulations.), and any other standards in
this code that apply to all single-family dwellings within the applicable
district.
      (2)   Where a person may operate a residential facility, as defined in
R.C. § 5123.19, that is of a size that is required to be allowed where multi-
family dwellings are permitted, such use shall be deemed a conditional use (see
§ 1214.03: Conditional Uses) in any the R-2 and R-3 Districts. Such facilities
must comply with the site development standards (see §
1226.01: Lot and Principal Building Regulations.), architectural standards (See
Chapter 1228: Architectural Standards), and any other standards in this code
that apply to all multifamily dwellings within the applicable district.
   (d)   Skilled nursing or personal care facilities.
      (1)   The principal building shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from
any adjacent residential zoning district or lot that contains a single-family
dwelling.
      (2)   The maximum density of these facilities varies based on the
specific type of facility as established below:
         A.   If the proposed facility includes an independent living component
(no skilled or personal care services provided), the independent living
component shall be limited to the uses and maximum density permitted by the
applicable zoning district. In a nonresidential zoning district, that maximum
density shall be six units per acre. In no case shall the independent living
component comprise more than 50% of the dwelling units or rooms in the proposed
development or the use shall be subject to the maximum lot size and densities
established in the zoning district.
         B.   The maximum density of congregate housing or assisted living
facilities shall be 12 units per acre in the R-2, R-3, B-1 and B-3 Districts
and 20 units per acre in the B-2 and P-I Districts regardless if the unit is a
complete dwelling unit with separate kitchen facilities.
         C.   All other types of skilled nursing or personal care facilities
shall comply with the maximum height and setback requirements of the applicable
zoning district and any conditions or requirements set forth as part of the
conditional use approval.
         D.   The Planning Commission may set maximum density or intensity
requirements as part of the conditional use approval based on the density or
character of surrounding uses.
      (3)   Skilled nursing or personal care facilities shall be located so as
to provide access from a major or minor arterial.
   (e)   Active recreational facilities and commercial recreational facility
(outdoors).
      (1)   The minimum lot area shall be at least one acre.
      (2)   All structures, viewing areas or seating areas shall be set back at
least 200 feet from any residential zoning district. Such setback may be
reduced by Planning Commission and City Council within the MUO or RPD Districts
if approved through the applicable procedures.
      (3)   All parking areas shall meet the minimum parking area setbacks as
established in
Chapter 1234: Parking, Access, and Mobility Standards.
      (4)   All outdoor lighting shall project downward and shall be of full
cutoff design in order to minimize glare and reflection onto adjoining
properties and public streets. See §
1226.04: Outdoor Lighting for additional information on cutoff lighting.
      (5)   The hours of operation may be regulated by the Planning Commission,
if necessary, to mitigate adverse impacts on adjacent residential uses.
      (6)   No motorized equipment is permitted.
      (7)   No uses that involve the discharge of firearms is permitted.
   (f)   Educational institutions (preschool and K-12). Preschool and K-12
educational institutions may be considered as a conditional use in the I-
1 District only if there is an existing building on the site that was designed
to accommodate a similar educational institution.
   (g)   Fraternal, charitable, and service oriented clubs. Accessory uses
necessary to the operation of such use, such as clubhouses, restaurants, bars,
swimming pools and similar activities, shall be permitted if they comply with
the applicable standards in §
1224.01: Accessory Uses and Structures. However, such uses where the conduct of
business is the principal activity shall be prohibited.
   (h)   Hospitals.
      (1)   New hospitals shall be on a lot with primary vehicular access on an
arterial street without going through a residential neighborhood to minimize
the impact on less intense residential uses.
      (2)   Outdoor storage of ambulances and other vehicles used in the
operation of the principal use may be permitted provided such storage areas are
located in the side or rear yard in off-street parking areas.
      (3)   The areas devoted to the outdoor storage of such vehicles shall be
enclosed with a fence having a minimum height of six feet.
      (4)   Access drives shall be located no less than 100 feet from an
intersection.
   (i)   Residential community centers.
      (1)   One residential community center shall be allowed within an
individual subdivision or for a multi-family dwelling development with more
than 12 dwelling units.
      (2)   Additional residential community centers may be approved as part of
a development that is approved as a planned unit development.
      (3)   The residential community center shall only be for the use of
residents and their guests.
   (j)   Wireless telecommunication facilities.
      (1)   Purpose.
         A.   The purpose of this division (j) is to provide for the common
good and preserve the enjoyment of private property through the regulation of
the construction, placement and modification of wireless telecommunications
facilities, including telecommunications towers and associated facilities,
while ensuring the ability of the consumer to use and enjoy telecommunications
services of all types, and to protect the right of private and public
enterprise to exercise free trade.
         B.   To the extent permitted by law, the city shall apply the
regulations set forth in this section to specifically accomplish the following:
            1.   Accommodate the need for wireless telecommunications towers
and facilities to meet the public’s demand for the use and convenience of
wireless personal cellular telecommunications service and wireless internet
access, while regulating their location and number in the city;
            2.   Encourage the location of towers and facilities on
nonresidential land;
            3.   Minimize the total number of towers and facilities;
            4.   Ensure that towers and antennas are configured in such a way
as to minimize adverse visual impact by design, careful siting, landscape
screening, camouflaging and innovative techniques brought about through the
advance of science and technology;
            5.   Avoid damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through
competent engineering, construction and erection of towers;
            6.   Ensure that a competitive and broad range of wireless personal
communications services and high-quality telecommunications infrastructures are
provided to serve the residents, businesses, public sector and visitors to the
city;
            7.   Create and preserve a wireless telecommunications facilities
system which will serve as an effective part of the city’s emergency response
network; and
            8.   Accommodate the public’s demand for present day wireless
personal communications services through these standards, so that changing
technologies will continue to serve these needs, while concurrently preserving
the city’s aesthetic and ecological integrity, so that residents of the future
may continue to enjoy the comfortable living standards of the Avon Lake
community.
      (2)   Application requirements.
         A.   All persons planning to construct a wireless telecommunication
facility to which the provisions of this section apply shall provide the
information required for the applicable type of application pursuant to §
1214.01: Common Review Requirements.
         B.   The city may charge a fee in addition to the Planning Commission
agenda fee for site plan review to process an application to locate a tower,
antenna or related wireless telecommunications facility in the city for the
purpose of reimbursing the public for the time incurred and the skills employed
by officials, employees and agents in processing applications in the amount as
set forth in
Chapter 208 of the Administration Code.
         C.   The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this
section:
            1.   A single ground or building-mounted receive-and-transmit-only
radio or television antenna, including any mast, for the sole use of the
occupant of a residential and business parcel on which the radio or television
antenna is located;
            2.   A ground, building, or tower-mounted antenna allowed in
conformance with §
1224.01: Accessory Uses and Structures, operated by a federally licensed
amateur radio operator as part of the amateur radio service;
            3.   A ground or building receive-only radio or television
satellite dish antenna allowed in conformance with §
1224.01: Accessory Uses and Structures, for the sole use of the resident
occupying a parcel on which the satellite dish is located;
            4.   Mobile services providing public information coverage of a
news event of a temporary nature; and
            5.   Government owned and operated receive-and/or-transmit
telemetry station antennas for supervisory control and data acquisition systems
for water, flood alert, traffic control devices and signals, stormwater, pump
stations and/or irrigation systems and similar uses.
      (3)   Approvals required.
         A.   A zoning permit may be issued for the following activities and
installations when in compliance with the other applicable use-specific
standards of this section:
            1.   Collocation of telecommunication antennas on an existing
telecommunication tower;
            2.   Telecommunication antennas attached to existing commercial,
office, industrial, public, institutional, or other nonresidential buildings,
or attached to any multi-family (apartment building); or
            3.   Replacement telecommunication towers or antennas in the same
manner as the original tower or antenna.
         B.   A conditional use approval shall be required for the installation
of any new wireless telecommunications tower including those in the districts
identified in Table 1216-3, or on any publicly owned land in the city.
         C.   In addition to meeting the review criteria established in §
1214.03: Conditional Uses, any application subject to a conditional use
approval must also demonstrate that a newly constructed tower is necessary
because collocation on an existing tower is not feasible in accordance with
division (j)(10) of this section. The following steps must be taken for the
application to be considered for review in this category.
            1.   The applicant shall demonstrate that the telecommunication
tower must be located where it is proposed in order to service the applicant’s
service area and that collocation is not feasible.
            2.   Where the telecommunication tower is located on a property
with another principal use, vehicular access is provided to the facility.
            3.   The applicant shall present signed statements indicating that:
               a.   The applicant agrees to allow for the potential collocation
of additional telecommunication antennas by other providers on the applicant’s
structure or within the same site location; and
               b.   The applicant agrees to remove the telecommunication tower
and accessory facilities/structures in accordance with §
1216.06(j)(11): Removal of Abandoned Facilities.
      (4)   Demonstration of necessity.
         A.   To assure that the city’s and the public’s objectives are
achieved, the wireless telecommunications service provider requesting
permission to locate a tower and related wireless telecommunications facility
shall produce written evidence of contact with all wireless telecommunications
service providers who supply service within the distribution sphere of the
proposed facility. The applicant-provider shall inquire about potential
collocation opportunities at all technically feasible locations in, or which
could service, the city.
         B.   To adequately demonstrate the need at a particular location the
applicant-provider shall provide following information as part of the
demonstration of necessity:
            1.   Coverage areas of existing sites within two and one-half
miles;
            2.   Propagation maps from proposed site at increments of 25 feet
starting at 50 feet in height up to proposed height;
            3.   List of existing structures within 2.0 miles of proposed site
that are at least 40 feet in height along with anticipated signal strengths
from those structures;
            4.   In-building and in-vehicle coverage areas in relation to
division (j)(4)B.2. of this section;
            5.   Description of anticipated coverage areas and coverage signal
strengths in dBm;
            6.   Written proof of contact with existing wireless
telecommunication sites within one mile of proposed site. Contact shall request
availability of collocation at exiting site. The application shall include
written responses from the contacted sites. Propagation maps from existing
sites within the one-mile radius shall be included to show the differences in
coverage areas;
            7.   Frequency, modulation and class of service of radio or other
transmitting equipment;
            8.   The number, type and design of the proposed tower and antennas
and any calculations used to determine the proposed number of collocations
available at the proposed site;
            9.   List of other service providers contacted in good faith that
may be willing to locate at the proposed site;
            10.   Certification that the NEIR levels at the proposed site are
within the permitted threshold levels as established by the FCC;
            11.   Name, address, phone number and accreditation of person
submitting maps and report;
            12.   Fall zone map identifying all existing structures within the
fall zone (a.k.a. total height) of the proposed tower; and
            13.   Line of site drawings which will provide approximate views
from adjacent properties.
         C.   The city shall contract with a competent expert to assist in
evaluating the need for a new tower, antenna and related wireless
telecommunications facilities at a particular location. This evaluation shall
be completed prior to the application being considered by Planning Commission.
The applicant shall be afforded an opportunity to provide rebuttal to the
expert’s review and re-review prior to the formal departmental review and
submission to Planning Commission in accordance with the Planning Commission
rules and regulations. This study shall not be required for collocations or
antenna systems being proposed for attachments to existing buildings and
structures unless the tower is proposed to extend beyond 25 feet in height over
the attachment point.
         D.   An applicant shall deposit with the city funds sufficient to
reimburse the city for all reasonable costs of a competent expert for the
evaluation and consultation to the city in connection with the review of any
application. The initial deposit shall be $8,000. The placement of the $8,000
with the city shall precede the application to Planning Commission. The city
will maintain a separate escrow account for all such funds. The city’s expert
shall invoice the city for its services in reviewing the application. If at any
time during the process this escrow account has a balance less than $3,000, the
applicant shall immediately, upon notification by the city, replenish said
escrow account so that it has a balance of at least $5,000. Such funds shall be
deposited with the city before any further action or consideration is taken on
the application. In the event that the amount held in escrow by the city is
more than the amount of the actual invoicing at the conclusion of the project,
the remaining balance shall be promptly refunded to the applicant. The total
amount of the funds needed as set forth in this section may vary with the scope
and complexity of the project, the completeness of the application and other
information as may be needed to complete the necessary review, analysis and
inspection of any construction or modification. The maximum fee associated with
the consultant review shall be $17,000.
      (5)   Certification of a registered structural engineer. Prior to
approval of a site plan to construct and locate a wireless telecommunications
tower or related facility, an independent certified structural engineer shall
be engaged by the city, whose services shall be paid for in total by the
applicant pursuant to the direction of the Planning Commission. The city may
pay for such services in advance for the purpose of timeliness and invoice the
applicant for charges. The applicant shall reimburse the city in full within 30
days of receipt of such invoice. The applicant may also be responsible for
obtaining independent opinions of other technical experts for the purpose of
verifying the safety and structural integrity of towers and other wireless
telecommunications facilities, including, but not limited to, representatives
of the FCC, the FAA and a person qualified to certify the safety of and comment
upon radio frequency emission, in a manner as determined acceptable to the
city, as directed by the Planning Commission.
      (6)   Wireless telecommunications providers - application requirements.
All wireless telecommunications services providers, including governmental,
public and quasi-public providers, who operate or propose to operate within the
corporate limits of the city, shall submit the following information, at a
minimum, as part of their application:
         A.   The identity and legal status of the provider, including business
affiliations;
         B.   The name, address, telephone number, fax number and electronic
mail address (if available), of the officer, agent or employee responsible for
the accuracy of the registration statement. It shall be the responsibility of
the provider to keep this information up to date;
         C.   A narrative and map description of all the provider’s existing or
proposed wireless telecommunications facilities in the city and elsewhere;
         D.   A description of the wireless telecommunication facilities in the
city and elsewhere;
         E.   Written information sufficient into the opinion of the Planning
Commission to verify that the provider has applied for and received
certification and approval as a licensed wireless telecommunications provider
by the FCC to operate in the state; and
         F.   Any other information reasonably related to the application and
the probable, substantive effects of locating a wireless telecommunications
facility in the city, as may be required by the Planning Commission.
      (7)   General standards for all facilities.
         A.   Apply regardless of zoning district. The following requirements
apply to all wireless telecommunication facilities regardless of the zoning
district in which they are to be located. These general standards are in
addition to the specific regulations set forth elsewhere in this section.
            1.   The telecommunication tower and accessory facilities/
structures shall be enclosed either completely or individually by a six-foot
high fence in residential zoning districts or eight-foot fence in
nonresidential zoning districts. The fence shall only be accessed through a
locked gate with reasonable access given to the city and collocators. Security
railing or fencing is required along the edge of a building roof if the
wireless telecommunication facility or antenna is not set back at least ten
feet from the edge of the roof top.
            2.   The city shall not be responsible for any damage to the tower
or other auxiliary structures, and shall be held harmless from any liability of
any kind relating to damage, destruction, misfeasance of the tower or auxiliary
structures, and from any personal injury to any party whomever.
            3.   If a provider proposes to add additional antenna to an
existing tower, building or structure, such antenna shall be reviewed as the
addition of a new antenna in accordance with this section regardless if the
antenna will be used by the owner of the tower or another provider. Such
additional shall be considered a collocation.
            4.   Existing on-site vegetation shall be maintained to the maximum
extent possible and vegetation that will be preserved must be identified on the
site plan. In addition, the perimeter of the site shall be planted with at
least one row of evergreen shrubs capable of forming a continuous hedge.
            5.   Neither the owner(s) of the property on which the wireless
telecommunication facilities are located, nor the service provider in charge of
the facility, shall permit such facility, including the grounds on which it is
constructed, to fall into a state of disrepair. All towers, antennas,
equipment, related structures and grounds shall be maintained in accordance
with the requirements of this code and as well as any other applicable
ordinances or regulations.
            6.   All applications to install wireless telecommunication
facilities shall comply with the collocation requirements set forth in division
(j)(10) of this section.
            7.   Underground wireless telecommunications equipment buildings
are especially encouraged, especially on zoning lots in or abutting residential
zoning districts where a tower is placed.
            8.   All wireless telecommunication towers shall be a non-
contrasting gray or similar color minimizing their visibility, unless otherwise
required by the FCC or the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). All
appurtenances and accessory facilities/structures shall be aesthetically and
architecturally compatible with the surrounding environment and the use of
camouflage or architectural treatment that enhances the appearance of the
facility and its environment is encouraged.
            9.   No advertising is permitted anywhere upon or attached to any
wireless telecommunication facility, including equipment shelters and fencing,
unless required by an applicable governmental agency. Signs shall not be
illuminated in any manner. Luminous paint may be used on signs if approved by
the Code Administrator and/or the Planning Commission.
            10.   No tower shall be artificially lit except as required by the
FAA. Security lighting shall be permitted for the wireless telecommunications
equipment building and other auxiliary structures, if any, and such lighting
shall be subject to the requirements of §
1226.04: Outdoor Lighting.
            11.   “No Trespassing” signs shall be posted around the wireless
telecommunication facility and any accessory facilities/structures. In
addition, each facility shall be identified with a two-square foot sign showing
the telephone number of the person to be contacted in the event of an
emergency, the longitude and latitude, the base elevation, the tower height and
the facility owner. The owner of the facility shall provide the city’s
emergency dispatch operators with a list of emergency contact numbers.
            12.   The city reserves the right to require the installation of a
decorative city nameplate on the tower as a camouflaging technique and this
shall be at the expense of the provider.
            13.   Access and parking.
               a.   All zoning lots on which are located towers and related
wireless telecommunications facilities shall abut a public right-of-way.
               b.   Existing or new roads shall be used for access. The type
and construction of such roads shall be regulated by
Chapter 1238: Subdivision Design Standards.
               c.   If available, existing parking shall be used and not
expanded.
               d.   If the wireless telecommunications facility is fully
automated, a maximum of two parking spaces shall be required for maintenance
workers. If the site is not fully automated, a maximum of three parking spaces
shall be permitted. Parking specifications shall be as regulated in
Chapter 1234: Parking, Access, and Mobility Standards.
            14.   The city may lease or rent at prevailing market rates the use
of existing or new towers and related wireless telecommunications facilities to
private or public service providers for collocation of antennas. A private or
public service provider, or the city, may be the sole user of a tower, antenna
or related wireless telecommunications facility. The city may itself lease or
rent, or construct, place, modify and/or maintain, towers and related wireless
telecommunications facilities on public or private property for exclusive or
shared operations with other private or public service providers, and may
charge any reasonable leases, fees or permits in a manner as would a private
wireless telecommunications service provider under similar business
circumstances.
         B.   Additional standards for historic places or districts.
            1.   Any application to locate a wireless telecommunication antenna
on a building or structure that is listed on the Register of Historic Places,
or is in an historic district, shall be subject to review by the Historic
Planning Commission for appropriate design guidelines.
            2.   In any historic district, wireless telecommunications towers
and related facilities shall not be located, unless it is proven that in order
to provide wireless telecommunications service, such towers or facilities may
not be located elsewhere within the city. Any tower and related wireless
communications facility, including the equipment building, shall be camouflaged
in such districts as herein described. Prior to approval, the provider shall
demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence that if towers and related
wireless telecommunications facilities are located in a historic district, they
shall not adversely affect the natural or human-made environment or the
architectural setting, and that their location shall not pose any reasonable
risk to the health and safety of residents within 300 feet of the boundaries of
the historic district.
         C.   Additional standards for accessory antenna attached to
structures. The following standards shall be applicable to wireless
telecommunication antennas not attached to a tower and which are built as
accessory uses in business, industrial, institutional and multi-family
structures.
            1.   The height of the telecommunication antenna support structure
and accessory facilities/structures shall not exceed the structural height
limitations in the zoning district in which they are permitted by more than 60
feet.
            2.   The telecommunication antenna and accessory facilities/
structures shall be designed with camouflaging techniques or will be side-
mounted to an antenna support structure in order that the wireless
telecommunication facilities harmonize with the architecture of the building/
structure on which they are mounted and the character and environment of the
area in which they are located.
            3.   The applicant shall be required to submit information to
demonstrate that a study was completed and it was determined that the building
or structure on which the antenna is to be attached is structurally capable of
supporting the additional antenna.
      (8)   Standards applicable to wireless telecommunication towers.
         A.   Towers shall be of the freestanding lattice or monopole type.
         B.   Telecommunication tower setbacks shall be set back a minimum of
50% of the total height of the tower, or 50 feet, whichever is more, from any
adjacent property line as measured from the base of the tower. Any guy wires
associated with a tower shall only be placed on the same property as the tower.
         C.   Telecommunication towers shall be set back a minimum of 200 feet
from any residential district.
         D.   The maximum height of a tower shall be 200 feet unless a
technically logical reason for locating a higher tower is demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Planning Commission and Council to be in order, on a case-
by-case basis, by the wireless telecommunications service provider making the
request. When a higher tower is required by provision of law consistent with
the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. Law No. 104-104, Sec. 1(a), Feb. 8,
1996, 110 Stat. 56, as may from time to time be amended, the provider shall
submit written verification of such fact. Towers less than 200 feet in height
are especially encouraged.
         E.   Equipment shelters and other accessory facilities shall comply
with any setback requirements in the applicable zoning district.
         F.   A wireless telecommunication tower may be approved where there is
already an existing principal use, regardless of whether it is associated with
the wireless telecommunication provided, subject to the following additional
conditions.
            1.   The existing use on the property is a permitted use in the
district. The wireless telecommunication facility shall not infringe upon the
required parking access and yard requirements, easements, drainageways and
basin of the main structure and/or site.
            2.   Service access to the equipment shelter shall, whenever
feasible, be provided along existing circulation of the existing use of
vehicular areas, which can be roadways, parking areas and driveways.
            3.   The tower shall comply with all setback and height
requirements of this division.
      (9)   Standards applicable to wireless telecommunication facilities in
residential districts.
         A.   The installation of a new wireless telecommunications tower in
any residential district is prohibited except when installed on a property
owned by the city, township, Lorain County or state. In such cases, a
conditional use approval shall be required and shall also comply with the
following.
            1.   The tower shall not be located in any conservation easements
or on a site with historical or natural landmarks.
            2.   The Planning Commission may establish a maximum height for the
tower based on the proximity to surrounding lots and the use of such lots. The
Planning Commission may also take into account how the site is used by the
city, township, Lorain County or the state.
            3.   A freestanding telecommunication tower or pole may be required
to be disguised as a tree if its presence is deemed to have a negative impact
on the environment in which it is proposed to be located.
            4.   The city may lease municipally-owned property for wireless and
cellular telecommunication antennas, monopole and lattice towers and associated
facilities if they meet the requirements of this division (j)(9).
         B.   Wireless telecommunication antennas attached to existing
nonresidential buildings or multi-family dwellings (apartment buildings) are
permitted with the issuance of a zoning permit when such antennas are in
compliance with the standards of this division (j)(9) including:
            1.   The wireless telecommunication antenna may be a maximum of 60
feet above the structure or building to which it is attached; and
            2.   If the applicant proposes to locate the wireless
telecommunication accessory facilities/structures or equipment in a separate
equipment shelter, the equipment shelter shall comply with the accessory
building standards for the zoning district in which it is located in addition
to the following:
               a.   Vehicular access to the accessory facilities/structures or
equipment shelter shall not interfere with the parking or vehicular circulation
on the site for the principal use, and the access path shall be paved with
asphalt or concrete; and
               b.   The shelter must be designed to be compatible with the
residential design character of the neighborhood or immediate area of location.
This design compatibility shall be reviewed by the following: roof style and
material, building wall material and landscaping.
      (10)   Collocation requirements.
         A.   The city encourages the location of wireless and cellular
telecommunication facilities on publicly-owned properties, thereby reducing the
visual impact of such facilities. Persons desiring to construct a
telecommunication antenna and tower shall consider publicly-owned land first.
         B.   No new telecommunication tower shall be constructed in the city
unless such tower is capable of accommodating at least one additional wireless
telecommunication antenna owned by another person if the height of the tower
will be at least 60 feet tall, or two additional antenna owned by other people
if the height of the tower will be at least 100 feet tall.
         C.   The applicant shall list the location of every tower, building
and structure within such area that could support the proposed
telecommunication antenna. The applicant must demonstrate that a technically
suitable location is not reasonably available on an existing tower, building or
structure irrespective of the city, township and county jurisdictional
boundaries. If another telecommunication tower is technically suitable, the
applicant must show that an offer was made to collocate an antenna on that
tower and that the offer was not accepted. The applicant shall provide
documentation containing a list of the telecommunication facility site
locations and owners of telecommunication towers, buildings and structures
which were contacted, the date of such contact, any offers of reciprocal rights
to install antennas on the applicant’s locations, and the reason why the
proposed antennas cannot be located on the existing structures.
      (11)   Removal of abandoned facilities. Any license renewal requires that
all providers utilizing telecommunication towers present a report to the city
of any tower and accessory facilities/structures located in the city whose use
will be discontinued and the date this use will cease. If at any time the use
of the telecommunication tower and accessory facilities/structures is
discontinued for a continuous period of 180 days, the Code Administrator may
declare the telecommunication tower and accessory facilities/structures
abandoned. The owner/operator of the telecommunication tower and accessory
facilities/structures will receive written notice from the Code Administrator
and be instructed to either reactivate use of the telecommunication tower and
accessory facilities/structures within 180 days or dismantle and remove the
telecommunication tower and accessory facilities/structures.
      (12)   Nonconforming facilities. Except as provided in this chapter, any
use being made of an existing tower or antenna support structure on the
effective date of this code and any amendment thereto shall be allowed to
continue, even if it is in conflict with this section. Any change or
improvement made to an existing telecommunication tower shall comply with this
section.
   (k)   Administrative, business or professional offices. Business and
professional offices are permitted within the P-I District when the offices
serve or are an integral part of a principally permitted public and
institutional use. Such office space shall not occupy more than 25% of the
total floor area of buildings on the same lot.
   (l)   Adult entertainment businesses.
      (1)   Purpose and findings.
         A.   It is the purpose of this division (l) to regulate adult
entertainment businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of
adult entertainment businesses within the city. The provisions of this division
do not have the purpose or effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on
the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented
materials. Further, it is not the intent of this division to restrict or deny
access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First
Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually
oriented entertainment of their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor
effect of this division to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene
material.
         B.   City Council has received substantial evidence concerning the
adverse secondary effects of adult uses on a community findings incorporated in
the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986),
Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc., 427 U.S. 50 (1976) and Barnes v. Glen
Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), and on studies in other communities,
including, but not limited to Phoenix, Arizona; Tucson, Arizona; Garden Grove,
California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California; Indianapolis,
Indiana; Minneapolis, Minnesota; St. Paul, Minnesota; New York, New York;
Cleveland, Ohio; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Amarillo, Texas; Austin, Texas;
Beaumont, Texas; Houston, Texas; and Seattle, Washington.
      (2)   Classification. Adult entertainment businesses shall be classified
as follows:
         A.   Adult arcades;
         B.   Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores or adult video stores;
         C.   Adult cabarets;
         D.   Adult motion picture theaters; and
         E.   Adult theaters.
      (3)   Locational requirements. All adult entertainment businesses shall
meet the following location requirements.
         A.   No adult entertainment business shall be established within 1,000
feet of any area zoned for residential use or any lot on which is located a
residential use.
         B.   No adult entertainment business shall be established within a
radius of 1,000 feet from any educational institution or cultural institution,
whether public or private, governmental or commercial, which educational
institution or cultural institution is attended by persons under 18 years of
age.
         C.   No adult entertainment business shall be established within a
radius of 1,000 feet from any commercial recreational facility (indoor or
outdoor) which is primarily advertised for families and/or children where such
facility is attended by persons under 18 years of age.
         D.   No adult entertainment business shall be established within a
radius of 1,000 feet from any active recreational facility or a passive park,
open space or natural area.
         E.   No adult entertainment business shall be established within a
radius of 1,000 feet from any business licensed pursuant to the alcoholic
beverage control regulations of the State of Ohio.
         F.   No adult entertainment business may be established, operated or
enlarged within 1,000 feet of another adult entertainment business.
         G.   Not more than one adult entertainment business shall be
established or operated in the same building, structure or portion thereof.
         H.   No adult entertainment business shall be established within a
radius of 1,000 feet from any place of worship.
         I.   The distances specified in this section shall be measured in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the nearest point
of the premises in which the proposed adult entertainment business is to be
established to the nearest property line of a use or zoning classification
listed above or another adult entertainment business. The presence of a city,
county or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes
of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this section.
      (4)   Nonconforming adult entertainment business. Any adult entertainment
business lawfully operating on April 27, 1998, that is in violation of any of
the provisions of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The
nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed one
year, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a
period of 30 days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased,
enlarged, extended or altered, except that the use may be changed to a
conforming use.
      (5)   Development standards. Sexually oriented businesses are subject to
the following standards.
         A.   No adult entertainment business shall be located in any temporary
or portable structure.
         B.   No exterior door or window on the premises shall be propped or
kept open at any time while the business is open, and any exterior windows
shall be covered with opaque covering at all times.
         C.   Permanent barriers shall be installed and maintained to screen
the interior of the premises from public view for each door used as an entrance
or exit to the business.
         D.   All entrances to an adult entertainment business shall be clearly
and legibly posted with a notice indicating that minors are prohibited from
entering the premises.
         E.   The adult entertainment business shall not conduct or sponsor any
activities, which created a demand for parking spaces beyond the number of
spaces required by the business.
         F.   No adult entertainment business shall be operated in any manner
that permits the observation of any persons or material depicting, describing
or related to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, inside
the premises, from any public way or from any location outside the building or
area of such establishment. This provision shall apply to any merchandise,
display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening.
   (m)   Animal boarding, training or daycare facilities.
      (1)   All structures and outdoor run areas designed to house or
accommodate animals, either permanently or temporarily, shall be set back a
minimum of 200 feet from all lot lines. All other structures related to the use
of the property shall be set back in accordance with the applicable zoning
district.
      (2)   Care and boarding of animals shall be limited to domestic animals
and may not include cattle, horses, swine or other similarly sized animals.
      (3)   A solid wood fence or masonry wall with a minimum height of six
feet shall be constructed where a kennel or animal boarding facility is located
adjacent to a residential zoning district.
   (n)   Automobile, motorcycle, recreational vehicle sales and leasing.
      (1)   The sale of used vehicles, including the display, offering for sale
and dealing of used vehicles, shall only be permitted as an accessory use to an
establishment that sells new vehicles and such sale at retail, display,
offering for sale and dealing of used vehicles shall be operated in conjunction
with, on the same lot as, and under the same ownership and management of, the
new vehicle sales or leasing establishment. Sales may take place on a separate
lot if that lot is under the same ownership as the new vehicle sales or leasing
establishment and is within 500 feet of walking distance along a legal path,
including any crosswalks.
      (2)   Display of vehicles for sale shall be located on a paved surface
and shall comply with the parking requirements of
Chapter 1234: Parking, Access, and Mobility Standards.
      (3)   The storage of any boats to be repaired or in dry-dock shall be
located in the rear yard and shall not occupy more than 60% of the rear yard.
      (4)   All work on vehicles, including, but not limited to, cleaning,
servicing, and repair, shall be done only in an enclosed building and shall be
subject to same standards as an automotive repair and service establishment
(see division (o) of this section) or automotive repair and service (major)
establishment (see division (p) of this section), as applicable.
   (o)   Automotive repair and service (minor) and fuel stations.
      (1)   Fuel pumps shall be set back a minimum of 40 feet from all lot
lines and 100 feet from all adjacent lot lines of lots in residential zoning
districts.
      (2)   Canopies shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from all lot lines
and 50 feet from all adjacent lot lines of lots in residential zoning
districts.
      (3)   All hydraulic hoists, oil pits and all lubricants, greasing,
vehicle washing and repair equipment shall be enclosed entirely within a
building. No outdoor disassembly or repair of motor vehicles shall be
permitted.
      (4)   Activities shall be limited to:
         A.   The sale of automotive fuel;
         B.   The servicing of motor vehicles with minor repair work;
         C.   Hand washing of vehicles within an enclosed building; and
         D.   The retail sale of vehicle parts and products relating to minor
repair work, such as, but not limited to, oil, grease, tires, antifreeze,
batteries, windshield wipers.
      (5)   Space for overnight parking, overnight accommodations, or the
inclusion of showers within the building shall be prohibited.
      (6)   Any major repair work, including, but not limited to, automobile
body repair and painting, automobile glass work, automobile transmission work,
automobile engine overhaul and repair, and radiator repair work shall be
classified as “automotive repair and service (major)” and shall be subject to
division (p) of this section.
      (7)   Vehicles being serviced or awaiting same shall be stored for no
longer than 14 days on the site if in unenclosed areas.
      (8)   All repair work must be performed in a fully enclosed building.
      (9)   There shall be no more than two driveway openings along any
frontage.
      (10)   The storage and disposal of solid waste and recyclable materials,
including used or discarded motor vehicle parts or equipment, and fluids, shall
comply with all applicable federal, state and local requirements.
      (11)   Outdoor solid waste and recyclable storage areas shall be screened
in accordance with §
1232.05: Screening Requirements.
   (p)   Automotive repair and service (major).
      (1)   A major automotive repair and service establishment shall be
subject to the same requirements as an automotive repair and service
establishment as established in division (o) of this section.
      (2)   The principal structure shall be set back a minimum of 150 feet
from any residential zoning district. Parking for the storage of vehicles,
whether operational or non-operational, shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet
from any adjacent lot in a residential district.
      (3)   The storage of non-operational vehicles for longer 14 days shall be
permitted if stored in the rear yard and screened by a solid wall or fence with
a minimum height of six feet.
      (4)   The use may be subject to additional screening requirement in
accordance with
1232.04: Landscaping Requirements.
      (5)   Vehicle service and repair shall be done in an enclosed building. A
temporary zoning permit shall be obtained for outside repair of oversized
vehicles that would take longer than five consecutive days. Temporary zoning
permits can only be granted under the following conditions:
         A.   The vehicle exceeds the height and width of the service repair
garage;
         B.   The temporary outside repair shall not involve the construction
of permanent lift or repair apparatus;
         C.   Temporary outside repair shall only be allowed for a period not
exceeding 30 days in a calendar year; and
         D.   The outdoor repairs shall not be conducted in the required
setback yards, loading spaces, parking spaces, aisles and/or drives.
      (6)   Vehicles awaiting repair shall be parked in designated parking
spaces and shall not encroach on driving aisles, landscaped areas and drive
approaches. No part of the street right-of-way shall be used for parking of
vehicles awaiting service.
      (7)   Damaged or inoperable vehicles shall not be used for storage
purposes.
   (q)   Funeral homes.
      (1)   Vehicular use areas shall be designed to allow for the queuing of
vehicles if funeral processions are intended to originate or terminate at the
establishment.
      (2)   All funeral homes shall be located so as to provide access from an
arterial street.
      (3)   Cremation services shall be permitted only in the I-1 and I-
2 Districts.
   (r)   Hotels and motels.
      (1)   Principal buildings shall be set back a minimum of 150 feet from
all adjacent lot lines of lots in residential zoning districts.
      (2)   The use shall only be permitted on lots with frontage along a
collector or arterial road.
   (s)   Microbrewery, microdistillery or microwinery.
      (1)   A microbrewery, microdistillery, and microwinery shall be allowed
in the B-1, B-2 and B-3 Districts when the majority of the floor area is
dedicated to being used for restaurant service or for the serving of drinks
made on site so that the use fits into the retail character of the districts.
Drinks made off-site may also be permitted provided the majority of drinks
offered for sale are made on site.
      (2)   A microbrewery, microdistillery, and microwinery in the I-
1 District may include a taproom area to serve customers drinks made on site
provided the floor area of the taproom does not exceed 65% of the total
footprint of the use. Food service may be included within the 65% total
footprint. Drinks made off site may also be permitted provided the majority of
drinks offered for sale are made on site.
   (t)   Nursery schools and day care centers.
      (1)   Day care facilities shall only be allowed in residential zoning
districts when it is accessory, and on the same lot, as an approved or
permitted educational institution or place of worship.
      (2)   Day care facilities in any residential district shall only be
allowed when access to the use is from a collector or arterial street.
      (3)   Picking up and dropping off of children shall not create unsafe
conditions. Loading and unloading of children from vehicles shall only be
allowed in the driveway or in an approved parking area.
   (u)   Parking lot. A parking lot may be permitted as the principal use of a
lot if the parking lot is associated with another principal use on a lot that
is within 500 feet of the lot line that contains the parking lot.
   (v)   Personal services, retail businesses and restaurants. Personal
services, retail businesses and restaurants may be permitted in the I-1, I-2 or
P-1 Districts provided that the total square footage of space dedicated to all
of these uses is limited to a maximum of 20% of the total floor area.
   (w)   Vehicle washing establishments.
      (1)   All structures shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from any
adjacent lot lines of lots in residential zoning districts. Any self-service
washing establishment or portion of a building used for self-service washing
shall be set back a minimum of 150 feet from any adjacent lot lines of lots in
residential zoning districts.
      (2)   In order to prevent excessive pooling of water in the street right-
of-way, the facility must be equipped with a dryer or must demonstrate adequate
drainage on-site to accommodate all water used for cleaning.
      (3)   There shall be adequate provision for the disposal of waste water
and the prevention of surface runoff.
      (4)   Vacuuming and/or steam cleaning equipment may be located outside,
but shall not be placed in the yard adjoining a residential zoning district.
Such areas shall be set back a minimum of 150 feet from any adjacent lot lines
of lots in residential zoning districts.
      (5)   The use shall be subject to the vehicle waiting space requirements
of §
1234.18.
   (x)   Metal salvage and junk storage.
      (1)   The storage of any metal salvage, scrap iron or junk, including
inoperative or wrecked vehicles, containers, secondhand building materials or
other salvageable materials, shall be within a solid wall or fence, including
solid gates, having a minimum height of ten feet. Materials shall not be piled
or stored higher than one foot below the top of the fence or wall.
      (2)   All fences or walls required in this section shall be constructed
of uniform materials painted or otherwise preserved and approved by the
Planning Commission. Additional fences, walls or evergreen hedges may be
required by the Commission if necessary, to adequately screen the materials
from adjoining residential zoning districts or public streets.
      (3)   Any buildings or structures associated with the use shall be set
back a minimum of 200 feet from the property line of any residential lot or
zoning district.
      (4)   Exterior junk piles shall be arranged in a manner (with drives for
accessibility) for the purposes of fire protection and access.
      (5)   No burning of junk or other materials shall be permitted.
   (y)   Self-storage facilities - indoor and outdoor.
      (1)   The leases for all self-storage units shall include clauses related
to the following:
         A.   The storage of flammable liquids or radioactive, highly
combustible, explosive or hazardous materials is prohibited;
         B.   That the tenant shall be required to provide access to the Fire
Department up to three times per calendar year for inspections related to the
fire code; and
         C.   The property may not be used for any uses other than dead
storage.
      (2)   There shall be no retail sales on the property with the exception
that the owner or their designee may hold an auction on the site up to four
times a year for the purpose of selling goods stored in units.
      (3)   The Avon Lake Fire Department shall be provided with 24-hour access
to the grounds and buildings. A lockbox shall be provided for its use.
      (4)   The maximum size of individual storage compartments shall be 500
square feet.
      (5)   The outdoor storage of inventory, materials, vehicles or
merchandise is prohibited, unless specifically approved by the Planning
Commission as part of a conditional use approval for a self-storage facility
(outdoor).
      (6)   Sale, repair, fabrication or servicing of goods, motor vehicles,
appliances, equipment, or materials or similar activities shall be prohibited
in or from self-service storage facilities.
      (7)   Self-storage facilities may not be used for residential purposes.
      (8)   Except for sinks and restroom facilities provided solely for the
use of the managers or security personnel of self-storage facilities containing
more than ten individual storage units, neither sinks nor restroom facilities
shall be permitted within self-storage facilities.
      (9)   No storage unit door opening in a self-storage facility (outdoor)
shall face a residential district.
   (z)   Truck terminals.
      (1)   Truck routes shall be established and approved by the Planning
Commission.
      (2)   All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from a
residential zoning district.
      (3)   There shall be no outside storage of materials, goods, and products
and the like.
   (aa)   Vehicle storage. Storage areas shall be located in the side or rear
yard within the off-street parking areas and shall meet the minimum parking
setback requirements in §
1234.06: Setback Requirements.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
CHAPTER 1218: MIXED-USE OVERLAY DISTRICT (MUO)
Section
1218.01 Purpose
1218.02 Scope and applicability
1218.03 Review procedure and criteria
1218.04 Permitted uses
1218.05 Development standards
§ 1218.01 PURPOSE.
   The Mixed-Use Overlay District (MUO) is established to promote high quality
development in areas of the city that are designated for mixed-use in the Avon
Lake comprehensive land use plan. Such areas are intended to be designed to
encourage a range of commercial, office, service and residential uses in
walkable development. This district is designed to encourage high-quality
development in alignment with the plan while also providing for the continued
operation of existing uses in the base zoning district. The MUO is designed to
provide for clear and predictable standards allowing for a streamlined review
process.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1218.02 SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY.
   The MUO District is an overlay district that applies as a secondary zoning
district over base zoning districts.
   (a)   Property owners that are subject to the MUO District may continue to
use their property in accordance with the requirements of the applicable base
zoning district.
   (b)   At the election of the property owner, the owner may choose to develop
pursuant to the MUO District, in accordance with this section, without
requiring the rezoning of the base zoning district.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1218.03 REVIEW PROCEDURE AND CRITERIA.
   (a)   Review procedure. The review procedure for development under the MUO
District shall be as follows:
      (1)   Step 1 - Pre-application meeting (required). An applicant shall be
required to have a pre-application meeting with the Development Review
Committee to informally discuss the application and any concept plans. Such
meeting shall be subject to §
1214.01(f).
      (2)   Step 2 - Application. The applicant shall submit an application in
accordance with §
1214.01: Common Review Requirements, and with the provisions of this section.
      (3)   Step 3 - Development Review Committee review.
         A.   Upon determination that a MUO development plan application is
complete, the Development Review Committee shall review the application and may
distribute the application to other departments or agencies for review and
comment.
         B.   The Development Review Committee will review the application and
provide a summary report of comments to the applicant.
         C.   Upon receipt of comments, the applicant shall have the option to
make revisions to the application and plans based on the comments prior to
being forwarded to the Planning Commission or may request that the application
be forwarded to the Planning Commission without revisions. In all cases, the
Development Review Committee will forward their report to the Planning
Commission.
      (4)   Step 4 - Planning Commission review and recommendation.
         A.   The Planning Commission shall review the MUO development plan
application at its next regularly scheduled meeting, or at a special meeting,
after the application is determined to be complete.
         B.   In reviewing the application, the Planning Commission shall at a
minimum, consider the review criteria of this section.
         C.   Within 60 days of the Code Administrator determining that the
application is complete, the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to
City Council on the application. In making its recommendation, the Planning
Commission may approve, approve with modifications or supplementary conditions,
or deny the application.
         D.   If the Planning Commission fails to make a recommendation within
the established timeframe, or an extended timeframe approved by the applicant,
the application shall be deemed approved.
      (5)   Step 5 - City Council review and decision.
         A.   Following receipt of the recommendation from the Planning
Commission (Step 4), the application shall be placed on City Council’s agenda
for the next regularly scheduled meeting, if in compliance with notification
requirements, or City Council shall set a time for a public hearing on the
proposed amendment that is no more than 60 days from receipt of the Planning
Commission’s recommendation.
         B.   Notification of the public hearing shall be provided in
accordance with §
1214.01(i): Public Notification for Public Hearings.
         C.   City Council shall review a MUO development plan application
during a public hearing. In reviewing the application, City Council shall at a
minimum, consider the recommendation from Planning Commission and the review
criteria of this section.
         D.   City Council shall approve, approve with some modification, or
deny the recommendation of the Planning Commission. Such action shall only
require concurring vote of a simple majority of City Council unless the City
Council votes to approve, in any form, an application where the Planning
Commission recommended denial, in which case the approval shall require a
three-fourths majority vote of City Council.
         E.   If the City Council fails to make a decision within 90 calendar
days, or an extended timeframe approved by the applicant, the application shall
be deemed approved.
   (b)   Review criteria. In order to approve a MUO development plan, the
Planning Commission and City Council shall determine that:
      (1)   The proposed development is consistent with all the requirements of
this code, and other related codes and ordinances of the city;
      (2)   The proposed development complies with any established standards or
requirements in the approved comprehensive land use plan, thoroughfare plan or
other adopted plans of the city;
      (3)   The proposed development meets all the requirements or conditions
of any applicable development approvals (e.g., conditional use approvals,
variance approvals and the like);
      (4)   The development will result in a harmonious grouping of buildings
within the proposed development and will create a more walkable development;
      (5)   The development will preserve and be sensitive to the natural
characteristics of the site in a manner that complies with the applicable
regulations set forth in this code;
      (6)   Adequate provision is made for safe and efficient pedestrian and
vehicular circulation within the site and to adjacent property;
      (7)   The development will provide adequate lighting for safe and
convenient use of the streets, walkways, driveways and parking areas;
      (8)   Upon review and recommendation of the Code Administrator, points of
ingress/egress to the development shall be controlled and designed in such
manner as to minimize conflicts with adjacent properties and developments;
      (9)   Adequate provision is made for emergency vehicle access and
circulation; and
      (10)   If the project is to be carried out in progressive stages, each
stage shall be so planned that the foregoing criteria are complied with at the
completion of each stage.
   (c)   Significance of an approved MUO development plan.
      (1)   An approved MUO development shall become, for the proposed
development, a binding commitment of the specific elements approved for
development. Such development plan shall be considered an approved site plan
for the development and after approval, the applicant may seek approval of
zoning and building permits without returning to Planning Commission for
further approvals.
      (2)   All construction and development under any zoning permit and
building permit shall be in accordance with the approved MUO development plan.
Any departure from such plan shall be cause for revocation of the zoning permit
and/or building permit, and the property owner or other responsible parties are
subject to penalties as prescribed by this code.
   (d)   Time limit.
      (1)   The applicant shall submit a completed application for a zoning
permit within one year of the date the MUO development plan was approved or the
MUO development plan approval shall expire.
      (2)   Upon expiration of a MUO development plan approval, a new
application, including all applicable fees, shall be required before a new MUO
development plan will be reviewed.
      (3)   Upon written request, up to two extensions of six months may be
granted by the Code Administrator if the applicant can show good cause for a
delay.
      (4)   The City Council may authorize alternative time limits for zoning
permit issuance, as part of its approval, based on the scale of the proposed
development.
   (e)   Appeals. Any person or entity claiming to be injured or aggrieved by
any final action of the City Council shall have the right to appeal the
decision the Court of Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapters 2505 and 2506.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021; Ord. 23-46, passed 3-13-2023)
§ 1218.04 PERMITTED USES.
   (a)   Only those uses listed as allowed in the MUO District in Table 1216-
3 shall be permitted in a MUO development plan.
   (b)   If Table 1216-3 identifies a use as a conditional use in the MUO
District, the conditional use application must be reviewed prior to, or
simultaneously with, the MUO development plan.
   (c)   Uses that are solely residential are permitted within the MUO District
but they must be located behind nonresidential buildings. Such uses shall not
have frontage along any major arterial or collector road in the MUO District
unless such uses are proposed in an area identified as “R” for medium to high
density residential or “T” for townhomes uses in the focus area concepts of the
comprehensive land use plan.
   (d)   Residential-only uses shall not occupy any more than 40% any site
subject to an application. Such uses shall be required to be multi-family
dwellings. The applicant may identify a site containing multiple contiguous
parcels.
   (e)   Accessory and temporary uses shall be permitted as allowed in Chapter
1224: Accessory and Temporary Use Regulations.
   (f)   As part of any approval, the Planning Commission and/or City Council
may restrict the uses permitted within an individual MUO development plan by
adopting a list of uses permitted within the approved MUO development plan.
   (g)   All uses shall be subject to the performance standards of §
1226.02: Performance Standards.
   (h)   Any change of use or tenancy, excluding residential changes in
tenancy, may be approved through the zoning permit process provided the use
complies with this code and the approved MUO development plan.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021; Ord. 23-46, passed 3-13-2023)
§ 1218.05 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (a)   General design principles.
      (1)   The design of any development under the MUO District should reflect
the mixed-use recommendations of the comprehensive land use plan with a focus
on the creation of a pedestrian friendly mixed-use area that includes a mixture
of residential, office, retail, services, public and institutional uses.
      (2)   Where this section does not address certain requirements of this
code (e.g., landscaping or parking and the like), then the application shall be
subject to those regulations, unless otherwise stated.
   (b)   Setbacks.
      (1)   For nonresidential or mixed-use buildings in the Town Center or
Lake Road concept areas (see the Avon Lake comprehensive land use plan) that
will have frontage along an arterial or collector street, or any major street
as determined by the Planning Commission and City Council, a minimum of 70% of
the front facade of the main building shall be set along the sidewalk. The
remaining 30% of the front facade may be set back a maximum of 15 feet to
create entrances, courtyards and open spaces.
      (2)   For nonresidential or mixed-use buildings in the Lear Road concept
areas (see the Avon Lake comprehensive land use plan), the facade of the
building shall be set back a maximum of 30 feet.
      (3)   In all other instances, where the subject lot does not have
frontage along the streets identified above, the development may be set back to
a distance approved by the Planning Commission and City Council. However,
parking should be located to the rear of the building, to the maximum extent
practicable.
      (4)   The Planning Commission and City Council may approve an alternative
setback if the predominant development adjacent to the subject site reflects
the character envisioned by the comprehensive land use plan and will make the
subject development more compatible with existing development.
      (5)   Residential-only uses shall be set back no more than 25 feet from
the front lot line.
   (c)   Density, building height, and open space.
      (1)   Table 1218-1 sets out the density and building height requirements
for the different mixed-use areas in Avon Lake.
 
Table 1218-1: MUO District Requirements
Concept Area Density                 Maximum Building Height (ft.)
Town Center  Up to 25 units per acre 50
Lake Road    Up to 18 units per acre 40
Lear Road    Up to 12 units per acre 40
 
      (2)   The Planning Commission and City Council shall have the authority
to restrict densities based on the compatibility of the development with
surrounding development, the scale of the overall project, traffic impacts and
recommendations from the comprehensive land use plan.
      (3)   Higher density developments shall require additional open space
set-asides. The application shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 1230:
Open Space and Recreation Impact Fee Requirements.
      (4)   All principal buildings shall have a minimum height of two stories
except in the Lear Road concept area where there shall be no minimum building
height.
      (5)   All residential-only uses shall have a minimum density of eight
units per acre.
   (d)   Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage of all buildings, on any lot,
shall be 50%. See §
1226.01(i)(1) for method of calculation.
   (e)   Building orientation.
      (1)   Buildings shall be oriented toward the street unless adjacent to a
common open space, in which case the Planning Commission and City Council may
approve an alternative orientation to face the open space.
      (2)   Buildings located near the intersection of two streets may be
oriented toward a corner. If the building is oriented toward one of the
streets, any facade facing other streets shall have similar architectural
styles.
   (f)   Signs.
      (1)   Signs shall be integrated into the building and landscaping plans
to enhance the overall appearance while providing adequate identification of
the development.
      (2)   The requirements of
Chapter 1236: Sign Standards, may only be waived as part of the approval of the
MUO development plan when the applicant submits a master sign plan for an MUO
development plan application with a minimum acreage of five acres. In such
cases, the master sign plan shall not allow for more than a 10% increase in the
total sign area allowed in
Chapter 1236: Sign Standards.
   (g)   Building design. The general architectural of any building shall
comply with any applicable standards of
Chapter 1228: Architectural Standards. Additionally:
      (1)   For any building that is not residential-only, the ground floor of
the building shall be restricted to retail businesses, personal services,
offices, restaurants, or other nonresidential uses;
      (2)   Offices, other permitted nonresidential uses, and residential uses
should be developed on the upper floors of the buildings;
      (3)   The ground floor of the building should be designed to be at least
60% transparent, through the use of glass; and
      (4)   Open spaces between buildings that create courtyards or walkways to
the rear of the property or parking areas are strongly encouraged.
   (h)   Pedestrian connections.
      (1)   Pedestrian connections linking individual buildings within the MUO
District to sidewalks and/or paths are required.
      (2)   Pedestrian connections between the MUO District and adjacent
neighborhoods or developments are strongly encouraged.
   (i)   Parking. Any development in the MUO District shall comply with the
minimum parking requirements of this code however, the Planning Commission and
City Council shall have the authority to modify the parking requirements of
this code if the applicant can demonstrate adequate availability of public
parking, shared parking or other alternatives that will meet the intent of the
requirements of Chapter 1234: Parking, Access, and Mobility Standards.
   (j)   Utilities and service equipment. All industry standard grade utilities
shall be located underground. All manholes, utility boxes, entry fixtures and
other service equipment shall be located in side or rear yards and away from
walkways. These fixtures shall be adequately screened as provided in §
1232.05: Screening Requirements.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
CHAPTER 1220: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (PUD)
Section
1220.01 Purpose
1220.02 Applicability
1220.03 Changes to approved PUDs
1220.04 Accessory uses
§ 1220.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the PUD District is to protect all PUDs that were approved by
the city prior to January 1, 2022. It is the purpose of this chapter to allow
for the continuance of previously approved PUDs in accordance with approved
plans in a manner that the approved PUDs will be considered conforming with
this code and will not be deemed nonconforming. Furthermore, the purpose of
this chapter is to provide some guidance for future modifications of these PUDs
and the establishment of accessory uses and structures that may not have been
addressed by previous plan approvals.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1220.02 APPLICABILITY.
   (a)   This chapter will apply to all PUDs identified on the zoning map that
were approved prior to the date established in §
1220.01 above.
   (b)   After such date, no new PUD Districts may be established. As an
alternative, applicants may seek approval of a residential planned development
under
Chapter 1222: Residential Planned Development District (RPD).
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1220.03 CHANGES TO APPROVED PUDs.
   (a)   Where a property owner on a lot in an PUD seeks a variance from the
approved plan for an individual property that will not apply to any other
property in the PUD, the property owner shall request such variance in
accordance with §
1214.09: Variances.
   (b)   Any request to change or otherwise modify an approved PUD after
January 1, 2022, as it applies to more than one property owner, shall be
reviewed based on whether the change is considered major or minor, in
accordance with this division (b).
      (1)   Major change reviewed by Planning Commission and City Council.
Where an applicant proposes any of the following, the applicant shall submit a
revised plan that conforms with the review requirements for an RPD in §
1222.03(c): RPD Submission and Review Procedure:
         A.   Expansion of an existing PUD beyond the limits of the approved
PUD (only the new expansion will be subject to review); or
         B.   Proposed changes to the uses or density that will result in an
increase in residential dwelling units of more than 5% of the total dwelling
units approved as part of the original PUD.
      (2)   Major change reviewed by Planning Commission only. The following
changes shall require approval by the Planning Commission following a public
hearing unless the Code Administrator determines that changes are not
significant enough to substantially alter the originally approved plan:
         A.   Changes in the development plan relative to the arrangement of
lots, the layout of streets or circulation patterns, the size, configuration
and location of common open space, and changes in any approved elements of the
PUD; and
         B.   Amendments to the conditions that were attached to the PUD
approval.
      (3)   Minor changes reviewed by the Code Administrator.
         A.   Minor changes are those proposed by the developer/owner which do
not disturb or affect the basic design and approved PUD approval, and which are
essentially technical in nature, as determined by the Code Administrator, shall
be reviewed administratively by the Development Review Committee. The
Development Review Committee shall make a recommendation to approve or deny the
change to the Code Administrator who shall have the authority to make a final
decision.
         B.   The Code Administrator shall have the authority to forward the
action to the Planning Commission in the case that the recommendation is to
deny the change.
         C.   Examples of minor changes include, but are not limited to,
changes in the intensity of lighting, changes to individual floor plans,
changes to the siting of an individual building on a lot within approved
setbacks, changes in the size and location of water and sewer lines within
approved easements, engineering changes that do not alter street or lot
layouts, and changes in the location and number of fire hydrants.
         D.   The Code Administrator shall notify the Planning Commission of
all such approved minor changes.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1220.04 ACCESSORY USES.
   Unless otherwise allowed for in the approved plans, accessory uses
associated with development in a PUD shall be allowed in accordance with the
following.
   (a)   Accessory uses permitted in the R-1, R-1A, R-1B and R-1C Districts
shall be allowed for any single-family dwelling.
   (b)   Accessory uses allowed in the R-2 and R-3 Districts shall be allowed
for any two-family, three-family or multi-family dwelling.
   (c)   Any allowed accessory use or structure may only be located in the
yards as stated in §
1224.01(e) and are subject to any allowance for encroachments into those
applicable yards.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
 CHAPTER 1222: RESIDENTIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (RPD)
Section
1222.01 Purpose
1222.02 Scope and applicability
1222.03 RPD review process
1222.04 Review criteria
1222.05 Permitted uses
1222.06 Development standards
§ 1222.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Residential Planned Development (RPD) District is to
provide a means for encouraging ingenuity, open space preservation, imagination
and flexibility in the planning and designing of residential land areas. The
RPD regulations provide a controlled flexibility by utilizing objectives and
performance standards rather than rigid design requirements, the intent being
to encourage developments that possess greater amenities and/or provide greater
environmental protection than standard zoning district requirements. It is not
the intent of the RPD to allow applications to circumvent the intent of this
code to permit residential density, housing types or street and utility layouts
which conflict with the comprehensive land use plan of the city or the
character of the area. It is furthermore the purpose of the RPD regulations to:
   (a)   Encourage creative and high-quality developments that are compatible
with surrounding land uses, achieve a high degree of pedestrian-vehicular
separation and contribute to the overall quality of Avon Lake;
   (b)   Protect natural features such as wetlands, topography, trees and
drainage ways in their existing natural state as much as possible;
   (c)   Provide for adequate and usable open space;
   (d)   Provide for a flexible arrangement of buildings, densities and a
variety of housing types to meet the needs of the residential market;
   (e)   Ensure that there are adequate services and infrastructure to serve
the proposed development; and
   (f)   Promote a harmonious design amongst the various elements and uses
within the development while mitigating any potential negative impact on
surrounding properties.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1222.02 SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY.
   (a)   The intent of the RPD regulations is to provide a means for applying
comprehensive and flexible planning and design techniques on properties
substantially sized to accommodate such a plan. As such, the minimum size of
any RPD project or plan shall be 15 acres. RPD proposals should not be applied
to small areas as a means of bypassing traditional district regulations.
   (b)   An RPD of less than 15 acres may be considered for medium or high-
density residential areas as defined by the comprehensive land use plan.
Planning Commission and City Council must approve such reduction in size.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1222.03 RPD REVIEW PROCESS.
   (a)   Ownership. In order to submit an application for RPD review, the tract
or tracts of land included within the proposed RPD shall be in one ownership or
control, or shall be subject to a joint application by the owners of all
properties included within the proposal.
   (b)   Review procedure options.
      (1)   All applications shall be preceded by a pre-application conference
pursuant to this chapter.
      (2)   All applications shall be subject to relevant sections of the
common review requirements in §
1214.01: Common Review Requirements.
      (3)   All applications that are not already within an RPD District shall
include a separate application for a zoning map amendment to an RPD District.
Such amendment shall be reviewed as part of the RPD development plan.
   (c)   RPD submission and review procedure.
      (1)   Step 1 - Pre-application meeting (required). An applicant shall be
required to have a pre-application meeting with the Development Review
Committee to informally discuss the application and any concept plans. Such
meeting shall be subject to §
1214.01(f).
      (2)   Step 2 - Application. The applicant shall submit an application in
accordance with §
1214.01: Common Review Requirements, and with the provisions of this section.
      (3)   Step 3 - RPD development plan and zoning map amendment.
         A.   The RPD development plan approval procedure involves a zoning map
amendment to rezone the subject property to an RPD with an approved RPD
development plan.
         B.   The procedure for this stage shall comply with the requirements
of §
1214.02: Code Text and Map Amendments, including review by the Development
Review Committee.
         C.   In accordance with the zoning map amendment review procedure, the
Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing to review the RPD development
plan and make a recommendation to City Council to approve, approve with
modifications, or deny the application. The recommendation shall be made based
on review of the application using the criteria contained in §
1222.04: Review Criteria.
         D.   In accordance with the zoning map amendment review process, City
Council shall hold a public hearing on the RPD development plan and zoning map
amendment and decide to approve, approve with modifications, or deny the
application using the criteria contained in §
1222.04: Review Criteria, of this chapter. If the application is approved, the
area of land involved in the application shall be rezoned as an RPD with a
related, approved RPD development plan.
         E.   Such action of City Council shall only require concurring vote of
a simple majority of City Council unless the City Council votes to approve, in
any form, an application where the Planning Commission recommended denial, in
which case the approval shall require a three-fourths majority vote of City
Council.
         F.   In making its recommendations or decisions, the Planning
Commission and/or City Council may impose such conditions of approval as are in
its judgment necessary to ensure conformity to the applicable criteria and
standards of this zoning code and with the Comprehensive land use plan. In so
doing, the Planning Commission and/or City Council may permit the applicant to
revise the plan and resubmit it as an RPD development plan within 60 days of
such action.
         G.   Preliminary subdivision plat approval may occur concurrently with
the RPD development plan approval if permitted by the Code Administrator. If
submitting plats for subdivision review simultaneously with the RPD development
plan, the plats shall be subject to all applicable subdivision standards and
requirements including the applicable review process.
      (4)   Step 4 - Site plan review and/or zoning permit issuance.
         A.   Zoning permits shall not be issued until the lot or applicable
subdivision has been fully recorded in the office of the Lorain County
Recorder’s office and public improvements have been installed in accordance
with the applicable subdivision regulations.
         B.   For development activities where site plan review is required,
the applicant shall be required to received site plan review prior to issuance
of a zoning permit.
   (d)   Time limit.
      (1)   Any RPD development plan shall be valid for a period of two years
after the date of approval by City Council. If no development has begun
(development being defined as the start of construction of the required public/
private improvements as shown on the approved RPD development plan for one or
more phases of the project) within two years from the date of approval, such
approval shall lapse and be of no force and effect.
      (2)   Two one-year extensions of the time limit set forth in division (d)
(1) of this section, may be granted by the Planning Commission if such
extension is not in conflict with the most current comprehensive land use plan
and that such extension is in the best interests of the entire community. The
developer/owner shall apply for an extension and shall state the reason for the
extension.
      (3)   If an approved RPD development plan lapses as provided in this
section, the RPD development plan shall be considered void. Notice of such
lapse shall be filed by the Planning Commission and forwarded to the City
Council.
      (4)   Voiding of the RPD development plan shall not rezone the property.
After such plans are voided, the Planning Commission, City Council, or property
owners may initiate a rezoning to a base zoning district in accordance with §
1214.02: Code Text and Map Amendments, or the property owner, or their agent,
may resubmit an RPD development plan in accordance with the procedures of this
chapter.
   (e)   Changes to approved RPDs.
      (1)   An RPD shall be constructed and completed in accordance with the
approved RPD development plan including all supporting data and conditions. The
RPD development plan and supporting data, together with all recorded
amendments, shall be binding on the applicants, their successors, grantees and
assignees, and shall limit and control the use of premises (including the
internal use of buildings and structures) and the location of structures in the
RPD as set forth therein.
      (2)   Where a property owner on a lot in an RPD seeks a variance from the
applicable standards for an individual property that will not apply to any
other property in the RPD, the property owner shall request such variance in
accordance with §
1214.09: Variances.
      (3)   Any request to change or otherwise modify the approved RPD
development plan as it applies to more than one property owner, shall be
reviewed based on whether the change is considered major or minor, in
accordance with this division.
         A.   Major changes reviewed by Planning Commission and City Council.
Where an applicant proposes any of the following, the applicant shall submit a
revised RPD development plan that will be subject to the same review as a new
RPD, in accordance with §
1222.03: RPD Submission and Review Procedure:
            1.   Expansion of an existing RPD beyond the limits of the RPD
Development plan approval; or
            2.   Proposed changes to the uses or density that will result in an
increase in residential dwelling units of more than 5% of the total dwelling
units approved as part of the original RPD development plan.
         B.   Major changes reviewed by Planning Commission only. The following
changes shall require approval by the Planning Commission following a public
hearing unless the Code Administrator determines that changes are not
significant enough to substantially alter the originally approved plan:
            1.   Changes in the development plan relative to the arrangement of
lots, the layout of streets or circulation patterns, the size, configuration
and location of common open space, and changes in any approved elements of the
RPD; and
            2.   Amendments to the conditions that were attached to the RPD
development plan or RPD development plan approval.
         C.   Minor changes reviewed by the Code Administrator.
            1.   Minor changes are those proposed by the developer/owner which
do not disturb or affect the basic design and approved RPD development plan,
and which are essentially technical in nature, as determined by the Code
Administrator, shall be reviewed administratively by the Development Review
Committee. The Development Review Committee shall make a recommendation to
approve or deny the change to the Code Administrator who shall have the
authority to make a final decision.
            2.   The Code Administrator shall have the authority to forward the
action to the Planning Commission in the case that the recommendation is to
deny the change.
            3.   Examples of minor changes include, but are not limited to,
changes in the intensity of lighting, changes to individual floor plans,
changes to the siting of an individual building on a lot within approved
setbacks, changes in the size and location of water and sewer lines within
approved easements, engineering changes that do not alter street or lot
layouts, and changes in the location and number of fire hydrants.
            4.   The Code Administrator shall notify the Planning Commission of
all such approved minor changes.
   (f)   Revocation.
      (1)   In the event of a failure to comply with the approved plan or any
prescribed condition or approval, including failure to comply with the stage
development schedule, the Planning Commission may, after notice and hearing,
revoke the approval of the RPD development plan. The Planning Commission shall
at the same time recommend whether to maintain the RPD zoning district or the
rezoning of the properties to another zoning district.
      (2)   The revocation shall become final 30 days after City Council passes
an ordinance to rezone the property to a non-RPD zoning category or a decision
by the Planning Commission to revoke the approved plans but retain the RPD
zoning.
      (3)   Where the RPD zoning remains without an approved RPD development
plan, the property owner or agent shall be required to submit a new RPD
development plan in accordance with the review procedures of this chapter.
   (g)   Recording. The recording of the subdivision related to the RPD
approval shall be done in the same manner as outlined in §
1214.05: Major Subdivisions.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1222.04 REVIEW CRITERIA.
   All RPD applications shall be reviewed based on the following general
criteria and the applicable review body shall consider such criteria in the
creation of their specific findings when making recommendations and decisions
regarding RPD applications:
   (a)   The proposed development is in conformity with the goals, policies and
any applicable recommendations of the Avon Lake comprehensive land use plan;
   (b)   The proposed development meets the intent and spirit of this code and
all other applicable city ordinances or adopted plans;
   (c)   The development provides an environment of stable character that
promotes a harmonious relationship between land uses within the site and a
harmonious relationship with surrounding development, utilizing adequate
buffers where necessary;
   (d)   The proposed development provides a development pattern which
preserves and utilizes the natural topography, geologic features, scenic
vistas, natural vegetation and natural drainage patterns of the site;
   (e)   The proposed development maximizes the opportunity for privacy within
residential areas and minimizes nuisances between residential areas and other
land uses;
   (f)   The proposed development, while compatible with its surroundings,
provides a more diverse environment for living, shopping and/or working than
would be possible under strict application of the standard minimum design
requirements of other districts provided within this code;
   (g)   The proposed development promotes greater efficiency in the use of
land and does not impose an undue burden on public services and facilities such
as fire and police protection, public works, schools, water supply and
wastewater disposal due to excessive population densities;
   (h)   The proposed development is not likely to result in significant
adverse impacts upon the natural environment, including air, water, noise,
stormwater management, wildlife, and vegetation, or such impacts will be
substantially mitigated;
   (i)   The proposed development is accessible from public thoroughfares
adequate to accommodate the traffic which will be imposed on them by the
proposed development, and the proposed streets and parking areas within the
site are adequate to serve the proposed arrangement and densities of land uses;
   (j)   The proposed development minimizes pedestrian, bicycle and vehicle
conflicts;
   (k)   The proposed development provides a higher quality and more useful
design of landscaping and open space and amenities than would normally be
required under the strict application of existing zoning and subdivision
requirements;
   (l)   The proposed development contains such proposed covenants, easements,
association by-laws and other such provisions as may reasonably be required for
the public health, safety, and welfare;
   (m)   The proposed development is designed in such a way that each
individual section of the development as well as the total development, can
exist as an independent section capable of creating an environment of sustained
desirability and stability or that adequate assurance has been provided that
such an objective shall be attained;
   (n)   Where common open space is required, appropriate arrangements with the
applicant have been made which will ensure the reservation of common open space
as identified on the RPD development. If deemed necessary by City Council
during the RPD development plan review process, City Council may require the
applicant to hold bond to ensure the successful and proper reservation of open
space. Furthermore, the RPD development plan shall demonstrate how the open
spaces shall be duly transferred to a legally established homeowners’
association or has been dedicated to the city or another public or quasi-public
agency for preservation and maintenance;
   (o)   Appropriate agreements with the applicant have been made to ensure the
proper completion of public improvements in compliance with the code of
ordinances of Avon Lake, Ohio;
   (p)   The proposed development can be substantially completed within the
time specified in the schedule of development submitted by the developer; and
   (q)   The RPD plans have been transmitted to all other agencies and
departments charged with responsibility of review and any identified issues
have been considered and reasonably addressed by the applicant.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1222.05 PERMITTED USES.
   (a)   Principal uses.
      (1)   Only those uses listed as a permitted residential use or public,
institutional, and recreational use in this code (see § 1216.05: Allowed
Principal Uses) may be considered in the application of an RPD. A use shall be
considered permitted use in an RPD if is permitted as-of-right, permitted with
standards, or permitted as a conditional use in § 1216.05: Allowed Principal
Uses.
      (2)   The permitted uses within the RPD shall be established for the
subject property in the comprehensive land use plan. Any request for
alternative land uses shall require the approval of the Planning Commission and
City Council as part of the RPD review process.
      (3)   In general, any standards that applies to a specific use in this
code shall also apply to those same uses in an RPD. However, the Planning
Commission and City Council may adjust or waive any of those use-specific
standards based on unique circumstances.
      (4)   As part of any approval, the Planning Commission and/or City
Council may restrict the uses permitted within an individual RPD by adopting a
list of uses permitted within the RPD.
      (5)   All uses shall be subject to the performance standards of §
1226.02: Performance Standards.
   (b)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Unless otherwise allowed for in the approved plans, accessory uses
associated with development in an RPD shall be allowed in accordance with the
following.
         A.   Accessory uses permitted in the R-1, R-1A, R-1B and R-1C
Districts shall be allowed for any single-family dwelling.
         B.   Accessory uses allowed in the R-2 and R-3 Districts shall be
allowed for any two-family, three-family or multi-family dwelling.
      (2)   Any allowed accessory uses shall still comply with the applicable
accessory use-specific standards established in this code in §
1224.01: Accessory Uses and Structures.
      (3)   As part of any approval, the Planning Commission and/or City
Council may restrict the accessory uses permitted within an individual RPD.
      (4)   For residential uses, the maximum gross floor area of accessory
buildings shall be as established in Table 1222-1. The table also establishes
the maximum lot coverage, of the rear yard, by all accessory structures,
including accessory buildings. The accessory structures that count toward lot
coverage are identified in Table 1224-2. The maximum rear yard lot coverage
requirements shall not be waived as part of the RPD process.
 
Table 1222-1: Maximum Floor Area and Rear Yard Coverage for Accessory
Structures
Lot Area (Square Maximum Sq. Ft. of Maximum Sq. Ft. of All Maximum Coverage of
Feet)            Any One Accessory  Accessory Buildings    Rear Yard by All
                 Building                                  Accessory Structures
15,000 or more   500                1,000                  40%
12,000 to 14,999 500                1,000                  45%
6,500 to 11,999  250                500                    65%
Under 6,500      250                500                    65%
 
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1222.06 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (a)   Lot and density regulations.
      (1)   Table 1222-2 sets out the density, total lot coverage and building
height requirements for the different areas of Avon Lake based on the future
land use categories of the comprehensive land use plan. See §
1226.01: Lot and Principal Building Regulations for methods of calculation.
 
Table 1222-2: RPD Density, Lot Coverage and Building Height Standards
Future Land Use Maximum Density   Maximum Lot Maximum Front Maximum Building
Plan Category                     Coverage    Yard Setback  Height
Low-density     2 units per acre  40%         30 feet       35 feet
residential
Medium-density  15 units per acre 50%         20 feet       45 feet
residential
High-density    Up to 25 units    50%         15 feet       50 feet
residential     per acre
 
      (2)   The Planning Commission and City Council shall have the authority
to restrict densities based on the compatibility of the development with
surrounding development, the scale of the overall project, traffic impacts, and
recommendations from the comprehensive land use plan.
      (3)   The Planning Commission and City Council may waive requirements to
lessen the density or intensity of uses but an increase in density or intensity
shall require an amendment to the comprehensive land use plan.
      (4)   Each principal building shall have its own private yard.
      (5)   The RPD development plan shall illustrate lot areas and setbacks
(e.g., building area for each lot) for each lot.
      (6)   Every building in an RPD shall have access either to a street,
walkway or other area dedicated to common use.
      (7)   In RPDs with residential dwelling units, the privacy of future
residents shall be assured by yards, creative building arrangements, screening
and other design elements. At a minimum, residential dwellings shall meet the
following standards in an RPD.
         A.   The minimum distance between principal buildings shall not be
less than ten feet.
         B.   For multi-family dwellings, principal buildings should be
oriented in a manner that will provide the most privacy to individual dwellings
through creative placement and increased separation.
         C.   Driveways may be located along a lot line but on lots where there
is a side-loading garage or access to a garage where a vehicle backs out of the
garage toward an adjacent lot line instead of a street and where a zero-foot
setback is proposed, a curb shall be installed along the entire driveway to
prevent the overhang of any vehicles across lot lines and to direct drainage to
approved drainage systems.
   (b)   Open space. All RPD applications shall incorporate open space as
required in
Chapter 1230: Open Space and Recreation Impact Fee Requirements based on the
density of residential development.
   (c)   Design and development standards. Where this code provides for design
and development standards not specifically addressed in this chapter,
development within an RPD shall comply with the applicable standard.
      (1)   Illumination. All development shall comply with the outdoor
lighting standards of §
1226.04: Outdoor Lighting unless waived by the Planning Commission and City
Council.
      (2)   Off-street parking and loading. All development shall comply with
the requirements of
Chapter 1234: Parking, Access, and Mobility Standards unless waived by the
Planning Commission and City Council where shared parking, on-street parking or
other arrangements will not necessitate as much parking.
      (3)   Landscaping and buffering.
         A.   All RPDs shall comply with the applicable landscaping and
buffering requirements of
Chapter 1232: Landscaping and Screening Standards, which shall be established
as the minimum landscaping and buffering requirements. To the maximum extent
possible, applicants should make efforts to preserve large areas of mature tree
stands in areas that will provide natural landscaping and buffering between
uses, in which case, the opacity requirements of §
1232.05(b) may be waived.
         B.   All development and common open space shall be landscaped
according to all overall coordinated plan, utilizing a variety of trees,
including evergreen type whenever possible to maximize screening potential
year-round. Plantings, walls, fencing and screens shall be so designed and
located as to optimize privacy and aesthetic quality without encroaching upon
required automobile sight distances.
         C.   The percentage of retained and proposed landscaped areas to the
total area shall not be less than 20% of the entire lot.
         D.   In general, all unpaved areas of a lot shall be landscaped, or a
bond or irrevocable letter of credit submitted to guarantee the installation of
landscaping prior to occupancy of a principal building.
         E.   The amount of landscaping shall be comparable to the intensity of
the development proposed to soften the developed areas. Particular care shall
be taken to introduce trees and other landscaping into parking and other paved
areas that are sustainable given the proximity to large expanses of pavement.
         F.   Outdoor areas or containers holding or storing trash, garbage,
recycled or reused materials shall be screened on three sides from adjoining
properties, streets and other public areas. Such areas or containers shall be
screened in accordance with this code and shall include a decorative gate for
access.
         G.   Project buffer.
            1.   RPDs that contain residential uses of a higher density than of
adjacent residential uses shall be required to provide a permanent open space
buffer consisting of mounding and vegetative plantings sufficient to protect
the privacy and amenity of such adjoining areas. The buffer area shall be a
minimum of:
               a.   Twenty feet in width if the gross density of the RPD is
more than one unit per acre higher than adjacent residential development;
               b.   Fifty feet in width if the gross density of the RPD is more
than five units per acre higher than adjacent residential development; or
               c.   Planning Commission and City Council may reduce the
required buffer based on the presence of adjacent open space or landscaping
areas that provides a pre-existing buffer or the presence of other design
elements that will help mitigate the need for such buffer.
            2.   The buffer area shall be maintained by the land owner or owner
association in such a manner as to ensure its effectiveness.
            3.   The project buffer area shall not be included in the
calculation for the lot area of any private lot.
      (4)   Signs.
         A.   Signs shall be integrated into the building and landscaping plans
to enhance the overall appearance while providing adequate identification of
the development.
         B.   The requirements of
Chapter 1236: Sign Standards, may only be waived as part of the approval of the
preliminary RPD plan when the applicant submits a master sign plan for the
entire RPD. In such cases, the master sign plan shall not allow for more than a
10% increase in the total sign area allowed in
Chapter 1236: Sign Standards.
      (5)   Development layout. Dwelling units shall be grouped or clustered to
provide interest and diversity in the arrangement, maximize privacy, collect
and maximize the common open space and promote the individual character and
coordinated layout of each lot, cluster and grouping. Streets and cul-de-sacs
shall be laid out so as to discourage through and high-speed traffic unless
such through street is needed to be in compliance with the approved city plans.
      (6)   Vehicular access points.
         A.   Adequate and properly arranged facilities for internal pedestrian
and traffic circulations shall be provided.
         B.   Topography, landscaping and existing vegetative clusters shall be
utilized as necessary to make the project attractive and provide buffers
between areas of substantially different character.
         C.   The street and thoroughfare network shall be designed to minimize
truck and through traffic passing through residential areas of the development,
especially where dwelling units with two or more bedrooms are common.
         D.   A minimum of two ingress and egress points shall be provided for
any RPD. If an RPD is phased, each phase shall have a minimum of two ingress
and egress points at the time of construction. Planning Commission and City
Council may approve one ingress and egress point for the RPD or individual
phase if the establishment of two access points is determined not to be
feasible.
         E.   Where an RPD is located adjacent to a vacant lot, connections
shall be planned for the future connection to the future development of the
vacant lot unless waived by the Planning Commission and City Council. Where
such connections are made, a temporary turnaround may be established and the
future connection shall be noted on the RPD development plan and the final
subdivision plat. An easement shall be provided on the final plat of the
subdivision to keep the land open in perpetuity for the connection.
      (7)   Vehicular circulation. The circulation system and parking
facilities shall be designed to fully accommodate the automobile with safety
and efficiency. Any driveway to arterial and collector streets shall be placed
at locations where the traffic can be controlled and operated effectively with
the minimum interference with the capacity and flow of the existing streets.
      (8)   Pedestrian circulation. An interconnecting walkway system shall be
designed to promote easy and direct barrier free access, using accepted
criteria, to all areas of the development in a carefully conceived total
service plan while also considering the security of the residents in the
design. Wherever possible, the vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns
shall be completely separate and independent of one another.
      (9)   Bicycle plan. A planned unit development shall consider bicycle
plans adopted by the city and/or a regional agency, where applicable, on or
adjacent to the site. A component of the bike plan which is proposed within a
planned unit development shall be assured for public access by easements,
agreements or covenants as may be appropriate after review by appropriate
departments, acceptance by the Law Director and approval by Council.
      (10)   Solid waste storage and disposal. All solid waste rubbish, garbage
and receptacles shall be stored in enclosed areas acceptable to and regulated
by the city.
   (d)   Improvement standards.
      (1)   Subdivision compliance. Unless alternative standards are approved
as part of a subdivision modification, all RPDs shall comply with the
applicable subdivision improvement and design standards established in
Chapter 1238: Subdivision Design Standards.
      (2)   Streets. All streets proposed within an RPD shall be public
streets, dedicated to the city in accordance with the applicable subdivision
regulations, unless otherwise approved by Planning Commission and City Council
as part of the RPD development plan approval. In considering the approval of
any application that proposes the use of private streets, the Planning
Commission and City Council shall consider the following.
         A.   All private streets shall be designed in accordance with the
standards of §
1238.12(f).
         B.   Adequate provision shall be made for storm drainage, guest
parking and for access by emergency vehicles and trash collection trucks.
         C.   Private streets are discouraged for use with developments of over
20 dwelling units and shall not be used solely to avoid the construction of
public streets. Planning Commission and City Council may approve the use of
private streets for more than 20 dwelling units if the design of such streets
can sufficiently accommodate emergency service vehicles.
         D.   Any development proposed containing private streets shall also
contain a description of the method by which such streets are to be maintained,
such as the by-laws of a homeowners’ association.
      (3)   Pedestrian walkways. In addition to any sidewalk requirements
required by the applicable subdivision standards, any RPD that contains
residential uses shall provide for adequate pedestrian walkways connecting
residences to existing and proposed recreational facilities, schools,
neighborhood shopping, other residential areas and adjoining sidewalk systems.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
CHAPTER 1224: ACCESSORY AND TEMPORARY USE REGULATIONS
Section
1224.01 Accessory uses and structures
1224.02 Temporary uses and structures
§ 1224.01 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (a)   Purpose. This section authorizes the establishment of accessory uses
and structures that are incidental and customarily subordinate to principal
uses. The intent of this section is to allow a broad range of accessory uses
while not creating adverse impacts on surrounding lands.
   (b)   General provisions.
      (1)   An accessory use or structure shall be incidental to the primary
use of the lot, and shall not alter the character of the principal use.
      (2)   Accessory uses and structures shall be constructed on the same lot
as the principal use that it serves.
      (3)   No accessory structure shall be constructed on any lot until the
construction of the principal structure has commenced.
      (4)   Demolitions.
         A.   In cases where the main or principal structure is demolished, an
existing accessory structure shall be allowed to remain on the lot or property
without the main structure to which it is supposed to be an accessory on the
following conditions:
            1.   Up to 12 months consistent with that allowed by
Chapter 1242: Nonconformities; and
            2.   A zoning permit and building permit is obtained for the
reconstruction of the principal structure, the construction of which shall take
place within 12 months. Failure to complete reconstruction of the principal
structure will be an automatic cause for the removal of the accessory structure
at the owner’s expense unless cause is given, in which case the Code
Administrator may approve an extension of up to 12 months.
         B.   If the main or principal structure is demolished, all paved areas
shall be demolished in accordance with §
1234.05(a).
      (5)   Small accessory structures such as doghouses, benches, garden
decorations, barbeque equipment and the like shall be exempt from the
provisions of this section provided they do not have a footprint that exceeds
24 square feet.
      (6)   Gardens and the raising of crops for the personal use of the
residents, tenants or property owners, may be grown in the side or rear yard,
without a permit.
      (7)   Maintaining or harboring livestock is prohibited, unless approved
as an agricultural use in accordance with this code or in accordance with
division (f)(24) of this section. Maintaining or harboring roosters or other
poultry not in accordance with division (f)(24) of this section shall not be
approved as a conditional use.
      (8)   An accessory building that is attached to the principal building
shall be considered an integral part of the principal building and shall comply
with the site development standards and all other development standards of the
applicable zoning district. Any accessory structure shall be considered as an
integral part of the principal building if it is connected to the principal
building either by common walls or by a breezeway or roof.
      (9)   The accessory use regulations of this chapter shall not apply to
any public park lands owned by the city, Lorain County or the state.
      (10)   Height limit.
         A.   Unless otherwise stated, the maximum height of a detached
accessory building in residential zoning districts shall be 20 feet.
         B.   Unless otherwise stated, the height of a detached accessory
building in nonresidential zoning districts shall not exceed the height of the
principal building.
         C.   In no case shall any accessory structure exceed the height of the
principal building in a residential zoning district.
      (11)   Number and size requirements.
         A.   There shall be no more than two accessory buildings located on a
single zoning lot in a single-family residential district (R-1A, R-1B, R-1C and
R-1D).
         B.   For the purposes of this code, accessory buildings shall include
detached garages and carports, detached storage/utility sheds, and other
detached accessory buildings that are completely enclosed by a roof and walls
constructed of permanent materials (including screened-in porches where the
majority of materials is permanent), as determined by the Code Administrator.
         C.   Table 1224-1 establishes the maximum gross floor area of
accessory buildings as well as the maximum lot coverage, of the rear yard, of
all accessory structures (including accessory buildings) for single-family
residential districts. Table 1224-2 includes a column that identifies what
accessory buildings and structures count toward this lot coverage.
 
Table 1224-1: Maximum Floor Area and Rear Yard Coverage for Accessory
Structures
         Lot Containing a Dwelling  Lot Containing a Dwelling
         with an Attached Garage    without an Attached Garage Maximum Lot
Zoning   Maximum Sq.    Maximum Sq. Maximum Sq.    Maximum Sq. Coverage of
District Ft. of Any One Ft. of All  Ft. of Any One Ft. of All  Rear Yard by
         Accessory      Accessory   Accessory      Accessory   All Accessory
         Building       Buildings   Building       Buildings   Structures

R-1A     500            1,000       1,250          1,400       40%
R-1B     500            1,000       1,250          1,400       45%
R-1C     250            500         500            650         65%
R-1D     250            500         500            500         65%
NOTE: Sq. Ft. = Square feet
 
         D.   Accessory buildings on large lots. In any residential district on
lots of one and one-half acres or greater, an accessory building larger than
permitted by the regulations set forth in Table 1224-1 may be permitted in
compliance with the following.
            1.   The accessory building shall have an area not to exceed 4% of
the area of the rear yard, or 3,000 square feet, whichever is lesser.
            2.   On lots with an area of three acres or more, such accessory
building shall be permitted in the side or rear yard.
            3.   Such accessory building shall be located no less than 150 feet
from a public right-of-way and no less than 50 feet from a side or rear lot
line.
            4.   Such accessory building shall not exceed 24 feet in height but
in no case shall the height of the accessory building exceed the height of the
principal building.
      (12)   Setback and location requirements.
         A.   Accessory structures shall be located in the yards established in
Table 1224-3.
         B.   Accessory structures in residential districts shall be setback a
minimum distance as established in Table 1224-2 below.
         C.   Accessory structures in nonresidential districts shall be setback
a minimum of ten feet from the side and rear lot lines unless such lot lines
share a boundary with a residential district in which case, the accessory
structures shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the adjacent residential
zoning district.
         D.   Table 1224-2 also establishes the minimum setback for all paved
surfaces, including driveways in residential districts.
 
Table 1224-2: Minimum Setbacks for Accessory Structures and Uses in
Residential Districts
                 R-1A and R-1B Districts R-1C and R-1D Districts R-2 and R-
Accessory                                                        3 Districts
Structure or Use Side Yard Rear Yard     Side Yard Rear Yard     Side and Rear
                 Setback   Setback       Setback   Setback       Yard Setback
Accessory        3         3             3         3             10
buildings
Swimming pool    6         10            3         5             10
Driveways [1]    0         0             0         0             0
[2]
Other paved      0         2             0         0             0
surfaces
Fences           See §
                 1226.03
All other
accessory        3         3             3         3             10
structures
NOTE: All setback numbers are in feet.
[1]On lots where there is a side-loading garage or access to a garage where a
vehicle backs out of the garage toward an adjacent lot line instead of a
street and where a zero-foot setback is proposed, a curb shall be installed
along the entire driveway to prevent the overhang of any vehicles across lot
lines and to direct drainage to approved drainage systems.
[2]See additional driveway standards in §
1234.06.
 
         E.   Accessory buildings that are permitted in the rear yard only, as
established in Table 1224-3, may be permitted in the side yard if there is a
50-foot setback from the side lot line.
         F.   Additional setbacks may be required from the principal building,
adjacent structures, or streets based on the applicable building or fire code
regulations.
         G.   Accessory structures shall be separated from the principal
building a minimum of ten feet or the distance required by the Fire Code,
whichever is greater. If the separation of the accessory and main structure is
less than required, the accessory structure shall be protected with a fire-
resistant material and shall conform to the same yard requirements as the
principal building.
   (c)   Prohibited structures for accessory uses.
      (1)   Unless approved as a temporary use pursuant to this code, accessory
structures that are constructed with fabric, canvas, tarpaulin or other similar
materials shall be prohibited. Inflatable garages or storage structures shall
also be prohibited
      (2)   Portable containers, shipping containers and semi-tractor trailers
used for storage (with or without wheels) shall not be used as permanent
accessory structures in any zoning district.
   (d)   Accessory uses in the Residential Planned Developments.
      (1)   The types of accessory uses allowed in a RPD shall be considered as
part of the PRD review. Generally:
         A.   Accessory uses for single-family residential dwellings shall be
those allowed in the R-1A District;
         B.   Accessory uses for multi-family residential dwellings shall be
those allowed in the R-2 District;
         C.   Accessory uses for commercial uses shall be those allowed in the
B-3 District; and
         D.   Accessory uses for industrial uses shall be those allowed in the
I-1 District.
      (2)   The Planning Commission and City Council may approve alternative
accessory uses and structures within an RPD if allowed as part of the RPD
development plan approval process.
   (e)   Permitted accessory uses. The following is an explanation of Table
1224-3.
      (1)   Defined. The symbols for permitted uses (P), permitted uses with
standards (PS), and conditional uses (C) are defined in the same manner as §
1216.05(b).
      (2)   Prohibited uses. A blank cell indicates that a use is prohibited in
the respective zoning district.
      (3)   Yards permitted. This column identifies within which yards the use
may be permitted. See the use-specific standards for any restrictions related
to placement in individual yards.
      (4)   Floor area and yard calculation.
         A.   This column identifies when the accessory structure is “included”
in the calculation of maximum lot coverage requirements of Table 1222-1 and
Table 1224-1.
         B.   Where accessory buildings and structures are placed on risers,
posts or other unpaved surfaces, such buildings and structures shall still
count toward any floor area and coverage requirements of this section if they
are included in the calculation according to Table 1224-2.
      (5)   Zoning permit required. A “Yes” in the “Zoning Permit Required”
column shall mean that the applicable accessory structure requires a zoning
permit in order to be constructed.
      (6)   Use-specific standards. The numbers contained in the “Use-Specific
Standards” column are references to additional standards and requirements that
apply to the use type listed. Standards referenced in the “Use-Specific
Standards” column apply in all zoning districts unless otherwise expressly
stated.
      (7)   Use determination and unlisted uses. The determination of whether a
proposed accessory use or structure is permitted, permitted with standards, a
conditional use, or a prohibited use under the provisions of this section shall
be made in the same manner as principal uses. See §
1216.05(d).
 
Table 1224-3: Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
Use Category
and Use Type  R-
P = Permitted 1A,         B-
Use           R-  R-      1,  I-      Yards                           Use-
PS =          1B, 2       B-  1,      Permitted  Yard        Zoning   Specific
Permitted Use R-  and MUO 2   and P-1 F = Front  Coverage    Permit   Standards
with          1C, R-3     and I-2     S = Side   Calculation Required in Sec.:
Standards     and         B-3         R = Rear
C =           R-
Conditional   1D
Use
Accessibility PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  F, S or R  Not         Yes      1224.01
ramps                                            included             (f)(1)
Amateur radio                                    Not                  1224.01
towers and    PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  S or R     included    Yes      (f)(2)
antennas
Basketball    PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  F, S or R  Not         No       1224.01
hoops                                            included             (f)(3)
Bike and                                                              1224.01
skateboard    PS  PS      PS      PS  R          Included    Yes      (f)(4)
ramps
Detached                                                              1224.01
garages and   PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  R          Included    Yes      (f)(5)
carports
Detached
storage/
utility sheds PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  R          Included    Yes      1224.01
and other                                                             (f)(6)
detached
buildings
Drive-through                         See §     Not                  1224.01
facility                  PS  PS      1224.01(f) included    Yes      (f)(7)
                                      (7)
Gazebos and   P   P   P   P   P   P   R          Included    Yes
pergolas
Generators                                       Not                  1224.01
and HVAC      PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  F, S or R  included    Yes      (f)(8)
equipment
Home          PS  PS  PS              Not        Not         Yes      1224.01
occupations                           applicable included             (f)(9)
Nursery
schools or
day care      PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  Not        Not         Yes      1224.01
centers                               applicable included             (f)(10)
(children or
adults)
Outdoor               PS  PS  PS      F, S or R  Not         Yes      1224.01
dining                                           included             (f)(11)
Outdoor                                          Not                  1224.01
displays and          PS  PS  PS      F, S or R  Included    Yes      (f)(12)
sales
Outdoor                                          Not                  1224.01
storage and               PS  PS      R          Included    Yes      (f)(13)
bulk sales
Outdoor
vending                                          Not                  1224.01
machines and  PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  F, S or R  Included    No       (f)(14)
drop-off
boxes
Patios,                                                               1224.01
porches and   PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  F, S or R  Included    Yes      (f)(15)
decks
Playsets,                                        See §
treehouses    PS  PS  PS          PS  R          1224.01(f)  No       1224.01
and                                              (16)                 (f)(16)
trampolines
Renewable     See
energy        Chapter 1240: Renewable Energy Systems
systems
Retail                                Not        Not                  1224.01
commercial            PS  PS  PS      applicable included    No       (f)(17)
uses
Satellite     PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  Not        Not         No       1224.01
dishes                                applicable included             (f)(18)
Swimming      PS  PS  PS  PS      PS  R          Included    Yes      1224.01
pools                                                                 (f)(19)
Tennis and
other         PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  R          Included    Yes      1224.01
recreational                                                          (f)(20)
courts
Type-B day    PS  PS  PS  PS      PS  Not        Not         No       1224.01
care home                             applicable included             (f)(21)
Type A day    C                       NA         Not         Yes      1224.01
care homes                                       included             (f)(22)
Utility                               See §
structures    PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  PS  1224.01(f)
                                      (23)
 
   (f)   Standards for specific accessory uses and structures. The following
requirements apply to the specific types of accessory uses and structures
listed, in addition to the requirements of division (b) of this section.
      (1)   Accessibility ramps. Ramps that provide access to buildings for the
disabled are permitted in all zoning districts and may encroach in all setbacks
but shall not encroach on a public sidewalk, right-of-way or street.
      (2)   Amateur radio towers and antenna.
         A.   No more than one amateur radio tower and/or antenna shall be
permitted on each lot.
         B.   Ground-mounted amateur radio towers, antennas and related guy
wire anchors must be located in the rear yard.
         C.   Building-mounted amateur radio towers and antennas must be
located to the rear of the centerline of the principal building.
         D.   Such tower shall not exceed 65 feet in height or the maximum
height of the applicable zoning district, whichever is greater. The measurement
shall be made from the grade directly beneath the tower to the highest point on
the antenna or tower, whichever is the tallest point of the structure.
         E.   Antennas and guy wire anchors shall not overhang or otherwise be
located within required accessory structure setbacks or on adjacent lots.
         F.   When an amateur radio tower and antenna is no longer being used
by an FCC amateur radio license holder for amateur radio service, the tower and
antenna must be removed no more than 180 days after cessation of the FCC
license or the transfer or property ownership or lease to an individual without
an FCC license.
         G.   Amateur radio towers and antennas that do not comply with the
provisions of this section shall require a conditional use approval (see §
1214.03: Conditional Uses). The application for a conditional use approval for
amateur radio towers and antennas must demonstrate that compliance with the
provisions of this section would prevent the amateur radio operator from
exercising the rights granted to him or her by the FCC or the state by license
or law. If the Planning Commission determines that expertise beyond that of
city staff is necessary to determine compliance with this criterion, then the
applicant shall reimburse the city for any expenses necessary for hiring a
third-party consultant to make this determination.
      (3)   Backyard chickens, coops/runs. Notwithstanding any of the
foregoing, female chicken “hens”, and no other fowl or poultry for the purpose
of egg production, shall be kept in the city in R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-1D, R-2, R-
3, P-1, PUD and RPUD zoning districts beginning with pullets (young female
chickens less than one year of age), hen (female chicken one or more year(s) of
age), or female chicks (very young chicken) in accordance with the following
regulations.
         A.   Permit application.
            1.   Before the keeping of hens can occur, a zoning permit and
building permit shall be obtained.
            2.   Permit applications shall be accompanied by the following:
               a.   Back yard hen training certificate from a city-approved
back yard hen-keeping training provider;
               b.   A rendering that includes the specifications for the
intended coops/runs showing placement in relation to property lines, creeks,
waterways, city main storm inlet(s), retention basin(s) or other structures on
the property with accurate dimensions shown, including easements. On properties
with platted easements, whether on the side or rear yards, any proposed
structure shall be a minimum of five feet from said easement, including storm
sewer, drainage, and utility easements. Any proposed structure should also be a
minimum distance of ten feet from creeks/ditches, waterways, city storm inlet
(s), or city drains;
               c.   Submit plans for any electrical and/or plumbing
requirements;
               d.   Submit a sketch of the fence, wall or landscape screening
plan for the coops/runs and a fence permit pursuant to §
1226.03;
               e.   If the applicant is not the property owner, written
permission from the property owner to have backyard hens on the property must
be submitted; and
               f.   By signing this application, the applicant and property
owner allow city personnel onto the property to inspect the coops/runs;
conditions of chickens; and in response to complaints of offensive odors,
noises, conditions or other violation of the planning and zoning regulations.
         B.   Personal use, limitations.
            1.   Hens shall only be purchased from sources that are certified
by the U.S. Department of Agriculture National Poultry Improvement Plan (USDA-
NPIP).
            2.   Hens shall only be kept for personal use by persons residing
in the principal structure on the lot on which the hens are kept.
            3.   No more than six hens shall be permitted on any lot.
            4.   No eggs from hens shall be sold.
         C.   Setbacks.
            1.   Coops/runs are restricted to rear yards.
            2.   In residential zoning districts, the coops/runs shall be kept
at least three feet from the side and rear property lines, unless the coops/
runs are a bump out on a detached garage, then it shall be kept at least three
feet from the side and rear property lines. In P-1 zoning districts, the coops/
runs shall be three feet from the side and rear property lines, unless such lot
lines share a boundary with a residential district, in which case, the coops/
runs shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the adjacent residential
zoning district.
            3.   Such structures shall be located no less than 20 feet behind
the rear most wall of the principal structure on the lot and adjacent lots.
         D.   Enclosure.
            1.   A COOP/RUN shall be defined as an enclosure that houses hens.
It is connected as one accessory structure. The base surface of coops/runs must
not exceed 200 square feet and eight feet in height pursuant to § 1226.01(g)
(1)A., and shall be exempt from the lot coverage restrictions contained in the
zoning code.
            2.   Hens shall not be allowed out of the coops/runs, unless an
adult on the property on which the hens are kept is directly monitoring them
and the adult is able to immediately return the hens to the coops/runs, if
necessary.
            3.   Hens are not allowed outside of the permitted property,
including on a neighbor’s property or on the public right-of-way.
            4.   Hens shall be kept in a covered, predator-proof coops/runs,
with a floor impervious to digging that is well-ventilated and designed to be
accessible for cleaning. The coop portion of the coops/runs shall be well-
ventilated, providing a humane environment as to warmth, ventilation, light,
and bedding, and provide nesting boxes and roosting poles. The hens shall have
adequate water supply and nourishment.
            5.   The coops/runs shall be of uniform and sturdy design and
constructed of quality materials consistent with the neighborhood design.
            6.   The coops/runs shall always be maintained in good repair to
protect the aesthetics of the neighborhood and not present a blighted
appearance to the property or to neighbors.
            7.   Hens shall have access to an outdoor run that is attached to
the coop to prevent them from running at large and to prevent access by
predators.
            8.   The coop area of the coops/runs shall allow two to four square
feet, depending on the size of the hen. The run shall allow for ten square feet
per hen. The coops/runs shall be constructed to provide humane conditions to
ensure the health and well-being of the hens.
            9.   Landscaping, fencing, or a wall or a combination thereof,
shall keep the coops/runs from being viewed from the street and adjacent
properties.
            10.   Portable coops/runs or coop tractors that are meant to be
moved, are not permitted on the lot.
         E.   Sanitation, slaughtering.
            1.   The coops/runs must be kept clean, dry, and sanitary; free
from debris and offensive odors; and devoid of rodents and vermin.
            2.   A perimeter around the coops/runs that is at least six feet or
to the property line, whichever is further, shall be clear of weeds, junk, and
other debris and shall be maintained to keep it clear of harboring rodents and
vermin.
            3.   The coops/runs shall be located so that adequate drainage is
obtained, normal drying occurs, and standing water is not present.
            4.   The coops/runs must be cleaned on a regular basis to prevent
the accumulation of waste. Waste management best practices as recommended by
Ohio State University shall be implemented.
            5.   All feed must be stored in a rodent-proof container.
            6.   No hens shall be slaughtered on-site. Hen(s) must be
transported to a slaughter and rendering establishment that has been approved
to receive poultry by the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
         F.   Number and transferability.
            1.   Applications shall be kept on file by the Building Department
pursuant to §
1214.10(f).
            2.   Permits shall automatically be renewed, unless the property is
sold or the permit holder is cited for noncompliance, in which case the coops/
runs shall be inspected by the Building Department and Community Development
Department and treated as a new application.
         G.   Permit revocation. The Community Development Department shall
revoke a permit at any time if the permit holder fails to adhere to the
provisions of this division pursuant to §
1214.10(g).
         H.   Appeal. Any denial of a permit application or revocation of a
permit may be appealed pursuant to §
1214.11 of this code of ordinances.
      (4)   Basketball hoops.
         A.   Basketball courts shall be reviewed as “tennis and other
recreational courts”.
         B.   Movable basketball hoops shall not be located in rights-of-way or
be so located as to require play in any right-of-way.
      (5)   Bike and skateboard ramps. Bike ramps and skateboard ramps shall be
set back at least 15 feet from all lot lines.
      (6)   Detached garages and carports. 
         A.   Detached garages and carports shall be served by a paved
driveway.
         B.   Detached garages and carports shall be constructed of materials
that are similar to the materials used for the principal building.
      (7)   Detached storage/utility sheds, and other detached buildings.
Detached storage/utility sheds, and other detached buildings that exceed 100
square feet in floor area shall not be constructed with metal or plastic
facades.
      (8)   Drive-through facilities. The following standards shall apply to
businesses that contain a drive-through facility regardless if the drive-
through is part of another use (e.g., restaurant or financial institution) or
if it is a stand-alone use (e.g., automatic teller machine).
         A.   General standards.
            1.   Audible electronic devices such as loudspeakers, automobile
service order devices and similar instruments shall not be located within 250
feet of any residential dwelling unit.
            2.   All drive-through areas, including, but not limited to, drive-
through signs, waiting lanes, trash receptacles, audio equipment, drive-up
windows, and other objects associated with the drive-through area shall be
located in the side or rear yard of a property to the maximum extent feasible,
and shall not cross, interfere with, or impede any public right-of-way.
            3.   If the drive-through window, drive-through signage or any
audio equipment are located in the front yard, they shall be screened with an
opaque, landscaped screen of with a height that will fully screen the window,
signage or audio equipment. Such screening shall not be required for waiting
spaces that are located in a front yard.
         B.   Waiting space and lane requirements. Drive-through facilities
shall be required to include vehicle waiting spaces as established in §
1234.18.
      (9)   Generators or HVAC equipment.
         A.   All generators must be located on a paved surface and shall be
set back a minimum of three feet from all lot lines. HVAC equipment may be
located on a paved surface or attached to the principal building.
         B.   Generators or HVAC equipment shall be located in the rear yard,
to the maximum extent feasible and shall be set back a minimum of three feet
from all lot lines.
         C.   Generators or HVAC equipment may be permitted in the front yard
if approved as a conditional use with the following considerations.
            1.   The generators or HVAC equipment must be screened by a solid
wall that is architecturally compatible with the principal building in color
and materials, that is connect to the principal building, and that does not
exceed four feet in height.
            2.   The generators or HVAC equipment shall not extend more than
six feet from the front facade of the principal building and the screening wall
shall not be located more than seven feet from the front facade.
            3.   The wall shall not be wider than six feet and shall screen the
entirety of the equipment.
         D.   Such screening requirements shall not apply when the generators
or HVAC system is to be located in a side yard adjacent to a lot in a
nonresidential zoning district.
      (10)   Home occupations. The following standards for home occupations are
intended to provide reasonable opportunities for employment on residential
property, while avoiding changes to the residential character of a dwelling
that accommodates a home occupation, or the surrounding neighborhood, where
allowed by this section.
         A.   Secondary. The home occupation shall be clearly secondary to the
full-time use of the property as a residence.
         B.   One customer at a time. Any home occupation that provides
services where members of the public visit or enter the premises may be
permitted if designed to accommodate one customer at a time and which meets all
other applicable requirements for home occupations.
         C.   Permitted home occupations. The following uses, and other uses
determined by the Code Administrator to be similar in nature and impact, may be
approved as a home occupation when in compliance with this section:
            1.   Art and craft work including, but not limited to ceramics,
painting, photography, dressmaking, millinery, sewing, weaving, tailoring,
ironing, washing and sculpting;
            2.   Office-only uses, including, but not limited to, an office for
an architect, financial advisor, attorney, consultant, counselor, insurance
agent, planner, tutor or writer;
            3.   Personal service establishments including, but not limited to,
fitness/health facilities, beauty parlors, barber shops, animal grooming (no
overnight boarding) or licensed massage or physical therapy;
            4.   Mail order, online businesses or direct sale product
distribution (e.g., Amway, Avon, Creative Memories, Pampered Chef and the
like); and
            5.   Other similar uses as determined by the Code Administrator.
         D.   Prohibited home occupations. The following are business
activities that are prohibited as home occupations:
            1.   Animal hospitals and boarding facilities;
            2.   Automotive and other vehicle repair and service, except when
such repair or service is within an attached garage and the vehicle is owned or
leased by the occupant of the dwelling units.
            3.   Construction, landscaping or similar contractor facilities and
storage (an office-only use is allowed in compliance with the above section)
and other outdoor storage;
            4.   Fitness/health facilities that provide group activities or
services;
            5.   Medical clinics, laboratories or doctor’s offices;
            6.   Parking on, or dispatching from the site, any vehicle used in
conjunction with the home occupation (e.g., landscaping services, taxi
services, construction and the like) with the exception of a vehicle owned and
operated by the home owner or tenant;
            7.   Uses that require explosives or highly combustible or toxic
materials;
            8.   Welding and machine shop operations;
            9.   Retail uses where there is stock-in-trade on site;
            10.   Wood cutting businesses; or
            11.   Other similar uses as determined by the Code Administrator.
         E.   Operating standards.
            1.   Permitted home occupations shall not create an adverse effect
on the residential character of the zoning district or interfere with the
reasonable enjoyment of adjoining properties.
            2.   All home occupation activities shall take place in the
dwelling and there shall be no use of an outdoor area or accessory structures
for the home occupation.
            3.   The sale of goods or services shall be limited to:
               a.   Products that are produced or processed on the premises; or
               b.   The sale of goods as part of a mail order, online business
or direct sale product distribution (e.g., Amway, Avon, Creative Memories,
Pampered Chef and the like) where there is no stock-in-trade on the site.
            4.   No equipment shall be used which will create any dust, noise,
odors, glare, vibrations or electrical disturbances beyond the lot.
            5.   Activities conducted and equipment or material used shall not
change the fire safety or occupancy classifications of the premises.
            6.   All storage of materials, goods, supplies or equipment related
to the operation of a home occupation shall be inside the dwelling.
            7.   The residential building shall not be altered in any manner
that is intended to change the residential appearance of the dwelling to a
building with a commercial appearance. There shall be no separate entrance
created solely for the home occupation.
            8.   At least one resident of the dwelling shall operate the home
occupation and there may be up to one employee on-site who does not reside at
the dwelling.
            9.   The operator of a home occupation in a rental unit shall be
able to demonstrate that the property owner has authorized the use of the unit
for a home occupation.
            10.   No more than 20% of the floor area of any one story of the
dwelling unit shall be devoted to such home occupations. Such space for a home
occupation shall only be located in the principal dwelling and is prohibited
from being located in any accessory building or structure.
            11.   No additional off-street parking or loading facilities shall
be provided beyond that traditionally used for residential uses. No additional
driveways shall be established for the use of the home occupation.
            12.   There shall be no signs other than the wall signs allowed on
a dwelling in accordance with this code.
            13.   Traffic shall not be generated by such home occupation in
significantly greater volume than would normally be expected in the residential
neighborhood.
            14.   There shall be no window display or outdoor storage or
display of equipment, materials or supplies associated with the home
occupation.
            15.   When any home occupation results in an undesirable condition
interfering with the general welfare of the surrounding residential area, such
home occupation may be terminated by the Code Administrator.
      (11)   Nursery schools or day care centers (children or adults). Nursery
schools or day care centers may only be permitted as accessory uses to
permitted and conforming nonresidential uses. Such use shall be located within
the principal building.
      (12)   Outdoor dining.
         A.   Outdoor dining areas shall be located along a sidewalk adjacent
to the principal building the dining is connected with or between the principal
building the dining is connected with and an adjacent parking area. Outdoor
dining areas shall not be located in such a manner as to require customers and
employees to cross driveways or parking areas to go between the cafe/food
service area and the principal building.
         B.   Outdoor dining areas shall not be located within ten feet of a
fire hydrant, Fire Department standpipe connection, fire escape, bus stop,
loading zone, mail boxes, or traffic signal stanchions.
         C.   If no grade separation is provided between vehicular traffic and
the outdoor dining area, permanent railings or fencing shall be provided around
the dining area. If the outdoor dining area is adjacent to a street or area
that is closed to vehicular traffic, no railing or fencing shall be required.
         D.   Outside entertainment, whether by band, orchestra, instrument,
musician, singer, radio, television, loudspeaker, microphone, recital or any
other individual, group or mechanical device shall not be permitted in any
outside dining area if the noise from such entertainment is of such a volume so
as to cause a disturbance to abutting property owners. The addition of this
activity to an existing use shall require approval through site plan review.
         E.   If the outdoor dining area is located on a sidewalk, the area
shall be designed so there is a minimum of five feet of clearance adjacent to
the dining area to allow for safe pedestrian circulation. Furniture or elements
of the outdoor dining shall also not block any areas of ingress or egress from
the principal building.
         F.   Umbrellas and awnings that shelter diners from the elements shall
be secured so as not to create a hazard in windy conditions. Such umbrellas
shall not contain signage but awnings may include signage in compliance with
Chapter 1236: Sign Standards.
         G.   Enclosing outdoor dining areas either by a permanent roof or to
expand the existing structure shall meet all the requirements of a building
within the applicable zoning district and shall require the issuance of a new
zoning permit.
         H.   Where an outdoor dining area is located in a right-of-way, the
permittee shall hold harmless, indemnify and defend the city from and against
any and all injuries, deaths, losses, damages, claims, suits, liabilities,
judgments, costs and expenses, consequential or otherwise, including reasonable
attorney fees, which may in any way arise out of or be connected with the
granting of a zoning permit which may in any way result therefrom, or from any
act or failure to act by the permittee, its agents or employees.
         I.   The city shall have the right and power, acting through the Code
Administrator to prohibit the operation of an outdoor dining area at any time
because of anticipated or actual problems and conflicts in the use of the
sidewalk area. Such problems and conflicts may arise from, but are not limited
to, scheduled festivals and similar events or parades or marches, or repairs to
the street or sidewalk, or from demonstrations or emergencies occurring in the
area.
      (13)   Outdoor displays and sales. Seasonal and permanent facilities for
outdoor display and sales (e.g., garden supply sales, news and flower stands,
and similar uses) that are accessory to another principal use may be permitted
upon compliance with the following.
         A.   Such uses shall not be placed within the street right-of-way,
within an interior drive, or in a location which will interfere with the vision
clearance requirements.
         B.   Outdoor displays and sales shall be related to the principal use
of the site and shall clearly be accessory and incidental to the principal use.
Outdoor displays and sales shall be prohibited when the principal building is
vacant.
         C.   Outdoor displays and sales areas shall not cover an area more
than 25% of the ground floor area of the principal building.
         D.   Outdoor displays and sales areas shall be shown on the plan
approved as part of the applicable zoning permit application.
         E.   Outdoor display and sales areas may be permitted in the front
yard provided that the merchandise is displayed along the sidewalk or walkway
adjacent to the building. Outdoor display and sales areas may also be permitted
in the side or rear yard without being located adjacent to the building. In all
cases, the displays and sales areas shall be spaced a sufficient distance from
the building, as dictated by the Fire Department, to satisfy all fire safety
requirements.
         F.   In all cases, any areas designated for outdoor display or sales
shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from any adjacent lot lines of lots in
residential zoning districts.
         G.   The placement of the merchandise shall not interfere with
pedestrian movement on any sidewalk or walkway. A minimum of five feet of the
sidewalk or walkway shall be clear of merchandise to allow for safe pedestrian
movement.
         H.   The outdoor display and sales areas shall be maintained in good
order and appearance.
         I.   The outdoor display and sale of goods and products shall be
limited to those goods and products that a customer can pick up and carry into
the building for purchase. Larger items may be displayed for sale if in
compliance with the outdoor storage requirements of division (f)(13) of this
section.
      (14)   Outdoor storage and bulk sales.
         A.   Outdoor storage and bulk sales shall comply with the standards of
outdoor displays and sales unless otherwise modified by this section.
         B.   Outdoor storage and bulk sales in a parking lot shall be
prohibited unless allowed as a temporary use pursuant to §
1224.02: Temporary Uses and Structures.
         C.   The area of the lot devoted to outdoor storage of goods and
merchandise shall not exceed 15% of the ground floor area of the principal
building.
         D.   Outdoor storage and bulk sales areas shall be shown on the plan
approved as part of the applicable zoning permit application.
         E.   Areas devoted to outdoor storage shall be paved with asphalt or
concrete and free of dust. Outdoor storage may be located on areas paved with
gravel in the industrial districts if the storage is set back a minimum of 200
feet from any adjacent lot lines of lots in residential zoning districts.
         F.   The storage of radioactive, toxic or otherwise hazardous
materials shall not be permitted.
         G.   Areas devoted to outdoor storage or bulk sales shall be located
in a rear yard so that it is behind the principal building and not visible from
any public street, unless the storage is located on a corner lot. The enclosed
area shall be setback 25 feet from any property boundary that abuts a single-
family residential district and in no case shall the side and rear setback of
the enclosed area be less than ten feet. On corner and through lots, the
enclosed area shall be setback 20 feet from any street right-of-way.
         H.   Screening.
            1.   All aspects of outdoor storage and bulks sales of goods and
materials shall be screened in accordance with §
1232.05: Screening Requirements.
            2.   If the wall or fence needs to exceed eight feet in height to
conceal the storage of materials, such wall or fence shall be constructed of
materials similar to the principal building so that it appears to be an
extension of the principal structure.
            3.   All materials shall be stored in such a fashion as to be
accessible to firefighting equipment at all times.
      (15)   Outdoor vending machines and drop-off-boxes. Outdoor vending
machines and drop-off boxes for recycled goods, books, donations and the like,
may be permitted when they comply with the following regulations.
         A.   No such use or facility shall be placed within the street right-
of-way, within an interior drive, or in a location which will interfere with
required site vision clearance requirements in §
1226.05: Intersection Visibility.
         B.   The facility or equipment shall be maintained in good operating
order and appearance.
         C.   Vending machines and drop-off boxes shall only be permitted in
the MUO, B-1, B-2, I-1, and I-2 Zoning Districts. They may be permitted in
residential districts only when accessory to a permitted nonresidential use.
         D.   Vending machines shall only be placed along the facade of the
principal building with a maximum of one machine for every 50 feet of building
frontage, with any machine separated from another vending machine by 50 feet.
See Figure 1224-A.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3188.jpg]
   Figure 1224-A: The above is an image of a single vending machine that is
   appropriately located along the facade of the building.
         E.   Drop-off boxes shall only be permitted in the side or rear yard.
         F.   The container shall be emptied at least once every week.
Containers that result in the overflow of donated goods shall be declared a
nuisance and shall be removed immediately upon notification by the Code
Administrator at the expense of the property owner or business owner.
         G.   The city shall have the authority to place more than one drop-off
box on a single lot when providing recycling services to the general public.
      (16)   Patios, porches and decks.
         A.   Patios without a roof, building or structure are permitted in any
yard. Where a building or structure is placed on a patio, such building or
structure may only be located in the yards where those buildings or structures
are permitted.
         B.   Patios, decks, and porches may have built-in grills, kitchen
areas, living areas or dining areas (e.g., table, chairs, umbrellas and the
like) but such activities shall only be permitted in the rear yard only and
provided such use complies with any applicable Building Code requirements.
         C.   Patios, decks and porches may have seating areas in any yard the
patio, deck or porch is permitted and located.
         D.   Porches may be located in any yard.
         E.   An unenclosed porch or deck attached to a single-family dwelling
may be erected within the required front yard or required rear yard, but shall
not exceed 35% of the required rear yard area (regardless of the yard it is
located within) and shall be subject to the encroachment limitations of §
1226.01(e)(4).
         F.   An unenclosed porch or deck attached to a multi-family dwelling
may be erected within the required front yard or required rear yard and shall
be subject to the encroachment limitations of §
1226.01(e)(4).
         G.   An unenclosed porch or deck shall be defined as a porch or deck
that is not enclosed by four permanent walls and could include a roof structure
overhanging the front entry that is open on three sides or a screened-porch or
similar, non-weatherproofed or non-conditioned space (e.g., no heat or air-
conditioning), where the screening covers more than 75% of the wall surface.
         H.   Rooftop decks in nonresidential districts shall be regulated as
part of the principal building.
      (17)   Playsets, treehouses, and trampolines.
         A.   If a playset or treehouse has more than 100 square feet of
enclosed play area, the use shall be reviewed in the same manner as a “detached
storage/utility sheds, gazebos, pool houses, and other similar building.” As
such, any playset or treehouse that has more than 100 square feet of enclosed
play area shall also count toward the maximum floor area and lot coverage
standards of Table 1222-1 and Table 1224-1. Such area shall be measured by the
smallest square or rectangle around the bottom of the playset or treehouse.
         B.   Treehouses, trampolines, enclosed play areas, and playsets that
are anchored into the ground (i.e., not portable) shall be located in the rear
yard only. Portable playsets may be located in any yard but are encouraged to
be located in the side or rear yard.
      (18)   Retail commercial uses. Retail commercial uses are permitted in
the I-1 and I-2 Districts provided:
         A.   Such uses are an accessory use;
         B.   The uses are located completely within a principal building of a
nonresidential use;
         C.   The retail use is for the sale of goods and products manufactured
on site; and
         D.   The total floor area of accessory uses shall not exceed 15% of
the total gross floor area of the footprint of the principal building.
      (19)   Satellite dishes.
         A.   Satellite dishes of one meter in diameter or less shall be exempt
from the provisions of this section and shall not require a zoning permit.
         B.   To the maximum extent feasible, the dish should be located in the
side or rear yard.
         C.   Satellite dishes larger than one meter in diameter may be
permitted if approved by the Planning Commission as a conditional use.
      (20)   Swimming pools.
         A.   Any constructed or manufactured pool, both permanent and
temporary, not located within an enclosed building and which is used or
intended to be used as a swimming pool in connection with residential dwellings
and is available only to the residents and their private guests shall be
classified as a private swimming pool and shall be regulated by this division
(f)(19). This includes community pools that are restricted to use by residents
of a subdivision or residential development and their guests as well as outdoor
pools that serve guests of a hotel or similar nonresidential use.
         B.   For the purposes of this division (f)(19), swimming pool shall
include pools, spas and hot tubs and shall be defined as any in-ground, on-
ground or above-ground pool intended for swimming, wading or recreational
bathing capable of containing in excess of two feet of water at its deepest
point as determined by manufacturer’s specifications.
         C.   A swimming pool shall not exceed 54 inches in height, above
ground, and shall comply with the setback requirements set forth in Table 1224-
2. Slides associated with pools shall be exempt from this height requirement.
         D.   Usual and customary pool equipment and accessories (such as a
pool deck, a diving board or a filtration house), not exceeding five feet in
height, shall only be located in the rear yard and shall be set back a minimum
of three feet from all lot lines.
         E.   All swimming pool construction and operation shall be in
accordance with standards and regulations established by the Board of Health
having jurisdiction within the city, the Building Code and any other
governmental regulations governing the construction and operation of such
facilities.
         F.   Any outdoor swimming pool, as defined in this division (f)(19),
shall be surrounded by a barrier which shall comply with the following.
            1.   Every swimming pool shall be completely enclosed by a fence
and/or structure of sturdy construction at least 48 inches in height, measured
from the ground level at each point along the boundary of such enclosure. The
enclosure may surround the pool area or the entire yard. The enclosure shall be
of such design as to prevent young children from crawling or otherwise passing
through, under or over such enclosure without the use of a ladder or other
implement. Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a four-inch
diameter sphere.
            2.   Solid barriers which do not have openings, such as a masonry
or stone wall, shall not contain indentations or protrusions except for normal
construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints.
            3.   Access gates into such enclosure shall be self-closing and
have a self-latching device. The fence/barrier shall be equipped with at least
one such access gate.
            4.   Where an above-ground pool structure is used as a barrier or
where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure and the means of
access is a ladder or steps, then the ladder or steps shall be capable of being
secured, locked or removed to prevent access.
            5.   The required barrier must be installed prior to filling the
pool with water.
            6.   Automatic pool covers are permitted but the barrier
requirements of this section shall still apply.
            7.   A spa or hot tub with a safety cover that complies with ASTM F
1346 shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.
         G.   A zoning permit application for a pool shall contain either
information that demonstrates a barrier is already in place or shall include
the simultaneous application for fencing or barrier construction.
         H.   If the proposed barrier utilizes fencing on the property line
that is owned by the neighboring property owner, the pool owner shall be
required to build or replace that length of the barrier if it is ever remove by
the neighboring property owner.
         I.   Proper drainage shall be provided to ensure that pool overflow
does not affect adjacent properties.
         J.   Lighting shall be shaded so as not to be a disturbance to
adjacent properties.
         K.   Any sound of motor or pumps in such manner as to disturb the
peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring inhabitants shall be shielded to
prevent such disturbances.
      (21)   Tennis and other recreational courts. Outdoor tennis courts and
courts for other sports, including basketball and racquetball, that are
accessory to a residential or nonresidential use shall comply with the
following requirements.
         A.   Tennis courts or other full-size recreational courts shall only
be permitted on lots with a minimum lot area of one acre.
         B.   The court shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from all lot
lines.
         C.   All fencing shall be subject to the fence regulations in §
1226.03: Fences and Walls except that fencing that surrounds a tennis or
recreational court may exceed the maximum fence height of this code provided
that the fencing is located adjacent to the edge of the court.
         D.   Any lighting for the court shall not exceed 20 feet in height and
shall be directed downward and only illuminate the court. All outdoor lighting
shall comply with § 1226.04: Outdoor Lighting.
      (22)   Type B family day care home (one to six children). Type B family
day care homes are permitted when accessory to any residential dwelling unit,
regardless of the applicable residential zoning district.
      (23)   Type A family day care home. Type A family day care homes may only
be considered for a conditional use on lots with a minimum lot size of 20,000
square feet.
      (24)   Utility structures.
         A.   Utility structures shall be located to the rear of the lot, to
the maximum extent feasible, or otherwise located to create the least amount of
visibility.
         B.   If the applicant demonstrates to the Code Administrator that the
utility structure can only be located in a front yard, the structure shall be
landscaped in a manner that will allow access to the unit but otherwise buffer
the view of the structure. The applicant shall be required to provide a
landscaping plan as part of the subject application.
         C.   Utility structures in the I-1 and I-2 Districts shall not be
subject to this screening requirement.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021; Ord. 24-33, passed 3-25-2024; Ord. 24-148,
passed 11-12-2024; Ord. 25-109, passed 6-23-2025)
§ 1224.02 TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (a)   Purpose. This section allows for the establishment of certain
temporary uses and structures of limited duration, provided that such uses or
structures do not negatively affect adjacent properties, and provided that such
uses or events are discontinued upon the expiration of a set time period.
Temporary uses and structures shall not involve the construction or alteration
of any permanent building or structure.
   (b)   General standards for temporary uses and structures. Temporary uses or
structures shall:
      (1)   Not be detrimental to property or improvements in the surrounding
area or to the public health, safety or general welfare;
      (2)   Be compatible with the principal uses taking place on the site;
      (3)   Not have substantial adverse effects or noise impacts on nearby
residential neighborhoods;
      (4)   Not include permanent alterations to the site;
      (5)   Not maintain temporary signs associated with the use or structure
after the activity ends;
      (6)   Not violate the applicable conditions of approval that apply to a
site or use on the site;
      (7)   Not interfere with the normal operations of any permanent use
located on the property; and
      (8)   Contain sufficient land area to allow the temporary use, structure,
or special event to occur, as well as adequate land to accommodate the parking
and traffic movement.
   (c)   Permitted temporary uses and structures.
      (1)   Construction structures. Temporary structures for construction
operations may be permitted in any district if such structures are deemed
necessary, provided:
         A.   The use of such structures shall be limited to offices; buildings
for the storage of lumber, equipment and other building material, and
construction dumpsters;
         B.   Such construction structures shall be located in a landscaped
setting approved by the Planning Commission except that construction dumpster
shall be located on a paved surface;
         C.   All temporary structures shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet
from the nearest occupied residential dwelling;
         D.   A temporary structure for a sales trailer and/or construction
office may be approved by the Code Administrator and placed on the site no
sooner than two weeks before the start of grading or construction and shall be
permitted for a period of one year after issuance of the zoning permit unless
an alternative time limit is approved by the Code Administrator based on the
scale of the project;
         E.   The structure shall not be located within a floodplain or in a
location that will obstruct drainage flow;
         F.   The structure shall not block or prevent access to any fire
hydrant;
         G.   All temporary structures for construction operations shall be
removed within 14 days after the completion of work on the premises for which
an occupancy permit has been issued or if construction is not pursued
diligently. For residential subdivisions, the temporary construction structures
shall be removed after the zoning permit has been issued for the final
dwelling.
      (2)   Farmers market.
         A.   Farmers markets are permitted in nonresidential districts and on
lots used for public and institutional uses in residential districts.
         B.   Farmers markets shall not operate more than one day of each week
on any one lot. Farmers markets may operate only during the months of April
through October and only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
         C.   In a farmers market, no person may display or offer for sale any
items that were purchased directly or indirectly from any other person or any
item that was not produced upon land either owned or leased by the person
displaying or offering such item.
         D.   All electrical connections, temporary structures, stands, tents
and the like shall comply with all applicable codes and regulations and all
permits and licenses required for such connections and erections and by the
persons making same must be obtained.
         E.   The farmers market operator shall be responsible for cleanup of
the farmers market site at the end of each day of operation including removal
of trash, temporary structures, stands, tents, signage and banners.
         F.   Sanitary facilities for vendors of the farmers market must be
provided by the host property.
         G.   The farmers market shall not be operated or conducted in a way
that is a nuisance or disturbance to the occupants of neighboring properties.
         H.   The farmers market operator or his or her designated
representative authorized to direct the operations of all vendors participating
in the market shall be on the site of the market during all hours of operation.
         I.   The farmers market and every vendor must comply fully with all
applicable federal, state, county and local health codes and be registered with
the Ohio Department of Agriculture, Division of Food Safety.
         J.   Adequate parking for the farmers market must be provided.
Required on-site parking spaces of the host property may be used for the
farmers market provided such arrangement does not render the host property
deficient in its parking requirement or that there is no parking demand
associated with the use of the host property for the same parking spaces during
the hours of the farmers market operation.
         K.   One temporary freestanding sign not to exceed ten square feet in
area and six feet in height may be permitted for the farmers market provided
that a temporary zoning permit is obtained. The temporary sign authorized by
this division (c)(2)K. shall not be installed sooner than the day before the
farmers market and shall be removed by the end of the day of the farmers
market.
         L.   Musicians may perform at the farmers market, subject to such
conditions imposed as part of the zoning permit.
         M.   Approval process: approval of a farmers market shall be through
the zoning permit process as established in § 1214.10: Zoning Permit. Such
zoning permit shall require the additional requirement that the Mayor, the
Building Inspector, the Fire Chief, the Police Chief and the Code Administrator
find that the proposed use is a farmers market and complies with all the
requirements and standards of this section. The zoning permit for a farmers
market shall expire on October 31 of the calendar year the permit was issued.
         N.   Documentation: prior to the first day of the farmers market, the
person responsible for coordinating the farmers market shall provide to the
Code Administrator a list of vendors who will be participating in the farmers
market. The list shall contain the name, address and contact number of each
vendor, products to be sold, dates of participation in the farmers market and
any other information required by the Code Administrator. Along with the above
referenced list, a copy of any required food service licenses or other
applicable licenses for each vendor must be provided. Said licenses (or copies)
shall be in the possession of the farmers market operator and the vendor as
applicable, on the site of the farmers market during all hours of operation.
      (3)   Gravel surface parking lot.
         A.   A gravel surface parking lot may be permitted while a site is
under construction but shall only be permitted in areas for parking as
established in the approved plans associated with the zoning permit.
         B.   The gravel parking area must be paved in accordance with §
1234.16(b) prior to final occupancy of the building.
         C.   The applicant may also remove the temporary gravel surface
parking lot as an alternative to paving but in such case, the area that was
used as a gravel lot shall be returned to its previously state or as a
landscaped area.
         D.   A solid surface or gravel driveway shall be provided so vehicles
may access the parking lot from a public street.
      (4)   Temporary events. A temporary event may be permitted in compliance
with the following.
         A.   Exempt activities. The following activities shall be exempt from
these temporary use regulations but may still be subject to other sections of
this code.
            1.   Any event sponsored in whole or in part by the city, Lorain
County, state or United States government or the school district.
            2.   Any organized activities conducted at sites or facilities
typically intended and used for such activities including, but not limited to,
sporting events such as golf, soccer, softball and baseball tournaments
conducted on courses or fields intended and used for such activities and
religious services, wedding services, activities at rented event or community
spaces, and funeral services conducted at places of worship.
         B.   Garage or estate sales.
            1.   Garage or estate sales are permitted up to four times per
calendar year on any single lot with a maximum of four days per each
occurrence.
            2.   A zoning permit shall not be required for a garage or estate
sale but the sales shall be subject to the general standards applicable to all
temporary uses and the time restrictions.
         C.   Temporary seasonal sales. Temporary outdoor sales of seasonal
agricultural items, including the sale of such items as Christmas trees,
pumpkins, seasonal produce and similar agricultural products, may be permitted
in accordance with the following standards.
            1.   If the proposed temporary outdoor sale is intended to be
seasonal, in the same area, on an annual basis, the use shall be considered an
accessory use and shall be regulated in accordance with §
1224.01: Accessory Uses and Structures.
            2.   Temporary outdoor sales shall be limited to a maximum of 60
days in any one calendar year, on any single lot.
            3.   Temporary outdoor sales are prohibited on lots occupied with
residential uses unless there is an approved agricultural use on the lot.
            4.   The property contains an area not actively used by another use
that will support the proposed temporary sale of products without encroaching
into or creating a negative impact on existing open space, landscaping, traffic
movements, or parking space availability.
            5.   The sale of goods shall not occur within the public right-of-
way, or within 100 feet of a dwelling.
            6.   The range of goods or products available for sale shall be
limited to nonprocessed products obtained primarily through farming or
agricultural activities, including, but not necessarily limited to: pumpkins;
grains and seed crops; fruits of all kinds; vegetables; nursery, floral,
ornamental and greenhouse products; trees and forest products, including
Christmas trees, and firewood; bees and beekeeping products; seafood; and dairy
products.
            7.   The hours of operation of the seasonal sale of agricultural
products shall be from 7:30 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., or the same hours of operation
as a principal use on the same lot, whichever is more restrictive.
         D.   Temporary event with limited impact.
            1.   A temporary event with limited impact may be permitted with a
zoning permit for a maximum of two times per calendar year on any single lot.
Such events shall be subject to the general standards for all temporary uses.
            2.   The authorization of a temporary event with limited impact
shall not exceed seven consecutive days per occurrence.
            3.   Any temporary event that involves the sale of alcoholic
beverages, attendance of over 50 people at one time, overnight stays, that
exceeds two times per calendar year, or that exceeds seven consecutive days in
length for any one occurrence shall only be permitted if approved as a
temporary use with extensive impact.
         E.   Temporary event with extensive impact. Any temporary event that
is not classified as a temporary event with limited impact or that is not
specifically exempted or prohibited by this code, shall be classified as a
temporary event with extensive impact and shall require a conditional use
approval in accordance with §
1214.03: Conditional Uses and the following standards.
            1.   The temporary event shall not create an unreasonable risk of
significant:
               a.   Damage to public or private property, beyond normal wear
and tear;
               b.   Injury to persons;
               c.   Public or private disturbances or nuisances;
               d.   Unsafe impediments or distractions to, or congestion of,
vehicular or pedestrian travel;
               e.   Additional and impracticable or unduly burdensome on
police, fire, trash removal, maintenance or other public services demands; and
               f.   Other adverse effects upon the public health, safety or
welfare.
            2.   The temporary event shall not be of such a nature, size,
number, or duration that the particular location requested cannot reasonably
accommodate the event.
            3.   The temporary event shall not occur at a time and location
that has already been permitted or reserved for another permitted temporary
event.
            4.   In approving the temporary event, the Planning Commission is
authorized to impose such conditions as may be necessary to reduce or minimize
any potential adverse impacts upon other property in the area. Such conditions
may include, but are not limited to, conditions that address the following:
               a.   Provision of adequate vehicular ingress and egress;
               b.   Control of nuisance factors, such as but not limited to,
the prevention of glare or direct illumination of adjacent properties, noise,
vibrations, smoke, dust, dirt, odors, gases and heat;
               c.   Regulation of number of occurrences, operational hours or
other timing limits to mitigate impacts on surrounding uses;
               d.   Regulation of temporary buildings, structures and
facilities, including placement, height and size, location of equipment and
open spaces, including buffer areas and other yards; and
               e.   Modification or elimination of certain proposed activities.
            5.   Sunset provision.
               a.   In any approval of a temporary event (extensive impact),
the Planning Commission may impose a requirement that the conditional use
expires within a time set by the Planning Commission in its reasonable
discretion, unless, prior to the expiration of the conditional use approval,
the Planning Commission extends the time in which the conditional use is valid.
               b.   Where such approval incorporates a sunset provision, the
Planning Commission shall hold hearings to determine whether to extend the time
period for the validity of the conditional use. Notice of said hearings shall
be given in the manner required for conditional uses (see §
1214.03: Conditional Uses) shall be held with sufficient time for the Planning
Commission to hear, consider, and make a decision on the extension of the
conditional use and for conditional use extension to become effective prior to
the cessation or expiration of the conditional use approval. The Planning
Commission may only extend the effectiveness of the conditional use if it finds
that the conditional use continues to meet the criteria set forth in the in
this code.
               c.   If Planning Commission extends a conditional use as set
forth above, the Planning Commission may impose requirements reasonably related
to implementing the provisions of this code and to achieving the city’s purpose
and intent in enacting this code, the purpose of this section on temporary
uses, and the comprehensive land use plan in effect at the time of extension.
               d.   In the event a conditional use is not extended, all signs,
related fixtures or other special features allowed by the applicable
conditional use approval shall be removed and the areas of the buildings or
land where such signs, fixtures or features are located shall be repaired to
the condition prior to establishment of the proposed conditional use.
               e.   If there is a transfer of ownership of the property and
related approved event, such transfer shall trigger a review of the temporary
event approval by Planning Commission. Such review shall take place as in the
same as that established in division (c)(4)E.5.b above.
      (5)   Temporary sales office and model homes. If a temporary sales
office/model home is to be located in a subdivision, its location shall be
indicated on the improvement plans and approved by the Planning Commission. The
following provisions shall be met:
         A.   Up to four temporary real estate sales offices or model dwelling
units shall be permitted in an individual section or phase of a new residential
subdivision;
         B.   The dwelling shall comply with all of the applicable standards of
this code for the final residential use regardless of the temporary use as a
sales or leasing office;
         C.   The sales office/model homes shall be operated by a developer or
builder active in the same phase or section where the use is located; and
         D.   The sales office/model homes shall be converted into a permanent
residential use upon completion of construction and issuance of the permit for
the last dwelling in the same subdivision.
      (6)   Portable storage units. Temporary storage containers may be placed
on a property for the purpose of loading or unloading the container under the
following conditions.
         A.   Only one contain shall be placed at any property at one time.
         B.   Portable storage units must be located on an improved surface
outside the city right- of-way and shall not obstruct or hinder vehicular or
pedestrian traffic. Such units shall be a minimum of three feet from any
property line and ten feet from the city right- of-way.
         C.   Not more than one unit per zoning lot is permitted. Stacking of
portable storage units on top of each other is prohibited.
         D.   Portable storage units shall not exceed a size of 1,200 cubic
feet on the interior and shall be free from visible forms of deterioration such
as rust or peeling paint.
         E.   Portable storage containers are permitted as a temporary use for
a period not to exceed ten consecutive days up to a maximum of 30 days in any
one 12-month period.
         F.   When necessary to facilitate cleanup and/or restoration
activities resulting from a major catastrophe (e.g., fire, flood, water leak,
sewage back-up or other event where there is significant property damage) the
Code Administrator may extend the time period to a maximum of 90 days within
anyone 12-month period.
         G.   Portable storage units may be used in conjunction with
construction or alteration when a building permit has been issued provided the
following conditions are met.
            1.   The unit may be located on-site for duration of construction
but not to exceed three months for new construction, remodeling, renovation, or
expansion work. The Code Administrator may extend this time for a reasonable
period.
            2.   For construction of a new residential house the container may
be located in an unpaved driveway provided all other placement requirements are
met.
            3.   The unit must be removed from premises after construction is
complete prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021; Ord. 23-46, passed 3-13-2023)
CHAPTER 1226: GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Section
1226.01 Lot and principal building regulations
1226.02 Performance standards
1226.03 Fences and walls
1226.04 Outdoor lighting
1226.05 Intersection visibility
§ 1226.01 LOT AND PRINCIPAL BUILDING REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Number of principal buildings per lot.
      (1)   In the R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, and R-1D, only one dwelling shall be
permitted on any single lot.
      (2)   There can be more than one principal building on an individual lot
in the R-2 and R-3 Districts as well as on an individual lot in all
nonresidential districts.
   (b)   Minimum lot area.
      (1)   Measurements.
         A.   The area of a lot includes the total horizontal surface area
within the lot’s boundaries (lot lines) with the exception of the following.
            1.   If the lot is deeded into the right-of-way, the boundaries for
calculating lot area shall be all area of the lot excluding any area within the
right-of-way.
            2.   For the purposes of measurements, the lot line along Lake Erie
shall be the point where the natural shoreline intersects the ordinary high-
water elevation as determined by the Ohio Department of Natural Resources,
Division of Geological Survey.
         B.   No lot shall be reduced in area or dimensions so as to make said
area or dimensions less than the minimum required by this code; and, if already
less than the minimum required by this code, said area or dimensions shall not
be further reduced. Exceptions to this standard shall only be granted if a
reduction is approved as part of a planned unit development or variance
approval.
      (2)   Zoning lots.
         A.   Where a person proposes to combine two or more platted lots to
meet the lot area requirements, such person shall be required to replat the
combined lots as a single zoning lot.
         B.   A person may also split two lots to combine portions of an
existing lot with adjacent lots.
         C.   Such lot splits and replats shall be recorded with Lorain County
after approval by the city in accordance with the minor subdivision procedure.
See §
1214.04: Minor Subdivisions.
         D.   A principal building may be located across two lots of record
without creating a zoning lot.
      (3)   Lot area requirements.
         A.   Table 1226-1 and Table 1226-2 establish the minimum lot area
requirements for residential districts.
         B.   There are no minimum lot area requirements for nonresidential
districts, however, such lots shall be of a size large enough to allow for all
proposed buildings and required setbacks, off-street parking, loading and
waiting spaces, and all landscaping and screening requirements established in
this code.
 
Table 1226-1: Lot Area Requirements for Residential Zoning Districts
Residential Zoning District Minimum Lot Area Required
R-1A                        15,000 square feet
R-1B                        12,000 square feet [1] [2]
R-1C                        6,500 square feet
R-1D                        4,800 square feet [2] [3]
R-2                         30,000 square feet [4]
R-3                         30,000 square feet [4]
NOTES:
[1] The minimum lot area shall be 12,000 square feet unless the lot is located
within a subdivision identified in Table 1226-2, in which case, the minimum
lot area established in Table 1226-2 shall apply.
[2] In areas where the prevailing lot areas are smaller than the minimum
required according to this table, then the minimum lot area of a newly created
lot shall not be less than the average of the four nearest lots on the same
block face. See Figure 1226-A.
[3] The minimum lot sizes in the R-1D District are to be in accordance with
subdivision plat for the original sublot. Parcel splits and combinations
recorded on Lorain County tax maps subsequent to the original plat recording
shall take precedence if the original parcels have been enlarged. Buildable
lots shall not be smaller than original subdivision plat.
[4] Development in the R-2 and R-3 Districts may include fee simple lots and
condominium lots that do not comply with the minimum lot area but there shall
be a minimum project site of 30,000 square feet.
 
 
Table 1226-2: Minimum Lot Area for Established Subdivisions in the R-1B
District
Subdivision                           Minimum Lot Area (Square Feet) [1]
Avon Center Estates Subdivision No. 1 9,000
Avon Center Estates Subdivision No. 2 10,000
Avon Center Estates Subdivision No. 3 11,000
Avon Lake Harbor Estates Subdivision  8,000
Avon Point Allotment                  11,000
Avon Vineyard Subdivision             11,500
Belden Park Subdivision               10,500
Belmar Beach Subdivision              8,500
Glen Arden Beach Subdivision No. 3    8,500
Lake Breeze Allotment                 8,000
Woodhaven Beach Subdivision No. 2     10,000
NOTE:
[1] The minimum lot area requirement shall only apply to lots in the
applicable subdivision if zoned R-1B.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3190.jpg]
   Figure 1226-A: The above are various applications of how lots, along the
same block face, are considered when averaging the four nearest lots. The
bottom image illustrates an example of a block face where the width of the lots
impacts the proximity of the four lots used for averaging.
   (c)   Maximum density.
      (1)   Calculation.
         A.   The maximum net density of a development with residential uses
shall be calculated as the total number of dwelling units located on any single
acre.
         B.   The maximum gross density of a development with residential uses
shall be calculated as the total number of dwelling units per acre, across the
entire lot (i.e., total number of dwelling units on the lot divided by the
total number of acres of the lot).
      (2)   Maximum density standards.
         A.   The maximum gross density of residential uses in the R-2 District
shall be five units per any single acre when no open space is required.
         B.   The maximum gross density of residential uses in the R-3 District
shall be 12 units per any single acre when no open space is required.
         C.   The Planning Commission shall have the authority to limit the
concentration (net density) of dwelling units on portions of the site based on:
            1.   The density of adjacent residential dwelling units;
            2.   The provision of open space; and
            3.   The overall design of the project and compatibility with goals
as established in the comprehensive plan.
   (d)   Minimum lot width.
      (1)   Measurements.
         A.   Unless otherwise stated, the lot width is the distance between
the side lot lines measured along the minimum front yard setback line.
         B.   The lot width at the street shall be measured along the street
frontage except for lots located on a curved street (e.g., curved or cul-de-sac
lot). In such cases, the lot width at the street shall be measured along a line
tangent to the curve that is at a 90-degree angle from the lot width.
      (2)   Lot width requirements.
         A.   Table 1226-3 and Table 1226-4 establish the minimum lot area
requirements for all zoning districts.
 
Table 1226-3: Minimum Lot Width Requirements for All Districts
                       Minimum Lot Width (Feet)
Zoning District        At the Front Yard At the Street On Corner Lots at the
                       Setback Line                    Street [1]
R-1A                   100               100 [2]       120
R-1B [3]               80 [4]            50            100
R-1C                   50 [5]            50            60
R-1D                   40 [5]            40            60
R-2 and R-3            100 [6]           100 [6]       100 [6]
B-1, B-2, B-3, and P-1 None
I-1 and I-2            200 on primary streets and 100 on all other streets
                       [7]
NOTES:
[1] On corner lots, at least one street frontage shall have a lot width
equal to the larger lot width requirement for corner lots and the second
street frontage shall meet the minimum lot width requirement for all lots in
the applicable district.
[2] In the R-1A District, except in the case of a corner lot, the minimum
lot frontage shall not be less than 100 feet, except on curvilinear streets
and cul-de-sacs, which shall have a minimum lot frontage of 60 feet. This
reduction shall not be permitted for corner lots.
[3] The minimum lot width shall be as established in this table unless the
lot is located within an established subdivision identified in Table 1226-4,
in which case, the minimum lot width requirements of Table 1226-4 shall
apply.
[4] Where a person proposes to combine two or more platted lots to increase
the lot width in the R-1B District, the combined lots may have a reduced lot
width at the minimum front building setback line of 60 feet. Such combined
lots shall be subject to the zoning lot replatting requirements of §
1226.01(b)(2).
[5] In areas where the prevailing lot widths are larger or smaller than the
minimum required according to this table, then the minimum lot width of a
newly created lot shall not be less than the average of the four nearest
lots on the same block face, adjacent to the subject lot. See Figure 1226-A.
[6] Development in the R-2 and R-3 Districts may include fee simple lots and
condominium lots that do not comply with the lot width requirements but the
minimum lot width shall apply to the overall project site.
[7] Primary streets are Lake, Walker, Electric, Miller, Moore, Avon-Belden,
Jaycox and Lear.
 
 
Table 1226-4: Minimum Lot Width for Established Subdivisions in the R-1B
District
Subdivision                           Minimum Lot Width at the Front Yard
                                      Setback Line (Feet)
Avon Center Estates Subdivision No. 1 75
Avon Center Estates Subdivision No. 2 80
Avon Center Estates Subdivision No. 3 80
Avon Lake Harbor Estates Subdivision  80
Avon Point Allotment                  80
Avon Vineyard Subdivision             75
Belden Park Subdivision               75
Belmar Beach Subdivision              80
Glen Arden Beach Subdivision No. 3    80
Lake Breeze Allotment                 80
Woodhaven Beach Subdivision No. 2     80
NOTE:
[1] Where a person proposes to combine two or more platted lots to increase
the lot width in the R-1 B District, the combined lot may have a reduced lot
width at the front building setback line of 60 feet. Such combined lots shall
be subject to the zoning lot replatting requirements of §
1226.01(b)(2).
 
   (e)   Minimum setbacks and yards.
      (1)   Measurements.
         A.   Setbacks refer to the unobstructed, unoccupied open area between
the foundation or base of a structure and the property line (lot line) of the
lot on which the structure is located. Setbacks shall not contain any structure
except when in conformance with this code.
         B.   A setback shall not be reduced in any manner to less than the
required dimensions for the district in which it is located, and a setback of
less than the required dimensions shall not be further reduced in any manner
unless otherwise noted in this code (e.g., nonconforming structures or by
variances).
         C.   Setbacks are measured from the right-of-way line or lot line, as
may be applicable. Where a right-of-way line does not exist (e.g., private
streets), such setback shall be measured from the edge of the street pavement.
      (2)   Yards required for buildings.
         A.   A yard is the open area created by the required setbacks. Where
required, a yard for any structure shall be located on the same lot as the
structure and shall not include any yard or open space areas from an adjacent
lot.
         B.   While a yard is defined as an open area, certain structures and
uses may be permitted in required yards as specified in this code.
         C.   Where the term “required” is used before any yard type, that
required yard shall be the area of the yard between the applicable lot line and
the required yard setback distance from the applicable lot line, regardless of
the presence of a building. See Figure 1226-B.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3192.jpg]
   Figure 1226-B: The above image illustrates the use of the term “required
yards” on a typical interior lot versus the location of the full front, side,
and rear yards as defined in the next sections of this code.
      (3)   Setback exceptions.
         A.   In cases where the side lines of a lot are not perpendicular to
the street line, the Code Administrator may average dimensions in measuring the
width of side yards.
         B.   In cases where the rear line of a lot is not parallel with the
street line, average dimensions may be used in determining the depths of rear
yards.
      (4)   Projections into required yards. Every part of a required yard
shall be open to the sky and unobstructed except:
         A.   As otherwise provided in this section;
         B.   For accessory and temporary uses as allowed in
Chapter 1224: Accessory and Temporary Use Regulations;
         C.   For landscaping as allowed in
Chapter 1232: Landscaping and Screening Standards;
         D.   For parking and circulation as allowed in
Chapter 1234: Parking, Access, and Mobility Standards;
         E.   For signage as allowed in
Chapter 1236: Sign Standards;
         F.   For the ordinary projections of architectural features including,
but not limited to, eaves, gutters, downspouts, flues, skylights, sills, belt
courses, cornices and ornamental features, not extending more than 16 inches
into the required yard;
         G.   Chimneys, not extending more than 24 inches;
         H.   Window air conditioner units;
         I.   Walls and fences as permitted in accordance with §
1226.03: Fences and Walls;
         J.   Unenclosed steps, including fire escapes, may be allowed in the
required front, rear, or side yard setbacks, provided, however that steps and/
or fire escapes shall be no closer than two feet from the side lot line;
         K.   Unenclosed platforms, porches, landings, steps, terrace, decks,
terraces or other similar features not extending above the first-floor level of
a building, or any combination thereof, may extend six feet into the required
front yard setback and rear yard setback, and three feet into the required side
yard setback. Such encroachment shall not cover more than 50% of the applicable
facade width; and
         L.   Fixed and retractable awnings and canopies, not extending more
than two feet into a required setback.
      (5)   Interior lots.
         A.   Unless otherwise stated, the required minimum front yard setback
shall be measured from the street right-of-way or, where a right-of-way is not
identified, the front lot line. See Figure 1226-C.
         B.   The lot line located directly behind the rear of the structure,
as determined by the Code Administrator, shall be the rear lot line and the
rear yard setback shall be applied. See Figure 1226-C.
         C.   All other lot lines shall be considered the side lot line and the
side yard setback shall be applied. See Figure 1226-C.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3194.jpg]
   Figure 1226-C: Typical setback and yard locations for an interior lot.
      (6)   Corner lots. Lots that have street frontage on two intersecting
streets shall be considered a corner lot, subject to the following.
         A.   For corner lots, there shall be one street frontage with a longer
lot width, at the street, as required by Table 1226-3. The second street
frontage shall have a lot width, at the street, equal to that of all other lots
in the applicable zoning district as set forth in Table 1226-3.
         B.   The required minimum front yard setback shall be provided from
each street right- of-way or, where a right-of-way is not identified, the lot
line adjacent to the street. See Figure 1226-D. An alley shall not be
considered a street for the purposes of determining a corner lot.
         C.   The lot line that runs parallel with the lot line along the
narrowest street frontage shall be the rear lot line and the minimum rear yard
setback shall be applied from such lot line. See Figure 1226-D.
         D.   All other lot lines shall be a side lot line and the minimum side
yard setback shall be applied from such lot lines. See Figure 1226-D.
         E.   Such setbacks and yard locations shall apply, regardless of the
orientation of the building.
         F.   Buildings on corner lots may also be oriented toward the corner
of the lot, in which case, the setbacks and yard locations shall be as
illustrated in Figure 1226-E.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3196.jpg]
   Figure 1226-D: Typical setback and yard locations for a corner lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3196.jpg]
   Figure 1226-E: Typical setback and yard locations for a corner lot where the
building is oriented toward the corner of the lot.
      (7)   Double frontage (through) lots. Double frontage lots shall be
discouraged and shall only be approved if necessitated by unique topographic
features or other special physical conditions as deemed necessary by the
Planning Commission. Double frontage lots shall be subject to the following
regulations:
         A.   Where a lot is considered a double (through lot) lot, the
required minimum front yard setback shall be provided on all lot lines that
abut a street. See Figure 1226-F.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3200.jpg]
   Figure 1226-F: Typical setback and yard locations for a double frontage
(through) lot.
         B.   The remaining lot lines not abutting a public road right-of-way
shall be considered as side yards and shall have the required minimum side yard
setback provided for each side lot line. See Figure 1226-F.
         C.   For the purposes of allowing accessory uses, including fences,
which are allowed in a rear yard, the yard that is located to the rear of the
principal building shall be considered the rear yard and the setbacks of §
1224.01(b)(12), shall apply to all accessory uses or structures. Such accessory
uses or structures shall not be permitted in the required front yard areas
adjacent to each street.
         D.   Where alleys exist in the city, any lots that have frontage along
the alley shall be not be considered a double frontage (through) lot and shall
either be regulated as an interior lot or corner lot depending on the location
of the subject lot within the block.
      (8)   Flag (panhandle) lots. Panhandle lots (flag) lots shall be
discouraged and shall only be approved if necessitated by unique topographic
features or other special physical conditions as deemed necessary by the
Planning Commission. Panhandle (flag) lots shall be subject to the following
regulations.
         A.   Panhandle (flag) lots shall not be used to avoid the construction
of a street.
         B.   The area of the “panhandle” portion of the lot connecting the lot
to the public street shall not be included in the area of the lot for the
purposes of determining compliance with the required minimum lot area for the
district in which the lot is located.
         C.   The stacking of panhandle (flag) lots shall be prohibited. See
Figure 1226-G.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3202.jpg]
   Figure 1226-G: The above illustration shows the stacking of panhandle lots,
which is prohibited.
         D.   The panhandle shall have a minimum width of 20 feet along the
entire width of the panhandle. The maximum width shall be 40 feet and anything
with a width of 40 feet or greater shall be consider an interior, corner, or
double frontage lot as may be applicable.
         E.   No structures, except for fences and walls allowed by this code,
shall be permitted in the panhandle portion of the lot.
         F.   The minimum front yard setback requirement shall be measured from
the lot line that creates the rear lot line of the adjacent lot as illustrated
in Figure 1226-H.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3204.jpg]
   Figure 1226-H: Typical setback and yard locations for a panhandle lot.
      (9)   Cul-de-sac or curved-street lot. For a cul-de-sac lot or a lot
abutting a curved street, the front-yard setback shall follow the curve of the
front property line (lot line). See Figure 1226-I.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3206.jpg]
   Figure 1226-I: Typical setback and yard locations for a curved street or
cul-de-sac.
      (10)   Other lot configurations. Where there is an instance of a lot
configuration not addressed in the previous sections (e.g., interior, corner,
panhandle and the like), or where there is an atypical building orientation on
any lot, the Code Administrator shall have the authority to make a
determination regarding where front, rear and side yard setbacks are required.
      (11)   Minimum setback requirements.
         A.   Setbacks required for accessory uses are established in §
1224.01: Accessory Uses and Structures.
         B.   Tables Table 1226-5, Table 1226-6 and Table 1226-7 establish the
minimum setback requirements for principal buildings in the residential zoning
districts.
 
Table 1226-5: Minimum Setback Requirements for Residential Districts
Required Setback   Minimum Setback in Feet
                   R-1A R-1B       R-1C   R-1D  R-2 and R-3
Front yard setback 50   50 [1] [2] 20 [3] 20[3] 30
Side yard setback  10   10 [4]     4      4     35 [5]
Rear yard setback  35   35         20     20    35 [5]
NOTES:
[1] For corner lots in the R-1B District, the minimum front yard setback
from the street to the side of the principal structure may be reduced to
15 feet provided it does not reduce the buildable width of the lot to less
than 25 feet.
[2] The minimum front yard setback shall be as established in this table
unless the lot is located on designated streets within a subdivision
identified in Table 1226-6, in which case, the minimum front yard setback
established in Table 1226-6 shall apply unless the prevailing front yard
setbacks are larger than the minimum required according to Table 1226-6,
then the minimum front yard setback shall not be less than the average of
the four nearest lots on the same block face. See Figure 1226-A.
[3] The front yard setback for lots fronting on Lake Road, Walker Road,
Avon-Belden Road, Lear Road, Jaycox Road, Moor Road, Miller Road, and
Electric Avenue shall be increased to 30 feet.
[4] In areas where the prevailing side yard setbacks are smaller than the
minimum required according to this table, then the minimum side yard
setback shall not be less than the average of the four nearest lots on the
same block face. See Figure 1226-A.
[5] Where the R-2 or R-3 District is adjacent to any other R-2 or R-
3 District, or any nonresidential zoning district, the side and rear yard
setbacks may be reduced to 20 feet.
 
 
Table 1226-6: Minimum Front Yard Setbacks for Established Subdivisions in the
R-1B District
                                      Minimum Front Yard Setback as Measured
Subdivision                           from the Established Centerline of the
                                      Street
Avon Center Estates Subdivision No. 1 70
Avon Center Estates Subdivision No. 2 70
Avon Center Estates Subdivision No. 3 80
Avon Lake Harbor Estates Subdivision  55
Avon Point Allotment                  70
Avon Vineyard Subdivision             80
Belden Park Subdivision               70
Belmar Beach Subdivision              60
Glen Arden Beach Subdivision No. 3    60
Lake Breeze Allotment                 70
Woodhaven Beach Subdivision No. 2     65
 
 
Table 1226-7: Minimum Setback Requirements for Nonresidential Districts
Required Setback                                  Minimum Setback in Feet
                                                  B-1 B-2 B-3 I-1 I-2 P-I
Front yard setback for lots with frontage on Lear 40  40  0   60  60  20
road
Front yard setback                                30  30  0   60  60  20
Front yard setback of a corner lot adjoining the
secondary street in a nonresidential zoning                   30  30
district
Side and rear yard setbacks adjacent to a         35  35  20  75  75  10 Side
residential zoning district                                           20 Rear
Side and rear yard setbacks adjacent to a         10  10  5   25  25  10 Side
nonresidential zoning district                                        20 Rear
 
   (f)   Minimum building separation in the R-2 and R-3 Districts. In order to
ensure adequate privacy for each dwelling unit, the minimum spacing between
buildings shall be determined by the types of walls facing each other and shall
be the greater of the distances required below.
      (1)   When neither of the two walls facing each other contains windows,
patios or decks, or the windows are in non-living areas, the two dwellings
shall be separated by a minimum of 15 feet for single-family dwellings and a
minimum of ten feet for multi-family dwellings.
      (2)   When one or both of the walls facing each other contain windows,
other than primary windows of living areas, the two dwellings shall be
separated by a minimum of 20 feet for single-family dwellings and a minimum of
15 feet for multi-family dwellings.
      (3)   When one or both of the walls facing each other contain primary
windows of living areas or the rear yard area where patios or decks are or
could be located, the two dwellings shall be separated by a minimum of 25 feet
for single-family dwellings, a minimum of 20 feet for multi-family dwellings.
      (4)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply: “living areas” shall include living rooms, family rooms, great rooms,
bedrooms, dining rooms and kitchens; “primary window” means any window in a
living space having a sill height of 60 inches or less above the floor.
      (5)   The Planning Commission, however, may consider the use of vision-
obscuring landscaping or other site, building or design features between
adjacent walls as providing adequate privacy for each dwelling unit and thus
approve lesser spacing between walls than required above.
   (g)   Maximum height.
      (1)   Calculation.
         A.   Building height shall be measured as the vertical distance from
average elevation of the finished grade to the mid-point between the eaves and
the peak line of the highest roof for any sloped roof or to the highest point
of a flat roof, excluding architectural features (e.g., vents, cupolas, weather
vanes, chimneys and the like), roof embellishments, or chimney extensions.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3208.jpg]
   Figure 1226-J: Measurement of building or structure height.
         B.   Where specified fencing and wall height shall be measured in
accordance with §
1226.03: Fences and Walls.
         C.   The height of all other structures shall be measured from the
lowest grade adjacent to the structure to the highest point of the structure.
      (2)   Exceptions to height limits. The maximum height limits established
in this code shall not apply to:
         A.   Barns, silos or other agricultural buildings or structures on
farms (not located in an improved platted subdivision) provided they are
setback from all lot lines a distance equal to the structure’s height provided
the Planning Commission approves such additional height as part of the
conditional use approval;
         B.   Spires, belfries, cupolas and domes, monuments, chimneys,
smokestacks, towers, water tanks, radio or television antennas, monuments and
other permitted mechanical appurtenances located upon or constructed as an
integral part of the principal building;
         C.   Governmentally-owned freestanding water tanks, towers, radio or
television antennas and flag poles;
         D.   Special industrial or utility structures such as a cooling tower,
grain elevator and other similar structure where the industrial process
requires a greater height may be erected above the maximum height allowed in
the applicable district, provided that:
            1.   Any such structure shall not occupy more than 15% of the lot
area;
            2.   The structure shall be set back a distance equal to its height
from any adjacent lot line; and
            3.   The Fire Department shall be required to approve the increased
height based on firefighting capacity.
      (3)   Maximum height standards.
         A.   Table 1226-8 establishes the maximum building height for
principal buildings.
         B.   The maximum height of accessory structures is established in §
1224.01(b)(10).
 
Table 1226-8: Maximum Height of Principal Buildings
Zoning District     Maximum Height in Feet
R-1A, R-1B and R-1C 35
R-1D                26
R-2 and R-3         45
B-1 and B-2         45
B-3                 35
I-1 and I-2         45
P-I                 45
 
   (h)   Minimum floor area for dwelling units.
      (1)   Calculation.
         A.   The minimum floor area of a dwelling unit shall include all
finished and habitable spaces including the basement floor area when more than
one-half of the basement height is above the finished lot grade level at the
front of the building.
         B.   Garages, outdoor patios, porches or decks, and accessory
buildings shall not be included in the minimum floor area of a dwelling.
         C.   Such requirements shall only apply to single-family dwellings and
multi-family dwellings, shall not apply to hospitals, nursing homes, or similar
types of residential uses that are institutional in nature.
      (2)   Minimum floor area requirements.
         A.   In the R-1A, R-1B and R-1C Districts, the minimum floor area for
dwellings shall be 1,000 square feet.
         B.   In the R-1D District, the minimum floor area for dwellings shall
be 750 square feet.
         C.   For multi-family dwellings in the R-2 and R-3 District, there
shall be a minimum floor area of 700 square feet for all units that have
internal entries (e.g., apartment buildings) and a minimum of 1,000 square feet
for all units that have exterior entries (e.g., townhomes or rowhouses).
   (i)   Maximum lot coverage. 
      (1)   Calculation. Where used, lot coverage is that portion of a lot, or
a specified yard, which when viewed directly above, which would be covered by a
building or structure, parking and loading areas and other surfaces that are
impermeable or substantially impervious to water. Such surfaces shall also
include any material that provides a significant barrier to the absorption of
stormwater into the ground located directly below the material such as, but not
limited to: asphalt, concrete, roofed structures and the like. Decks, pervious
paver blocks and other materials that are designed with adequate openings to
allow stormwater to pass through the material into the ground shall not count
as an impervious surface. The Code Administrator shall have the final
determination of what structures and materials are considered impervious
surfaces.
      (2)   Maximum lot coverage standards.
         A.   The maximum lot coverage in the R-1A District shall be 40% of the
total lot.
         B.   The maximum lot coverage in the I-1 and I-2 Districts shall be
75%.
   (j)   Building orientation. The main entrance of any building shall be
oriented toward a public street. For corner lots in residential zoning
districts, a dwelling unit may be oriented toward the intersection of the two
streets.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021; Ord. 23-46, passed 3-13-2023; Ord. 25-109,
passed 6-23-2025)
§ 1226.02 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   No land or structure in any zoning district shall be used or occupied in any
manner to create a dangerous or objectionable condition, substance or element,
in such a manner or in such amount to adversely affect the adjoining premises
or surrounding area. If any existing use or building is extended, enlarged or
reconstructed, the performance standards for the district involved shall apply
to such extended, enlarged or reconstructed part or parts of such building or
use as well.
   (a)   Compliance with state and federal regulations. All uses shall comply
with all applicable state and federal Environmental Protection Agency,
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq., and all other state and
federal regulations that pertain to the applicable use.
   (b)   Enclosures.
      (1)   The repainting, rebuilding, overhauling or dismantling of a vehicle
or the storage of tires, motor, or body parts in a right-of-way or an open yard
is prohibited.
      (2)   All uses and operations, except off-street parking and loading
facilities, shall be performed wholly within enclosed buildings in all
districts except the I-1 or I-2 Districts, unless specifically permitted
otherwise.
   (c)   Air pollution.
      (1)   The emission of smoke, soot, fly ash, fumes and dust shall be
controlled by precipitation devices, height of stack, rate of emission or other
manner so that the quantity deposited in any zoning district shall not be
detrimental to or endanger the public safety, comfort, welfare or adversely
affect property values. In addition, no use shall emit fly ash, dust, vapors or
other substances that are harmful to health, animals, vegetation or other
property or which can cause excessive soiling. Any such activities shall only
be allowed as permitted and approved by the Ohio EPA Division of Air Pollution
Control.
      (2)   Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from
sources such as parking areas, storage areas or yards shall be kept to a
minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling or other acceptable
treatment.
   (d)   Fire and explosive hazards.
      (1)   The storage, utilization and manufacture of materials, goods or
products ranging from free to active burning is permitted, provided the
materials or products shall be stored, utilized or produced within completely
enclosed structures having incombustible exterior walls, and such structure
shall be protected throughout by an automatic sprinkler system complying with
installation standards prescribed by the National Fire Protection Association.
Such activities shall be restricted to the I-1 and I-2 Districts only.
      (2)   Materials which produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases
under ordinary weather temperatures shall not be permitted in any district
except such materials as are used or required in emergency equipment or in
secondary processes which are accessory to the main use.
   (e)   Heat.
      (1)   In all zoning districts except the I-2 District, no use shall
generate heat that is perceptible without the aid of instruments at any point
beyond the lot occupied by the use.
      (2)   In the I-2 District, no use shall generate heat or glare that is
perceptible without the aid of instruments at any point beyond the zoning
district boundary.
   (f)   Odor.
      (1)   In all zoning districts except the I-2 District, the emission of
odorous matter in such quantities as to produce a public nuisance or hazard
outside the building is prohibited.
      (2)   In the I-2 District, the emission of odorous matter in such
quantities as to produce a public nuisance or hazard shall not be detectable
beyond the lot occupied by the use generating the emission.
   (g)   Toxic or noxious matter. The discharge of toxic or noxious matter
across the lot lines wherein such a use is located is prohibited for any period
of time and in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or endanger the
public health, safety, comfort or welfare or cause injury or damage to
property.
   (h)   Noise. The sound pressure level of any individual operation or
operations on a lot in any industrial district, other than the operation of
auto calls, bells, motor vehicles, sirens or whistles, shall not exceed the
average intensity of the street traffic noise at the nearest residential
district or business district.
   (i)   Vibration. Operations creating intense earth-shaking vibrations in the
shall be set back from and controlled in such a manner as to prevent
transmission of vibrations which would be perceptible without the aid of
instruments at the lot line of the applicable property.
   (j)   Industrial wastes. Pollution control standards as required by this
section shall be those which are set forth in the rules and regulations of the
Avon Lake Regional Water regarding discharge of waste waters.
   (k)   Solid and liquid waste.
      (1)   Solid waste, including empty packing crates and other excess
materials, shall be regularly disposed of, stored in buildings, screened by
solid walls or fences, or completely enclosed in containers or dumpsters, and
shall not be permitted to accumulate on any lot.
      (2)   Containers and dumpsters shall be located in a side or rear yard on
a paved surface in compliance with the minimum parking setbacks established in
§ 1234.06: Setback Requirements and the screening requirements set forth in
Chapter 1232: Landscaping and Screening Standards.
      (3)   If liquid wastes are disposed of in containers, they shall be
appropriate containers, and the wastes shall be removed from the site on a
regular basis.
   (l)   Radioactive or electrical disturbances.
      (1)   No activity shall emit dangerous radioactivity at any point or
electrical discharges affecting the operation, at any point, of any equipment
other than that of the creator of such disturbances.
      (2)   Such disturbances shall be confined to the use and lot from which
they originate and shall not occur across any lot line.
      (3)   The handling of radioactive materials, the discharge of such
materials into the air and water, and the disposal of radioactive wastes shall
be in conformity with the applicable regulations of the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission and the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency.
   (m)   Infectious and medical waste materials. The storage, incineration or
disposal of infectious or medical waste materials in such a manner or in such
quantities as to produce a public nuisance or a hazard to the public health and
welfare of the community shall not be permitted.
   (n)   Soil removal. No mining, extracting, filling or soil-stripping
operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to leave unsightly or
dangerous excavations or soil banks, or in such a manner as to increase
erosion.
   (o)   Stormwater facilities. Detention/retention facilities that are visible
from a public street shall landscaped and maintained as part of the site’s
required landscaping areas. Such landscaped areas shall contain any combination
of the following elements: shade and ornamental trees, evergreens, shrubbery,
hedges, and/or other planting materials as well as ornamental fencing.
   (p)   Enforcement. Where determinations can be made by the Code
Administrator or other authorized city employee, using equipment normally
available or obtainable without extraordinary expense, such determinations or
evaluation shall be made whenever possible before a notice of violation is
issued. Where technical complexity or extraordinary personnel or equipment is
required to make the determination, the Code Administrator may, in the case of
the offenses under this section, require the owner to either obtain and pay for
an independent survey or share in the cost of an independent survey from a
professional engineer experienced in the particular specialty.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1226.03 FENCES AND WALLS.
   (a)   Zoning permit required.
      (1)   No person shall construct or erect a fence or wall without first
obtaining an approved zoning permit.
      (2)   Zoning permits are not required for repairs of existing fences or
walls, or for invisible fences. However, such work or structures are still
subject to the applicable standards of this section. Zoning permits are also
not required for the replacement of a previously permitted and conforming fence
or wall. Replacement of nonconforming fences or walls shall be subject to
division (b)(13) of this section.
      (3)   A zoning permit is not required for fence or wall structures that
are less than two feet in height,
      (4)   A zoning permit shall not be required for short sections of fencing
or walls that are designed as an architectural feature or utilized for
decorative purposes and are not intended to enclose an area of land. Such
sections shall not exceed 25 feet in length and shall comply with the vision
clearance requirements of this code.
      (5)   Hedges, shrubbery, trees, bushes and plantings shall be excluded
from classification as fences but shall be subject to the vision clearance
requirements of this code.
      (6)   Retaining walls required and/or approved by the Public Works
Department shall not be subject to the requirements of this section.
   (b)   General requirements.
      (1)   Unless a specific distinction is made in this section, any
regulation that applies to fences shall apply to walls and vice versa.
      (2)   All fences and walls shall be subject to the vision clearance
requirements of §
1226.05: Intersection Visibility.
      (3)   All fences and walls, including invisible fences, and any related
supporting structures or appurtenances, shall be contained within the lot lines
of the applicable lot and shall not encroach into adjoining or abutting lots
and/or rights-of-way. Property owners, with written permission from abutting
property owners, may connect to fences or walls on adjoining properties.
      (4)   A zoning permit shall be required for each property on which a
fence or wall is being placed, including connection of existing fences or
walls. Such applications shall also include written documentation of agreement
between property owners.
      (5)   The smooth finished side of the fence or wall shall be the side of
the fence that faces outward from the lot or yard being fenced. If a fence has
two similarly finished sides, either side may face the adjacent property.
      (6)   All diagonal or supporting members shall face the property on which
the fence or wall is constructed.
      (7)   All sides of a decorative wall shall have an equal finish.
      (8)   All fences and walls shall be maintained in a neat and orderly
manner.
      (9)   Walls shall be prohibited within all utility easements. Fences that
are placed in utility easements shall require the written permission from the
applicable utility and without such permission, are subject to removal without
notice by utility companies or the city when work is being done in the utility
easements. Fences shall not be placed in any city easement unless the plat
specifically permits the placement of such fence. Replacement of fences removed
by the city or utility company shall be at the property owner’s expense.
      (10)   Fences and walls shall not impede, inhibit or obstruct culverts,
drains, natural watercourses or stormwater drainage in any zoning district.
Fences or walls may be permitted to include outlets at the bottom of the fence
or wall to eliminate the possibility of the accumulation of water and allow for
natural drainage past the wall or fence.
      (11)   Fences and walls for conditional uses shall be comply with the
standards of this section unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission
as part of the conditional use review procedure.
      (12)   It shall be the duty of each lot owner and contractor, or an agent
thereof, to determine lot lines and to ascertain that the fence or wall does
not deviate from the plans as approved by the Code Administrator issuing the
zoning permit, and that the fence does not encroach on another lot or existing
easement. The issuance of the zoning permit and any inspection by the city
shall not be construed to mean that the city has determined the fence is not
encroaching on another lot, nor shall it relieve the property owner of the duty
imposed on him or her herein.
      (13)   Nonconforming fences and walls.
         A.   Where a nonconforming fence or wall is to be maintained or
repaired, such nonconforming fence or wall may continue to exist. Repair or
maintenance shall include any general maintenance of a fence or wall while
still in place or a portion of a fence or wall may be removed temporarily for
repair or maintenance work provided the same fence or wall is replaced in the
same position.
         B.   If 50% or more of the length of a nonconforming fence or wall is
to be removed and replaced, even as part of maintenance, such replacement shall
conform with the requirements of this code and shall require the issuance of a
new zoning permit.
   (c)   Measurement.
      (1)   The maximum fence or wall height shall be measured from the lowest
point within three feet on either side of the fence to the top most portion of
the fence between posts. See Figure 1226-K. The structure posts or finials may
exceed the maximum height allowed in this section by up to six inches.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3210.jpg]
   Figure 1226-K: Illustration of the measurement of the height of a fence
based on the grade.
      (2)   Fencing or walls should follow the natural contour of the land on
which it is located. See Figure 1226-L.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3212.jpg]
   Figure 1226-L: This illustrates how fencing is measured along a natural
contour.
      (3)   A grading permit may be required in cases where the applicant
proposes altering the natural contour.
      (4)   A fence may be erected on top of a wall but the combined height of
the fence and wall shall not exceed the heights specified within this section
for a fence or wall. Fences or walls located on top of a retaining wall shall
be measured from the top of the finished grade at the top of the retaining
wall.
   (d)   Fences and walls in residential districts. The following standards
apply to fences and walls in residential districts.
      (1)   Only one single fence or wall shall be constructed, erected and/or
maintained on any individual lot when located within ten feet of any of the lot
lines.
      (2)   Table 1226-9 establishes the maximum height, location, and types of
fences and walls permitted in residential districts.
      (3)   For the purpose of these regulations, an “open fence” shall be any
fence intended for decorative purposes having at least 50% of its vertical
surface area open as viewed at right angles and uniformly distributed.
      (4)   The requirements for swimming pool protective barriers shall take
precedence where such requirements are in conflict with the regulations of this
section.
      (5)   Where the side lot line of one residential property is also the
rear lot line of another property, that portion of the fence along the side lot
line that abuts the adjoining property’s rear lot line, and that is installed
at such property line, shall be permitted rear yard regulations of this
section.
 
Table 1226-9: Fences and Walls in Residential Districts
Type of Fence or Wall         Yard in Which Permitted Maximum Height Permitted
Vinyl coated chain link fence Side and rear           4 feet
Open fence                    Front                   3 feet [1]
                              Side                    4 feet
                              Rear                    6 feet [2]
Solid fence or wall           Side                    4 feet
                              Rear                    6 feet
NOTES:
[1] A 4-foot open fence may be constructed in front of a dwelling provided
that the length of such fence does not extend past the side walls of the house
or across a driveway and provided it is set back from the right-of-way line a
minimum of 75% of the minimum front building setback for the district.
[2] Trellises up to 16 feet in total length may exceed the maximum permitted
height when located in the rear yard adjacent to, and between the side walls,
of the dwelling.
 
   (e)   Fences and walls in nonresidential districts. The following standards
apply to fences and walls in nonresidential districts.
      (1)   No fence or wall shall be, in any way, electrified or topped with
any sharp-edged materials with the exception of fences in the I-1 and I-
2 Districts where fences may be topped with barbed wire. Such barbed-wire shall
be placed on a 45-degree angle, arm away from the side of the fence that fronts
a property or right-of-way line. Such barbed wire shall only be located along
the top of a fence and shall not extend below the top of the fence more than
12-inches.
      (2)   No fence shall exceed eight feet in height in any rear or side
yard, or exceed three feet in height in any front yard. In the I-1 and I-
2 Districts, any fence in a front yard that is set back a minimum of 60 feet
shall be permitted to have a maximum height of eight feet.
      (3)   Any proposed fence shall be approved as part of the site plan
review in accordance with this code.
   (f)   Temporary fences. Fences erected for a specific function and limited
time duration, including deer, snow or construction fencing, are permitted as
follows and in compliance with the following requirements.
      (1)   Temporary fences shall be maintained in good condition and shall
not require a zoning permit.
      (2)   No temporary fencing material shall be used for permanent fencing.
      (3)   Snow fencing.
         A.   Snow fencing shall be permitted between November 1 of any year
and April 1 of the following year.
         B.   Snow fencing shall not exceed four feet in height.
         C.   Fencing materials shall be limited to burlap, plastic mesh fabric
of a neutral or dark color, any clear plastic material or wood slat fencing
(traditional snow fence) with wood or metal supports.
         D.   Snow fencing shall be erected on private property only and
positioned on the site so as not to obstruct the view of pedestrians or
vehicular traffic or be detrimental to public safety.
         E.   Snow fencing shall not cause an artificial or unnatural
accumulation of snow or drifting to accumulate on the property of another in
excess of that which would otherwise accumulate in the absence of such fence.
      (4)   Construction fencing: construction fencing to enclose an active
construction site for the duration of the construction period.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1226.04 OUTDOOR LIGHTING.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to control the installation of
exterior lighting fixtures to prevent light pollution in the forms of light
trespass and glare and to preserve, protect and enhance the character of the
city and the lawful nighttime use and enjoyment of property located within the
city. Appropriate site lighting, including lights for signs, buildings and
streets, shall be arranged so as to provide safety, utility and security;
control light trespass and glare on adjacent properties and public roadways.
   (b)   Applicability. The standards of this section shall apply to all
development activities, subject to review under this code, with the following
exceptions.
      (1)   Lighting related to single-family dwellings are exempt, however,
all lighting for these uses, with the exception of low-voltage landscaping
lighting, shall be completely shielded from adjacent properties.
      (2)   Decorative outdoor lighting fixtures with bulbs of less than 25
watts, installed seasonally, are exempt from the requirements of this section.
      (3)   Fully shielded decorative lighting attached to a building or placed
in landscaping and directed onto a building shall be exempt from the
requirements of this section, provided direct light emissions are not intended
to be visible above the building’s roof line. This shall not include decorative
lighting used to illuminate a sign, which is regulated by Chapter 1236: Sign
Standards.
      (4)   Light fixtures used to illuminate flags, statues and any other
objects mounted on a pole, pedestal, or platform shall be exempt from the
requirements of this section, provided these objects are illuminated using a
narrow cone beam or light fixtures designed to minimize light spillage beyond
the illuminated object.
      (5)   Lighting for certain outdoor recreational uses because of their
unique requirements for nighttime visibility and their limited hours of
operation. However, such uses, which includes, but is not limited to, ball
diamonds, playing fields, tennis courts and other similar outdoor recreational
uses shall be required to meet the following standards.
         A.   Cutoff from a lighting source that illuminates an outdoor
recreational use may exceed an angle of 90 degrees from the pole, provided that
the luminaries are shielded to prevent light and glare to spill over to
adjacent residential properties.
         B.   The maximum permitted illumination at the lot lines shall be two
footcandles.
         C.   Exterior lighting for an outdoor recreational use shall be
extinguished no later than 11:00 p.m.
      (6)   Temporary construction or emergency lighting is exempt from the
requirements of this section. Such lighting shall be discontinued immediately
upon completion of the construction work or abatement of the emergency
necessitating such lighting.
      (7)   Nothing in this chapter shall apply to lighting required by the FAA
or any other federal regulatory authority.
      (8)   Nothing in this chapter shall apply to street lighting installed in
rights-of-way.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3214.jpg]
   Figure 1226-M: Cutoff or shielded lighting fixtures (left) as compared to
non-cutoff lighting fixtures (right).
   (c)   Exterior lighting plan.
      (1)   A lighting plan is required for all uses that are required to file
for site plan review and shall be approved according to the procedures set
forth in § 1214.06: Site Plans. The lighting plan shall demonstrate compliance
with the requirements of this section. However, a photometric study of the
illumination shall only be required when a multi-family dwelling with ten or
more units or a nonresidential use is proposed to be located adjacent to a lot
in a residential district or that is occupied by an existing residential use.
      (2)   All existing uses on which outdoor lighting is installed or changed
shall conform to these standards.
      (3)   The lighting plan shall demonstrate compliance with the outdoor
lighting standards of this section.
   (d)   General requirements.
      (1)   All outdoor lighting fixtures regulated according to this section,
including but not limited to those used for parking areas, buildings, building
overhangs, canopies, signs, displays and landscaping, shall be full-cutoff type
fixtures, unless exempted per division (b) of this section.
         A.   Any use that has a canopy with lighting fixtures attached to the
bottom of the canopy shall utilize recessed ceiling fixtures.
         B.   Signs that are wholly illuminated from within and freestanding
signs that are externally illuminated with an exposed incandescent lamp not
exceeding 40 watts shall not require shielding.
      (2)   All on-site lighting of buildings, lawns, parking areas and signs
shall be designed so as not to shine onto any adjacent residential property or
building, or to cause glare onto any public street or vehicle thereon.
      (3)   Illumination is required consistently across the site shall be
designed so as not to create dark spots that may create safety issues in such
areas as vehicular use areas and connecting pedestrian paths.
      (4)   For all nonresidential uses in any residential district, all
outdoor lighting fixtures, including parking, display and aesthetic lighting,
shall be turned off after business hours. Only that lighting needed for safety
or security may remain lit after close of business, in which case the lighting
shall be reduced to the minimum level necessary.
      (5)   There shall be a maximum illumination of 0.5 footcandles at the lot
line in all residential districts and for any nonresidential use that abuts a
lot in a residential zoning district or lot occupied by an existing residential
use.
      (6)   Measurement.
         A.   Light levels shall be measured in foot-candles with a direct
reading, portable light meter. Readings shall be taken only after the cell has
been exposed long enough to take a constant reading.
         B.   Measurements shall be taken at the property line, along a
horizontal plane at a height of three and one-half feet above the ground.
      (7)   Maximum height of light poles: the total height of exterior
lighting poles shall not exceed the following height regulations. Height shall
be measured from the average grade surrounding each light pole:
 
Table 1226-10: Maximum Height of Light Poles
Districts:                       Maximum Height
All residential districts        20 feet
B-1, B-2, B-3, and P-I Districts 24 feet
I-1 and I-2 Districts            30 feet
Planned unit developments        To be determined during plan review
 
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1226.05 INTERSECTION VISIBILITY.
   (a)   In order to provide a clear view to the motorist there shall be a
triangular area of clear visibility that is free of any obstructions where
there is an intersection of two or more streets and/or where a driveway
intersects with a street.
   (b)   Where a street intersects with another street, the triangular areas
shall be defined by measuring 25 feet from the intersection of the extension of
the front and side street curb lines (or the edge of pavement where there is no
curb) and connecting the lines across the property. See Figure 1226-N.
   (c)   Where a driveway intersects a street, the triangular areas shall be
defined by measuring 20 feet from the edge of the driveway along the street and
ten feet along the driveway, perpendicular from the street. See Figure 1226-N.
   (d)   These standards shall not apply to driveways for single-family
dwellings or multi-family dwellings with six or fewer dwelling units.
   (e)   The Code Administrator may reduce the distance requirement where it is
determined that a narrow lot frontage would excessively reduce buildable area.
   (f)   No structure, sign or landscape element shall exceed 30 inches in
height, measured from the top of the curb, within the area established above,
unless approved by the Community Development Department. Trees may be located
within these areas provided they are pruned and/or the canopy is trimmed to
provide clear visibility (with the exception of the tree trunk) up to eight
feet above the top of the curb.
   (g)   Where no curb exists, the height shall be measured from the top of the
pavement.
   (h)   The Ohio Department of Transportation may impose additional
restrictions along state or federal routes.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3216.jpg]
   Figure 1226-N: Intersection visibility area for two intersecting streets.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021; Ord. 24-33, passed 3-25-2024)
CHAPTER 1228: ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS
Section
1228.01 Purpose
1228.02 Applicability
1228.03 Architectural standards for multi-family dwellings
1228.04 Architectural standards for nonresidential buildings
1228.05 Historic preservation
§ 1228.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to encourage development that contributes to
the city’s sense of place, reflecting the community’s vision for high-quality
development. The standards of this chapter are intended to ensure that
development and redevelopment contribute to the character and attractiveness of
core districts, major uses, gateways and corridors in the city.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1228.02 APPLICABILITY.
   The following principal buildings shall be subject to the standards of this
chapter unless otherwise stated:
   (a)   New multi-family dwellings in all R-2, R-3, MUO and RPD Districts;
   (b)   New principal buildings in the B-1, B-2, B-3, I-1, I-2, and P-
I Districts; and
   (c)   New nonresidential, principal buildings in any MUO District, including
mixed-use buildings that contain residential uses.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021; Ord. 23-46, passed 3-13-2023)
§ 1228.03 ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS FOR MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS.
   The standards of this section shall apply to all multi-family dwellings.
   (a)   All siding shall be either horizontal or vertical in placement.
   (b)   Front facades shall incorporate variation in mass through one or more
of the following methods every 50 feet of facade frontage:
      (1)   Wall offsets in the form of projections and/or recesses in the
facade plane; wall offsets shall have a minimum depth of two feet;
      (2)   Bay windows;
      (3)   Facade color changes;
      (4)   Use of pilasters, columns or other detailing to articulate the
facades; or
      (5)   Roofline changes when coupled with correspondingly aligned facade
material changes.
   (c)   In addition to wall offsets, front facades and side facades on
buildings on corner lots shall provide a minimum of three of the following
design features for each residential unit fronting onto the street:
      (1)   One or more dormer windows or cupolas;
      (2)   A recessed entrance;
      (3)   A covered porch;
      (4)   Pillars, posts or pilasters;
      (5)   One or more bay windows with a minimum of 12-inch projection from
the facade plane;
      (6)   Eaves with a minimum of six-inch projection from the facade plane;
      (7)   A parapet wall with an articulated design, which entails design
variation rather than a simple rectilinear form; or
      (8)   Multiple windows with a minimum of four-inch-wide trim.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3218.jpg]
   Figure 1228-A: Illustrative example of acceptable architectural design for
multi-family dwellings.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3220.jpg]
   Figure 1228-B: Illustrative example of unacceptable architectural design for
multi-family dwellings.
   (d)   To the maximum extent practicable, all roof vents, pipes, antennas,
satellite dishes and other roof penetrations and equipment (except chimneys)
shall be located on the rear elevations or configured to have a minimal visual
impact as seen from the street. See §
1228.04(e) and §
1232.05: Screening Requirements.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1228.04 ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS FOR NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS.
   Any nonresidential principal building in the B-1, B-2, B-3, MUO, I-1, I-2,
and P-I Districts shall be subject to the following standards, including mixed-
use buildings that contain residential uses. Where a building or structure is
considered a landmark or is located within a historic district, such buildings
or structures shall be subject to the standards of this section and §
1228.05: Historic Preservation.
   (a)   Building orientation.
      (1)   Buildings shall generally be parallel to the street they front
unless an alternate orientation is consistent with adjacent development.
      (2)   The primary entrances of buildings shall be oriented towards a
public street.
      (3)   If the primary entrance is located on the side or rear of the
building due to the location of parking, the facade located along the street
frontage shall be identified and designed as the primary facade.
   (b)   Building materials.
      (1)   The structural frame of a building shall not be exposed to the
exterior of a building.
      (2)   A combination of materials, textures, colors and finishes shall be
utilized to create visual interest.
      (3)   Materials within three feet of the finished grade or sidewalk shall
be of a durable material to withstand pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
      (4)   No stucco (commonly known as “dry vit” or E.F.I.S.) or similar
materials shall be permitted within three feet of the finished grade.
      (5)   All rooftop equipment shall match the color of the structure or be
visually compatible with the structure.
   (c)   Building facades.
      (1)   Blank building walls, whether the primary or secondary facade, that
are visible from public or private streets (including alleys adjacent to
residential or mixed-use buildings) are prohibited. These requirements shall
not apply to those walls that are not visible from a street or are completely
hidden due to topography or natural features preserved as open space.
      (2)   Although the front facade of a building is expected to be the focal
point in terms of the level of architectural character and features, all sides
of buildings that are visible from a public street or an adjacent building
shall incorporate architectural detailing on all facades that is consistent
with the front facade and the requirements of the applicable zoning district.
Any facade of a building that will be screened from view due to the buffering
requirements of §
1232.05: Screening Requirements shall be exempt from this requirement.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3222.jpg]
   Figure 1228-C: This figure shows two methods of using architectural features
to create wall surface relief on wall elevations that are not the primary
elevation.
      (3)   Ornamentation. All visible elevations shall include decorative
features such as cornices, pilasters and friezes. Building recesses and
protrusions are strongly encouraged on larger buildings to break long
uninterrupted building walls. See Figure 1228-D.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3224.jpg]
   Figure 1228-D: The above image illustrates a building that contains
pilasters, cornices and a series of facade setbacks (recesses) to visually
break up the appearance of the large facade.
      (4)   Facade offset required. Front facades 60 feet wide or wider shall
incorporate wall offsets of at least two feet in depth (projections or
recesses) a minimum of every 40 feet. Each required offset shall have a minimum
width of 20 feet. See Figure 1228-E.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3226.jpg]
   Figure 1228-E: Illustration of how the facade offset provisions may be
applied.
      (5)   Offset alternatives. The following alternatives can be used in
place of the required front facade offsets as shown in Figure 1228-E:
         A.   Facade color changes following the same dimensional standards as
the offset requirements;
         B.   Pilasters having a minimum depth of one foot, a minimum width of
one foot, and a minimum height of 80% of the facade’s height; and/or
         C.   Roofline changes when coupled with correspondingly aligned facade
material changes.
   (d)   Roof styles.
      (1)   Height. The height of any pitched roof shall not exceed one-half of
the overall building height.
      (2)   Roof line changes.
         A.   Roofline changes shall include changes in roof planes or changes
in the top of a parapet wall, such as extending the top of pilasters above the
top of the parapet wall.
         B.   When roofline changes are included on a facade that incorporates
wall offsets or material or color changes, roof line changes shall be
vertically aligned with the corresponding wall offset or material or color
changes.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3228.jpg]
   Figure 1228-F: Roofline changes shall be aligned with corresponding wall
offsets and/or material or color changes.
      (3)   Flat roofs.
         A.   When flat roofs are used, parapet walls, three-dimensional
cornices, fascia or other architectural features should be used to conceal
them, particularly if mechanical equipment is located on the roof.
         B.   Thin parapets that extend more than two feet above the roof and
have a depth of less than two feet from the facade surface, are prohibited.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3230.jpg]
   Figure 1228-G: Parapet walls with cornice treatments are used to disguise
flat roofs. The image on the right illustrates a tall, thin parapet wall that
is prohibited.
      (4)   Asymmetric or dynamic roofs.
         A.   Asymmetric or dynamic roof forms allude to motion, provide
variety and flexibility in nonresidential building design, and allow for unique
buildings.
         B.   Asymmetric or dynamic roof forms shall be permitted on
nonresidential buildings provided the criteria for flat roofs in division (d)
(3) of this section are met.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3232.jpg]
   Figure 1228-H: Examples of dynamic or asymmetric roof lines.
   (e)   Mechanical equipment.
      (1)   Wall mounted mechanical, electrical, communication equipment,
downspouts, gutters, service doors, and other building-mounted utility
fixtures, shall be painted and maintained to match the building or be screened
from view.
      (2)   Mechanical equipment such as transformers and HVAC units shall not
be located in front yards.
      (3)   All mechanical equipment, including both ground-mounted and roof-
mounted equipment, shall be screened from view from adjacent public and private
rights-of-way, as well as from all property zoned or used for residential
purposes.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3234.jpg]
   Figure 1228-I: Example of how parapet walls are utilized to screen roof
mounted mechanical equipment.
      (4)   Screening elements shall include walls (same material and color as
principal structure), landscaping, mounds, parapets or enclosures constructed
of the same materials used on the majority of the principal structure or any
combination or as otherwise approved or required during site plan review. (See
§
1214.06: Site Plans.)
      (5)   The screening of mechanical equipment will be reviewed as part of
site plan review based upon the following determinations:
         A.   Site location relative to adjacent properties and public rights-
of-way;
         B.   Topography of the subject site relative to adjacent properties
and public rights-of-way;
         C.   Whether the subject screening creates visual inconsistencies with
surrounding areas; and
         D.   Whether the screening substantially meets the overall intent of
these district architectural guidelines.
      (6)   Mechanical equipment is also subject to §
1232.05: Screening Requirements.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021; Ord. 23-46, passed 3-13-2023)
§ 1228.05 HISTORIC PRESERVATION.
   (a)   Purpose.
      (1)   The city hereby declares as a matter of policy the importance of
safeguarding the architectural integrity of historic sites, buildings,
structures, works of art and other objects having a special historical,
community or aesthetic interest or value in the interest of the health,
prosperity, safety and welfare of the residents of the city.
      (2)   It is the intent of this section to establish procedures whereby
certain areas, places, sites, buildings, structures and objects shall be
allowed the measure of protection afforded by a thorough study of alternatives
to incompatible alterations or demolition before such acts are performed, so
that the following objectives are achieved:
         A.   To promote the use and preservation of historic buildings,
structures and sites which reflect the cultural, social, economic, political or
architectural heritage of the city for the education and general welfare of the
people of Avon Lake;
         B.   To protect and enhance the attractiveness of the city as it
relates to residents, tourists and visitors, serving as a support and stimulant
to business, and thereby strengthening the economy of the city and its
residents;
         C.   To stabilize and increase the property values within the city;
         D.   To facilitate the reinvestment in and the revitalization of
certain older districts and neighborhoods;
         E.   To enhance the visual and aesthetic character, diversity and
interests of the city;
         F.   To preserve and further enhance the civic pride of the residents
of Avon Lake in the beauty of the city and in the notable accomplishments of
its past; and
         G.   To protect the property rights of owners whose properties lie
within areas of historic architectural significance.
   (b)   Standards and guidelines. The HPC shall utilize the Secretary of the
Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties developed by the
U.S. Department of the Interior, and any other adopted guidelines related to
historic preservation, when considering construction, expansion, or demolition
(partial or complete) of all new or existing buildings and structures subject
to COA review.
   (c)   Emergency remedies and routine maintenance. Nothing in this chapter
shall be construed to prevent or delay the reconstruction, alteration or
demolition of a structure or feature which has been ordered by the Code
Administrator upon certification of an unsafe condition constituting an
emergency. Similarly, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to govern or
restrict routine maintenance activities which do not represent an alteration to
the specified historical features or exterior appearance.
   (d)   Enforcement provisions and penalties.
      (1)   If it is found that any of these provisions or standards are being
violated, all work shall cease upon notification, and no work shall be
performed except to correct the violations. All work shall be corrected within
a reasonable period of time and any violations not corrected within the
specified time may be prosecuted.
      (2)   Whoever constructs, reconstructs or alters any exterior
architectural feature or demolishes a substantial part or all of any building
or structure within the historic district or any historic landmark not
authorized by a certificate of appropriateness shall be deemed to be in
violation of this section, the provisions of which are specifically intended to
impose strict liability, and shall be punishable for a minor misdemeanor
offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues. Whoever violates this
section shall be required to restore and reconstruct such features in full
detail. Restoration or reconstruction shall be in addition to any criminal
penalty and not in lieu thereof.
      (3)   Whoever receives a certificate of appropriateness from the HPC and
constructs, reconstructs or alters any exterior architectural feature or
demolishes a substantial part or all of any building or structure within the
historic district or any historic landmark other than in accordance with the
requirements of the certificate of appropriateness shall be deemed to be in
violation of this section, the provisions of which are specifically intended to
impose strict liability, and shall be punishable for a minor misdemeanor
offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues. Whoever violates this
section shall be required to make all changes needed to comply with the COA.
These changes shall be in addition to any criminal penalty and not in lieu
thereof.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
CHAPTER 1230: OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION IMPACT FEE REQUIREMENTS
Section
1230.01 Purpose
1230.02 Applicability
1230.03 Open space requirement
1230.04 Ownership of open space
1230.05 Protection of open spaces
1230.06 Standards for owners’ associations
1230.07 Recreation impact fee
§ 1230.01 PURPOSE.
   This section addresses the character and design of those portions of
development that are not occupied by platted lots or streets and that are
reserved for open space, public parks, and greenways. The purpose of this
section is to:
   (a)   Establish the standards and criteria under which portions of land
associated with development shall reserve and dedicate land to the city for the
purposes of development as private open space, public parks, greenways or other
recreational spaces; and
   (b)   Establish minimum ownership and maintenance standards for homeowner
and property owner associations related to private formal and informal open
space areas associated with development.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1230.02 APPLICABILITY.
   (a)   This chapter shall apply to all zoning districts, concept areas and
densities as identified in Table 1230-1 after the effective date of this code.
   (b)   The Code Administrator shall not grant a zoning permit for any
building or structure shown in a subdivision or development subject to the
provisions of this chapter unless the open space allocated to that phase have
been conveyed under one of the options established in this chapter.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1230.03 OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENT.
   (a)   Amount of open space required.
      (1)   Table 1230-1 identifies the minimum amount of open space that must
be established for certain types of developments allowed by this code.
 
Table 1230-1: Open Space Requirements
Zoning District and Proposed Gross     Required Open Space Set-Aside
Concept Area        Density            Minimum % of        Total % of Open
                                       Improved Open Space Space
RPD                 Under 4 units per  None required       20%
                    acre
                    4 to 12 units per  5%                  25%
                    acre
                    Over 12 units per  10%                 30%
                    acre
MUO - Town Center   Up to 12 units per 5%                  5%
                    acre
                    12 to 18 units per 7%                  7%
                    acre
                    18 to 25 units per 10%                 10%
                    acre
MUO - Lake Road     Up to 12 units per 5%                  5%
                    acre
                    12 to 18 units per 7%                  7%
                    acre
MUO - Lear Road     4 to 12 units per  3%                  3%
                    acre
 
      (2)   Where a minimum percentage of open space is required to be improved
open space, that percentage shall be based on the gross site area of the
proposed project, including all rights- of-way.
      (3)   The area of improved open space may also count toward the total
percentage of open space for the entire project, which shall also be based on
the gross site area of the proposed project, including all rights-of-way.
      (4)   Areas counted as improved open space: for the purposes of complying
with this division, the following features shall be credited towards the
improved open space requirements, if approved as such by City Council in review
of the open space:
         A.   Land occupied by active recreational uses such as pools, ball
fields, playgrounds, tennis courts, jogging trails and residential community
centers used primarily for recreation purposes;
         B.   Formally planned and regularly maintained open areas that include
arranged plantings, gardens, gazebos or similar structures, fountains,
sculpture, and other forms of public art;
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3236.jpg]
   Figure 1230-A: Formally planted areas and gardens can be credited toward
improved open space requirements.
         C.   Squares, forecourts, plazas, parks, public art, sculpture or
fountains or other water features designed in accordance with the standards in
this division; and
         D.   Where such features provide a clear community benefit, City
Council may credit plazas and sidewalk areas exceeding the minimum sidewalk
width requirements that contain at least four of the following features towards
the improved open space area requirements:
            1.   Seating elements;
            2.   Specialized or decorative paving features;
            3.   Pedestrian lighting beyond that required to illuminate public
rights-of-way;
            4.   Arcades, canopies, awnings, or overhangs to shield
pedestrians;
            5.   Street furnishings, including, but not limited to, planters,
waste receptacles, bicycle racks, drinking fountains, or shelters for persons
utilizing public transit; or
            6.   Community informational kiosks.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3238.jpg]
   Figure 1230-B: Features such as planters, seating elements, and sidewalk
arcades or overhangs can be credited towards improved open space.
      (5)   Regulations for general open space.
         A.   Beyond any open space areas defined as improved open space, the
open space may include fields, landscaped areas, natural areas and the like
that are not specifically excluded from the calculation by this chapter (see
division (a)(6) of this section). Such spaces shall still comply with all
general requirements for open space as established in this chapter.
         B.   Stormwater management devices, including retention ponds, and
other bio-retention devices, can be counted towards the overall open space
requirement when such features are treated as a site amenity and to qualify,
they shall support passive recreation uses by providing access, gentle slopes
less than three-to-one (3:1), and pedestrian elements such as paths, benches
and similar aspects.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3240.jpg]
   Figure 1230-C: Illustrative example of a stormwater pond designed as a
project amenity.
      (6)   Areas and uses not counted as open space: the following areas shall
not be counted toward compliance with open space requirements:
         A.   Private and public roads, and associated rights-of-way;
         B.   Public or private parking spaces, access ways, driveways and
other vehicular use areas;
         C.   Required minimum spacing between buildings and required yard
setbacks;
         D.   Land that is subject to pre-existing conservation easements or
other similar protected open spaces;
         E.   Above-ground buildings, pipes, apparatus and other equipment for
community or individual use, septic or sewage disposal systems;
         F.   Substations or public utility easements;
         G.   Dry stormwater detention basins or facilities; and
         H.   Leftover slivers of land that has no value for development, that
is not part of a larger improved open space set aside, and is not a natural
resource (e.g., river or stream corridor, large forest stand, wetland) that
contributes to the quality of the overall project, as determined by Planning
Commission and City Council.
   (b)   Permitted uses in open spaces. The following uses may be permitted in
required open space:
      (1)   Areas preserved in their natural state as wetlands, woodlands,
lakes or ponds, historic lands, environmentally sensitive areas, or similar
conservation-oriented areas;
      (2)   Outdoor active or passive recreational uses for the use and/or
enjoyment of the residents of the proposed development. Any restricted open
space intended to be devoted to recreational activities shall be of a usable
size and shape for the intended purposes as determined by the Planning
Commission. Where deemed appropriate by the Planning Commission, recreation
areas shall be provided with sufficient parking and appropriate access;
      (3)   Utilized for the raising of crops when authorized in a conservation
easement or in the association’s covenants and restrictions; and
      (4)   Any other similar uses approved by the Planning Commission during
the applicable review procedure.
   (c)   Design standards for open spaces. Land set-aside as open space shall
comply with the following standards.
      (1)   All areas of open space shall be accessible to residents or users
of the development by providing at least ten feet of frontage on a public
street.
      (2)   All areas of the open space shall have a minimum width of 50 feet
with the exception of trails and sidewalks that may provide access to the
required open space, in which case, those areas of sidewalks and trails may be
as narrow as ten feet in width.
      (3)   The open space shall be located and designed to the satisfaction of
the Planning Commission and shall be sufficiently aggregated to create large
areas of planned open space.
      (4)   The open space shall conserve significant topographic and landscape
natural features to the extent practicable.
      (5)   Any area within the open space that is disturbed during
construction or otherwise not preserved in its natural state, shall be
landscaped with vegetation that is compatible with the natural characteristics
of the site.
      (6)   All open space required by this chapter, including any recreational
facilities proposed to be constructed in such space, shall be clearly shown on
all approved plans.
      (7)   Where open areas, trails, parks or other open space resources are
planned or exist adjacent to development, the open space shall, to the maximum
extent practicable, be located to adjoin, extend, and enlarge the presently
existing trail, park, or other open area land.
      (8)   Provision of open space in multi-phase developments.
         A.   Development proposed in phases shall be considered as a single
development for the purposes of applying the open space set-aside standards
required in this chapter.
         B.   The open space set-aside for the entire project shall be reviewed
and approved as part of the preliminary plat process.
         C.   Development shall not be phased solely as a method to avoid the
minimum open space set-aside standards in this chapter.
         D.   In cases where less than 100% of the total amount of open space
set-aside is provided within the first phase of a multi-phase development, the
open space set aside required shall, at a minimum, be apportioned into each of
the remaining development phases. At any point, the applicant may fulfill the
open space set-aside requirements prior to completion of the development or
subdivision.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1230.04 OWNERSHIP OF OPEN SPACE.
   (a)   The first priority of the open space requirement is to provide for a
community wide network of parks, open spaces, greenways or other recreational
areas. As such, all open space required by this chapter shall first be offered
to the city for potential public land dedication.
   (b)   Such offer for public land dedication shall be made during the
applicable review procedure and the Planning Commission shall include a
recommendation on whether to recommend that the land should be considered by
City Council for public dedication.
   (c)   The city shall consider any recommendation from Planning Commission
regarding the proposed land and shall make a decision on whether to accept any
land offered for dedication. City Council shall not be required to accept any
land offered for dedication.
   (d)   Where the city chooses not to accept the open space for public
dedication, the developer shall retain the open space as private open space,
protected in perpetuity in accordance with §
1230.05: Protection of Open Spaces.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1230.05 PROTECTION OF OPEN SPACES.
   (a)   Any further subdivision of the open space for uses other than those
prescribed in this chapter and the approved RPD development plan or subdivision
plat shall be prohibited.
   (b)   In all cases, the long-term control and protection of the open space
shall be accomplished through the use of a conservation easement.
   (c)   The applicant may seek to dedicate the open space to the city;
however, the city is not required to accept such dedication. If the open space
is not dedicated to, and accepted by, the city, the long-term control and
protection of the open space shall be accomplished through the use of a
conservation easement in accordance with this section.
   (d)   Conservation easements.
      (1)   At the time when an applicant records the plat for the approved
subdivision or submits for a zoning permit where no plat is required, a
conservation easement shall be placed on all lands and private waters used to
satisfy the open space requirements of this chapter. The conservation easement
shall:
         A.   Run with the land, regardless of ownership;
         B.   Provide for protection of the land in perpetuity;
         C.   Be granted and deeded to the city, Lorain County, state, park
district, a city approved land trust or other qualified organization approved
by the Planning Commission and Law Director; and
         D.   Be solely for the purpose of ensuring the land remains
undeveloped other than development of uses permitted by §
1230.03(b).
      (2)   While the city, Lorain County, state, park district, city approved
land trust or other qualified organization may hold the conservation easement,
the property itself shall still be owned by the original property owner, the
developer (applicant of the subdivision) or a homeowners’ or property owners’
association. If it is to be owned by an association, the association’s
documents shall be recorded with the subdivision plat and a copy submitted to
the Code Administrator to be maintained as part of the city’s records.
      (3)   The conservation easement shall include information on how the
property will be maintained by the property owner and shall also state that
failure to maintain the property in accordance with the conservation easement
agreements shall be considered a violation of this code. In addition, the
holder of the easement may pursue any remedy provided by law or equity,
including, but not limited to, the remedies in R.C. § 5301.70.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1230.06 STANDARDS FOR OWNERS’ ASSOCIATIONS.
   (a)   A homeowners’ association or property owners’ association shall be
established to permanently maintain all open space and common areas if such
areas are not transferred and accepted by the city, Lorain County, state, park
district, city approved land trust or other qualified organization.
   (b)   All homeowners’ association or property owners’ association agreements
shall be submitted to the Code Administrator as part of the site plan review,
subdivision application review, or RPD review, whichever is applicable. No set
of proposed covenants, articles of incorporation or by-laws of a homeowners
association or property owners’ association shall permit the abrogation of any
duties set forth in this section.
      (1)   All homeowners’ associations or property owners’ associations shall
guarantee the maintenance of all open space and common areas within the
boundaries of the development through the deed restrictions or covenants.
      (2)   Membership in the association shall be mandatory for all purchasers
of lots in the development.
      (3)   The association shall be responsible for maintenance, control and
insurance of all common areas, including required open space.
      (4)   In the event that the homeowners’ association or property owners’
association no longer maintains the common areas and open space in a neat and
orderly manner, or if the homeowners’ association or property owners’
association goes defunct, the city may take over maintenance and assess a fee
to cover the costs of such maintenance. The fee shall be assessed to each of
the benefitting property owners within the subdivision.
      (5)   The association shall not authorize its dissolution or the sale,
transfer or other disposal of any common area, including restricted open space,
without:
         A.   An affirmative vote of 75% of its members;
         B.   Establishing a successor entity to take over said property
pursuant to this code; and
         C.   The approval of the City Council.
      (6)   Whenever the association adopts an amendment to any approved
agreements that pertain to maintenance obligations or access to common areas,
the revisions shall be provided to the Code Administrator for confirmation that
the amendment is in compliance with all applicable standards of this code and
any conditions of approval that applied to the original development or
subdivision.
      (7)   The association shall convey to the city and other appropriate
governmental bodies, after proper notice, the right to enter to any common area
for emergency purposes or in the event of nonperformance of maintenance or
improvements affecting the public health, safety and welfare. Such governments
shall have the right, after proper notice, to make improvements and perform
maintenance functions. In addition, the city shall have the right to proceed
against the association for reimbursements of said costs, including the right
to file liens against individual condominium units, houses and vacant building
lots.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1230.07 RECREATION IMPACT FEE.
   (a)   Purpose.
      (1)   This section is intended to impose an impact fee for the
acquisition and improvement of public recreation facilities on the development
of single-family dwelling subdivisions and multiple-family dwellings. In
enacting this code, City Council acknowledges that the city is responsible for
and will meet, through the use of general city revenues, the reasonable capital
improvements and maintenance requirements of the city’s existing recreation
facilities.
      (2)   The recreation impact fees authorized by this section will be used
solely for the acquisition and improvement of the additional public recreation
facilities required to meet the need for such facilities created by new
development:
         A.   Such fees shall not exceed the cost of acquisition and
improvement of those public recreation facilities the need for which is
reasonably attributable to those developments that pay the fees; and
         B.   The fees shall be spent solely for the acquisition and
improvement of additional public recreation facilities that substantially
benefit those developments that pay the fees.
   (b)   Fee required. The recreation impact fee is required prior to the
issuance of a zoning permit for any dwelling erected on a lot situated within a
development subject to approval, or which has previously received approval as a
major subdivision, or its predecessors, or which was subject to the subdivision
provisions of the Ohio Revised Code. The applicant shall pay to the Recreation
Trust Fund the amount of any applicable recreation impact fee specified in
division (c) of this section, and no zoning permit shall be issued by the
Building Department without submission of a written receipt from the Finance
Director indicating that any applicable recreation impact fee has been paid.
   (c)   Fee amount and administration.
      (1)   In addition to any other fee or fees described in the code of
ordinances of the city, persons who are seeking, or who have in the past
received, approval from the Planning Commission of a plat as part of a major
subdivision, or its predecessors, or which was subject to the subdivision
provisions of the Ohio Revised Code, and persons seeking approval from the
Building Inspector or Planning Commission for a multiple-family or attached
single-family residential development in the city, shall pay to the Recreation
Trust Fund a recreation impact fee as follows:
         A.   Five hundred thirty-five dollars for each lot in a subdivision
upon which a single-family dwelling is to be constructed; and
         B.   Three hundred ninety dollars for each dwelling unit to be
constructed in a multi-family dwelling.
      (2)   For developments subject to approval, or which have previously
received approval, as a major subdivision, or its predecessors, or which was
subject to the subdivision provisions of the Ohio Revised Code, such recreation
impact fees shall be due and payable following approval of a plat, but prior to
the issuance of a zoning permit, and no zoning permit shall be issued by the
Building Department without submission or a written receipt from the Finance
Director indicating that any applicable recreation impact fee has been paid.
      (3)   For multi-family dwellings subject to approval under §
1214.06: Site Plans, such recreation impact fees shall be due and payable
following approval of a zoning permit, but prior to the issuance of a building
permit, and no building permit shall be issued by the Building Department
without submission of a written receipt from the Finance Director indicating
that any applicable recreation impact fee has been paid.
      (4)   The amount of any applicable recreation impact fee due and payable
under this section as a condition precedent to the issuance of a zoning permit
under division (c)(3) of this section, or a building permit under this division
(c)(4) of this section, shall be waived:
         A.   For any single-family dwelling unit for which a recreation impact
fee assessed under this code has paid prior to the zoning permit or building
permit application; or
         B.   For any multi-family dwelling unit for which a recreation impact
fee assessed under this code has paid prior to the zoning permit or building
permit application.
      (5)   It shall be the responsibility of the Finance Director to:
         A.   Credit all recreation impact fees received by the Finance
Director to the Recreation Trust Fund, which the Director shall administer
separately from the General Fund of the city, and to deposit funds received by
the Recreation Trust Fund in one or more interest-bearing accounts in a bank or
other savings institution authorized to receive deposits of city funds.
Interest earned by each account shall be credited to that account and shall be
used solely for the purposes specified for the Recreation Trust Fund; and
         B.   Maintain and keep accurate financial records for each account
into which funds of the Recreation Trust Fund have been deposited, that show
the source and disbursement of all revenues; that shall account for all moneys
received; that shall ensure that the disbursement of funds from each
acquisition and improvement of additional public recreation facilities as
specified in the capital improvements plan, is recorded; and that shall provide
an annual accounting for each account showing the source and amount of all
funds collected and the projects that were funded.
      (6)   All funds currently in the Recreation Trust Fund and all funds
collected pursuant to this section shall be used solely and exclusively for the
acquisition and improvement of additional public recreation facilities as
specified in the capital improvements plan and as authorized by the City
Council.
      (7)   The city is hereby authorized to issue bonds, bond anticipation
notes, revenue certificates or other obligations of indebtedness as may be
provided by law in furtherance of the acquisition and improvement of additional
public recreation facilities as specified in the capital improvements plan and
as authorized by the City Council. The funds pledged towards the retirement of
any such indebtedness may include recreation impact fees and any other city
revenues that may be allocated by Council, provided that recreation impact fees
paid pursuant to this section shall be restricted solely and exclusively to
financing directly, or as a pledge against indebtedness, for the acquisition
and improvement of additional public recreation facilities as specified in the
capital improvements plan and as authorized by the City Council.
      (8)   Refunds of recreation impact fees paid to the Recreation Trust Fund
shall be made under the following circumstances:
         A.   If a zoning permit for a lot in a subdivision upon which a
single-family dwelling is to be constructed expires without commencement of
construction, then the person who paid any applicable recreation impact fee
required as a condition for the issuance of the zoning permit may request a
refund of the fees paid. To obtain a refund, the applicant must submit a
written request to the Planning Commission within 30 days of the expiration of
the zoning permit. The Planning Commission shall, within 60 days of the receipt
of a refund request, authorize the Finance Director to refund to the applicant,
without interest, the impact fees paid, less 5% of the refund (to offset a
portion of the costs of collection and refund), within ten days of receipt of
such authorization.
         B.   If a building permit for a multi-family development expires
without commencement of construction, then the person who paid any applicable
recreation impact fee required as a condition for the issuance of the building
permit may request a refund of the fees paid. To obtain a refund, the applicant
must submit a written request to the Planning Commission within 30 days of the
expiration of the building permit. The Planning Commission shall, within 60
days of the receipt of a refund request, authorize the Finance Director to
refund to the applicant, without interest, the impact fees paid, less 5% of the
fees paid to offset a portion of the costs of collection and refund, within ten
days of receipt of such authorization.
         C.   If the principal amount, not including interest, of all funds
paid into the Recreation Trust Fund from recreation impact fees is not expended
or encumbered by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following six
years from the date the recreation impact fee was paid, the then current owner
of the land may apply to the Finance Director for refund of any amount not
expended or encumbered, plus interest actually earned. Such application must be
submitted to the Finance Director within 180 days of the expiration of the six-
year period.
      (9)   The fee schedule contained in division (c) of this section, shall
be reviewed by the Planning Commission at least once each two years.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
CHAPTER 1232: LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING STANDARDS
Section
1232.01 Purpose
1232.02 Applicability
1232.03 Submission of landscape and screening plan
1232.04 Landscaping requirements
1232.05 Screening requirements
1232.06 Maintenance
1232.07 Delayed installation
§ 1232.01 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of the landscape and screening regulations to:
   (a)   Promote attractive development and preserve the appearance and
character of the surrounding area through landscaping and screening;
   (b)   Minimize or eliminate conflicts between potentially incompatible,
permitted land uses on adjoining lots through screening; and
   (c)   Ensure safe pedestrian and vehicular circulation when landscaping and
screening is installed.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1232.02 APPLICABILITY.
   (a)   General. No construction, reconstruction, enlargement, extension or
exterior alterations of any building or structure, or the occupancy of a new
building or structure occur, until the required landscaping and/or screening
has been provided according to this chapter. This chapter shall not apply to
single-family dwellings or their respective lots.
   (b)   New development or redevelopment. Any new development or redevelopment
of land must fully comply with the standards and regulations of this chapter.
   (c)   Additions and enlargements.
      (1)   Renovations or repairs. A building or lot may be repaired or
renovated without providing additional landscaping or screening, unless there
is an increase in gross floor area or improved lot area (e.g., expanded parking
lot or building addition).
      (2)   Additions and increases in gross floor area.
         A.   When a building, accessory building, parking lot or structure, or
lot is increased in gross floor area or improved lot area up to 25% (aggregate
from the area as of the effective date of this code), landscaping and/or
screening is required for the addition.
         B.   When there is an increase in the gross floor area or lot
improvement by more than 25% (aggregate from the area as of the effective date
of this code), the entire lot must conform to the landscaping and screening
requirements of this chapter.
   (d)   Change in use. Any change in use that increases development intensity
and results in increased traffic or processes, must fully comply with this
chapter. For the purposes of this chapter, a change in use includes:
      (1)   A residential use to a commercial use; or
      (2)   A commercial use to a manufacturing use.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1232.03 SUBMISSION OF LANDSCAPE AND SCREENING PLAN.
   As part of a site plan review application or conditional use application,
whichever may come first, the applicant shall be required to submit a plan
setting forth the proposed method of landscaping and/or screening. The plan
shall take into consideration the space required to be landscaped and/or
screened, the planting area available, the density of the foliage required to
adequately protect abutting properties and the height of screening necessary to
provide the desired protection.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1232.04 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   The planted area shall be free of structures (other than a fence or
wall), dumpsters, material storage or display, manufacturing or processing
activity, loading and unloading areas or vehicle parking or outdoor display. No
new driveways or streets shall be permitted in areas unless otherwise approved
by the city.
   (b)   All areas not covered by plants, shrubs and trees shall be well
maintained by an all-season vegetative ground cover and shall be kept free of
debris and trash.
   (c)   Ground cover must be installed appropriate to the surface conditions
of the area. Grass is the default landscaping material for ground, although
other alternative ground covers may be used, if approved as part of a site plan
review, for areas such as parking lot islands, where physical conditions may
warrant more tolerant ground cover. In all cases, ground cover should be some
form of natural vegetation. Small areas of decorative gravel or rock may also
be utilized in the ground cover areas when approved as part of the site plan
review.
   (d)   All plantings must be suitable for the city’s soils and climatic
conditions and:
      (1)   Shall be distributed so as to provide a relatively uniform
planting. Where the planting is along a street and some visibility into the
development is desired, the plant material may be arranged to provide view
corridors;
      (2)   The landscaped areas shall be entirely pervious except for barrier
structures and walks that provide pedestrian access. No more than 25% of the
required area may consist of impervious materials such as gravel, stones, or
paving;
      (3)   A mix of hardwood and ornamental tree species shall be provided;
and
      (4)   Native grasses and plants that are pollinator friendly shall be
provided.
   (e)   If an applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city that an
existing healthy tree line, attractive thick vegetation, natural earth berm
and/or slopes will be preserved and serve the same landscaping or screening
purposes that would otherwise be required by this chapter, then such preserved
existing screening may be permitted to be used, in part or whole, in place of
new ground cover, grading and plantings. If this existing natural screen is
removed at any time, the applicant or property owner shall be required to plant
landscaping or establish screening that will meet the ground cover, grading,
screening and planting requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1232.05 SCREENING REQUIREMENTS.
   Screening is intended to eliminate or minimize conflicts between potentially
incompatible, but otherwise permitted land uses on adjoining lots. Screening
may include a combination of setbacks and visual buffers or barriers.
   (a)   Screening plan. A screening plan must be submitted and must
incorporate a landscaping plan. The screening plan must show the location of
all screened areas on the site, location of utility easements, roads and
drives, emergency access, walkways and existing and proposed structures on the
site.
   (b)   Required screening.
      (1)   Screening of development. Screening is required in the following
scenarios and are required to be erected by the more intensive use in order to
properly visually buffer the use or activity of the more intensive use:
 
Table 1232-1: Screening Requirements
                          Adjacent Development or Zoning District
                          Single-Family Multi-Family Commercial,
                          Residential   Residential  Office, and Industrial
                                                     Mixed Use
            Single-family                            Screening   Screening
Proposed    residential                              required    required
Development Multi-family  Screening                              Screening
           residential   required                               required
            Commercial,   Screening     Screening                Screening
            office, and   required      required                 required
            mixed use
            Industrial    Screening     Screening    Screening
                          required      required     required
 
      (2)   Location.
         A.   Required areas for screening must be developed along the
perimeter of the lot and extend inward from the property line of the
development site. Screening may not be located within any dedicated public or
private street right-of-way, utility easement or encroach on adjacent property.
         B.   An area used for screening may be included in the calculation of
setback requirements.
      (3)   Minimum standards. Screening may include a mix of trees, berms,
plantings, fences and walls to achieve a solid screen of a minimum of 75% of
the length of the building, structure and/or activity requiring screening on
the more intensive property.
         A.   No structure or off-street parking or loading area shall be
located in the area dedicated for screening.
         B.   Fences or walls shall be six feet in height and shall be
landscaped along the base.
            1.   All structures and hardware used for landscaping or screening,
such as walls or fences, shall be constructed of weatherproof or weather
resistant materials such as treated wood, PVC or composite materials such as
Trex, brick, natural stone or pre-cast stone or other material approved by the
city.
            2.   The finished side of the fence or wall shall face the adjacent
property or right-of- way.
         C.   Berms shall be a minimum of four feet in height.
            1.   Berms must be formed with a gradual slope with a rounded top
to allow for planting and stabilized slopes.
            2.   Berms shall include trees and shrubs at or near the crown to
extend the vertical height of the screening.
         D.   If no fence, berm or wall is erected as a part of the screening,
a minimum of 30 feet of open space shall be provided on which to plant
screening materials.
         E.   Evergreen trees and shrubs shall be included for effective
screening if a wall or fence is not installed. All trees and shrubs used as
screening materials shall reach the minimum screening requirement within two
years of planting.
   (c)   Screening of equipment. In addition to the other forms of required
landscaping, screening shall be required to conceal specific areas of high
visual or auditory impact or hazardous areas from adjacent, less intense uses
and from views from public rights-of-way. Such areas shall be screened at all
times, unless otherwise specified, regardless of adjacent uses, districts, or
other proximate landscaping material.
      (1)   Screened items. The following areas shall be screened in accordance
with this section:
         A.   Large waste receptacles (e.g., dumpsters and cardboard recycling
containers) and refuse collection areas;
         B.   Any use or activity where is screening is required by a use-
specific standards in §
1216.06: Use-Specific Standards;
         C.   Off-street loading areas;
         D.   Outdoor service areas that are necessary to support common
business operations (e.g., outdoor freezer or refrigeration units, storage
units and the like);
         E.   Ground-level or facade-mounted mechanical equipment and utility
structures;
         F.   Roof top equipment that is not otherwise hidden by the roofline,
parapet wall, or other similar feature;
         G.   Screening shall not be required if any of the above items are not
visible from adjacent rights-of-way or from adjacent residential lots; and
         H.   All sides of the item shall be screened with the exception that
one side of the item may be screened with a gate or other similar feature to
allow access while screening the item when access is not necessary.
      (2)   Screening methods.
         A.   The following items are permitted for use as screening materials,
and more than one method may be used on a lot or site:
            1.   Vegetative materials that provide a fully opaque screen to the
minimum height necessary to fully screen the facility from off-site views (see
Figure 1232-A);
            2.   An opaque fence or wall; or
            3.   Integration into the building design (e.g., false walls or
other architectural screening). See Figure 1232-A.
         B.   The required screening shall have a height sufficient enough to
screen the applicable item(s) provided it is in accordance with any other
applicable sections of this code including, but not limited to, §
1226.03: Fences and Walls.
         C.   To the maximum extent feasible, pipes, conduit and cables should
be located along the rear facade of buildings if conditions do not allow for
them to be enclosed within the building itself. Pipes, conduit and cables shall
be located as far away from public view as practical and shall be painted a
similar color as the building facade to further reduce visibility.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3242.jpg]
   Figure 1232-A: The above image illustrates a vegetative screen that hides
HVAC equipment and a dumpster (left image) and the use of a wall and fencing
for screening that is architecturally compatible with the principal building
(right image).
      (3)   Configuration of vegetative materials. In cases where vegetative
materials are used for screening in accordance with this division, the
vegetative materials shall:
         A.   Be planted around the perimeter of the site feature to be
screened in a manner that screens the site feature from all off-site views;
         B.   Be configured in two staggered rows or other arrangement that
provides maximum screening;
         C.   Be upright, large evergreen shrubs or a hedge and be capable of
reaching at least six feet in height within three years of planting; and
         D.   Be spaced no farther than necessary to create an opaque screen
when the shrubs or trees are fully grown. In no case shall trees used for
screening be spaced further than 12 feet apart on center.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021; Ord. 24-33, passed 3-25-2024)
§ 1232.06 MAINTENANCE.
   (a)   All plantings identified on the approved plan must be permanently
maintained in good growing condition and replaced with new plant materials, as
necessary, to ensure continued compliance with applicable landscaping and/or
screening requirements.
   (b)   All structures and hardware used for landscaping or screening, such as
walls or fences, shall be maintained in good working and shall be constructed
of weatherproof or weather resistant materials or treated as such.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1232.07 DELAYED INSTALLATION.
   In cases where plantings cannot be completed due to weather or other
conditions prior to building occupancy, the city may require a financial
guarantee to be provided in the amount of 120% of the estimated cost of the
landscaping or screening to be provided. The form of financial guarantee must
be approved by the Law Director prior to approval.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
CHAPTER 1234: PARKING, ACCESS, AND MOBILITY STANDARDS
Section
1234.01 Purpose
1234.02 Off-street parking required
1234.03 Minimum parking space and driveway aisle standards
1234.04 Accessible spaces for automobiles and vans
1234.05 Access
1234.06 Setback requirements
1234.07 Prohibited activities
1234.08 Units of measurement
1234.09 Change in use, additions, and enlargements
1234.10 Mixed occupancies and shared parking
1234.11 Uses not specified
1234.12 Not to exceed requirement and reduced parking
1234.13 Deferred construction of parking spaces
1234.14 Number of parking spaces required
1234.15 Existing parking to be maintained
1234.16 Design, development, and maintenance of parking areas
1234.17 Bicycle and e-scooter parking
1234.18 Drive-in and drive-through circulation and off-street waiting spaces
1234.19 Off-street loading space
1234.20 Maintenance
1234.21 Sidewalks and sidewalk connections to a right-of-way
1234.22 Traffic impact analysis
§ 1234.01 PURPOSE.
   (a)   It is the purpose of the off-street parking and loading regulations to
reduce the congestion on streets due to excessive use for parking and loading
of motor vehicles and to prevent excessive amounts of off-street parking and
loading through the appropriate control of the siting and number of spaces
permitted.
   (b)   Off-street circulation regulations are designed to prevent traffic
congestion and hazard due to the movement of vehicles and pedestrians on
private property.
   (c)   The requirements apply uniformly to all buildings and uses, regardless
of the districts in which they are located.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1234.02 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIRED.
   Off-street parking and/or loading shall be provided for every new, enlarged
or modified use in connection with every use as applicable in this code, in
accordance with the requirements specified in this chapter.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1234.03 MINIMUM PARKING SPACE AND DRIVEWAY AISLE STANDARDS.
   The following minimum standards shall apply to all parking spaces and
driveway aisles.
   (a)   Parking space standard width and length. Parking spaces shall have the
following minimum dimensions, exclusive of circulation aisles:
 
Table 1234-1: Parking Space Dimensional Requirements
Dimension (Feet) 0 Degree 30 Degrees 45 Degrees 60 Degrees 90 Degrees
                 Parallel Diagonal   Diagonal   Diagonal   Perpendicular
Space width      8        8.5        8.5        9          9
Space length     22       18         18         18         18
 
   (b)   Circulation aisles. Circulation aisles shall have the minimum
dimensions as set forth in Table 1234-1 based on whether the drive aisle has
only one-way or two-way traffic. Where there is a combination of two different
parking angles, the widest aisle width shall be required.
 
Table 1234-2: Circulation Aisle Dimensional Requirements
Dimension (feet) 0 degree 30 degrees 45 degrees 60 degrees 90 degrees
                 Parallel Diagonal   Diagonal   Diagonal   Perpendicular
One-way          12       14         15         15         24
Two-way          24       24         24         24         24
 
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1234.04 ACCESSIBLE SPACES FOR AUTOMOBILES AND VANS.
   Accessible parking and loading spaces, except spaces used exclusively by
buses, trucks, other delivery vehicles, law enforcement vehicles or vehicular
impound, shall meet all state as established in the State Building Code.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1234.05 ACCESS.
   (a)   Access for single-family and multi-family dwellings. Access for
residential uses shall be as follows.
      (1)   For single-family dwellings, no more than two access driveways
shall be permitted, per unit.Each driveway must be at least ten feet wide and
no more than 30 feet wide for each driveway as measured at the curb. The
maximum width of the driveway at any point on the lot cannot exceed 50% of the
dwelling width.
      (2)   For multi-family dwellings, no more than two access driveways into
the off-street parking area shall be permitted with a minimum width of 20 feet
and a maximum width of 40 feet for each driveway as measured at the curb and
being no wider than 50% of the dwelling width at any point. For multi-family
dwellings that have garage driveway access or parking spaces directly
accessible to a private street, the Planning Commission may authorize wider
driveway widths.
      (3)   Residential driveways and parking pads shall meet the setback
requirements of §
1224.01(b)(12).
      (4)   Where the main or principal structure is demolished in any
residential zoning district, all driveways and paved surfaces shall also be
cleared from the site.
   (b)   Access for all other uses. Access for all uses, except single-family
and two-family dwellings shall be as follows:.
      (1)   Each lot shall be permitted one two-way access drive or, upon
review of the site plan, by the Planning Commission, a pair of one-way drives.
For each 150 feet or fraction thereof, an additional drive may be permitted.
      (2)   Entrance/exit driveways accessing the off-street parking area shall
not exceed 15 feet in width for each lane of ingress/egress and shall not be
located within 50 feet of a street intersection as measured from the
intersection of the street right-of-way lines.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021; Ord. 25-109, passed 6-23-2025)
§ 1234.06 SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Parking spaces for all uses shall be provided either in garages or
dedicated parking areas conforming to the provisions of this code.
   (b)   Other than a paved driveway, no off-street parking shall be located
within any required front yard for any residential use.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided, required off-street parking, loading,
and stacking facilities shall be located on the same lot as the principal
building.
   (d)   Parking areas and driveways shall be subject to the maximum lot
coverage standards of the applicable zoning district.
   (e)   Off-street parking areas in nonresidential districts shall be set
back:
      (1)   A minimum of 20 feet from all front lot lines;
      (2)   A minimum of five feet from all side and rear lot lines adjacent to
a lot in a nonresidential zoning district unless such adjacent lots have shared
parking or where there is a driveway connecting the two off-street parking
areas; and
      (3)   A minimum of 20 feet from all lot lines adjacent to a lot in a
residential zoning district.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1234.07 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   (a)   The display for sale of all types of vehicles shall be prohibited
within any required off-street parking area, except for a private individual
selling one personal vehicle or land where the principal use is the sale or
lease of vehicles.
   (b)   The display, sales or storage of any goods, wares or merchandise shall
not be permitted within any areas designated for required off-street parking,
loading or waiting spaces except on private driveways for residential uses for
garage sales and other permitted temporary sales.
   (c)   No part of any building, structure or related improvements and
materials shall be temporarily or permanently located or stored outdoors, in
areas designated for off-street parking, loading or stacking facilities unless
approved for outdoor bulk sales and storage (see §
1224.01: Accessory Uses and structures,) or as part of a temporary event (see §
1224.02: Temporary Uses and Structures).
   (d)   None of these requirements are intended to regulate the storage of
vehicles or materials in an enclosed garage.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1234.08 UNITS OF MEASUREMENT.
   For the purposes of determining off-street parking requirements, the
following units of measurement shall apply.
   (a)   Where floor area is designated as the standard for determining parking
space requirements, gross floor area shall be used for all land uses.
   (b)   Where seating capacity is the standard for determining parking space
requirements, the capacity shall mean the number of seating units installed or
indicated, or when fixed seats are not indicted, the capacity shall be
determined as being one seat for each 20 square feet of floor area of the
assembly room. For benches and pews, 30 lineal inches shall be considered as
one seat.
   (c)   Fractional numbers shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1234.09 CHANGE IN USE, ADDITIONS, AND ENLARGEMENTS.
   (a)   Whenever any change in use, enlargement of a building, or extension of
a land use results in an increase in the number of units used to measure
required off-street parking, loading or waiting spaces, and such alteration or
change creates a need for an increase of more than 15% in the number of
required off-street parking spaces, additional off-street parking shall be
provided on the basis of the increase in the number of such units of
measurement.
   (b)   The 15% increase shall be measured as an aggregate change from the
number of spaces that existed on the effective date of this code.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1234.10 MIXED OCCUPANCIES AND SHARED PARKING.
   (a)   In the case of mixed or multiple uses in one building or one lot, the
total requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be the sum of the
requirements for the various uses computed separately and may be reduced by up
to 25% by the Planning Commission as part of a site plan review.
   (b)   Off-street parking areas for one use shall not be considered as
providing requirements for any other use unless the Planning Commission decides
to reduce the number of parking spaces required for uses in a B-3 District. The
Planning Commission determination must be made in writing and shall consider
the following criteria:
      (1)   The number of on-street parking spaces in the vicinity;
      (2)   The availability of parking areas on adjacent sites, considering
the hours of operation of the subject use and adjacent uses; and
      (3)   The cumulative adverse impact on the district if buildings are
removed from a multiple storefront streetscape in order to provide parking on
site.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1234.11 USES NOT SPECIFIED.
   Where a use is not specifically mentioned, the requirements for the most
similar applicable use shall apply as determined by the Code Administrator.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1234.12 NOT TO EXCEED REQUIREMENT AND REDUCED PARKING.
   (a)   Not to exceed. In order to prevent excessive lot coverage, the
artificial increase in air temperature, and an unnecessary increase in surface
water run-off, no minimum off-street parking space requirement in §
1234.14: Number of Parking Spaces Required, shall be exceeded by more than 20%
unless good cause can be shown by the applicant and approved by the Planning
Commission. Single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and multi-family
dwellings are exempt from this provision.
   (b)   Reduced and adjacency parking. The Planning Commission may approve a
site plan with a reduction in the number of parking spaces required if it can
be shown that the lesser number of spaces is appropriate and consistent with
these regulations, the land use plan, and other plans of the city under the
following provisions.
      (1)   When the required parking spaces for a proposed use can be
accommodated on an adjacent or nearby site, arrangements can be made between
the businesses and other property owners that are not normally open, used or
operated during the same hours to share parking facilities in order to meet
their parking requirements, provided that not more than 50% of the required
parking spaces are shared.
      (2)   Where the required parking spaces are collectively or jointly
provided and used, a written agreement thereby assuring their retention for
such purposes shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned,
approved as to form by the Law Director, and filed with the application for a
zoning permit.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1234.13 DEFERRED CONSTRUCTION OF PARKING SPACES.
   If the number of parking spaces required in §
1234.14: Number of Parking Spaces Required, is substantially larger than the
number anticipated by the applicant, and the applicant provides sufficient
evidence that supports the reduced parking needs, the Planning Commission may
approve a site plan with a lesser number of parking spaces, provided that:
   (a)   Suitable area(s) must be reserved for the construction of the balance
of the total number of spaces otherwise required by this chapter and shall be
illustrated on the site plan in locations and with landscaping in full
compliance with this code. Such areas shall include needed areas for stormwater
management in association with such parking facilities;
   (b)   The Planning Commission, upon re-evaluation of the project parking
needs, may at any time direct that some or all of the reserved spaces be
constructed; and
   (c)   Any additional parking, if and when constructed, shall be provided
according to the approved site plan and only after approval of the construction
plans by the Code Administrator.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1234.14 NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES REQUIRED.
   The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required shall be as
follows:
 
Table 1234-3: Number of Parking Spaces Required
                                  Minimum Parking Spaces Required
Use                               SF = Square Feet
                                  GFA = Gross Floor Area
   Agricultural
                                  1 per 800 SF GFA of building used for the
Agriculture                       retail sale of food, drink or product made on
                                  site from agricultural produce
   Residential Uses
Bed and breakfast establishment   1 per guest room plus 2 for the owner
Dwelling, multi-family            2 per each dwelling unit
Dwelling, single-family
   Residential Care and Congregate
Residential facility              1 per 4 residents of design capacity plus 2
Skilled nursing or personal care  per facility
facility
   Public, Institutional, and Recreational Uses
                                  1 per 250 SF GFA, or 1 per 5 seats, whichever
Active recreational facilities    is greater for indoor use
                                  1 per 1,000 SF, plus 1 per 5 seats for
                                  outdoor use
Cemeteries                        1 per 100 SF of GFA used for assembly
Cultural facilities               1 per 400 SF of GFA or 1 per 8 seats,
                                  whichever is greater
Educational institutions (higher  1 per 3 auditorium seats, plus 1 per 5
education)                        classrooms seats of design capacity
Educational institutions          1 per 15 classroom seats of design capacity
(preschool and K-12)
Essential services                None required
Fraternal, charitable and service 1 per 150 SF of GFA
oriented clubs
Government offices and buildings  1 per 400 SF GFA
(no outdoor activities)
Hospitals                         2 per 3 beds of design capacity
Passive parks, open space and     1 per 10,000 SF
natural areas
Places of worship                 1 per 4 seats of design capacity
Public utility buildings and      1 per 1,000 SF GFA
facilities
Residential community centers     1 per 400 SF GFA of indoor space
Wireless telecommunication        1 per site; the driveway may count towards
facilities                        the parking requirement
   Commercial/Service
Administrative, business or       1 per 400 SF GFA
professional offices
Adult entertainment business      1 per 400 SF GFA
Animal boarding facilities        1 per 800 SF GFA
Animal hospital/clinics           1 per 400 SF GFA
Assembly halls or conference      1 per 250 SF GFA or 1 per 4 seats design
centers                           capacity, whichever is greater
Automobile, motorcycle,
recreational vehicle sales and    1 per 1,000 SF GFA of indoor showroom space
leasing
Automotive repair and service     2 per service bay or 1 for every 400 SF GFA,
(minor)                           whichever is greater
Automotive repair and service     2 per service bay or 1 for every 600 SF GFA,
(major)                           whichever is greater
Commercial and business support   1 per 400 SF GFA
services
Commercial recreational           1 per 400 SF GFA, or 1 per 5 seats, whichever
facilities (indoors)              is greater for indoor use
Commercial recreational           1 per 1,000 SF, plus 1 per 5 seats
facilities (outdoors)
Financial institutions            1 per 400 SF GFA
Fuel stations                     1 per 400 SF GFA
Funeral homes                     1 per 100 SF GFA used for assembly
                                  1 per guest room, plus 1 per 5 seats for
Hotels and motels                 restaurant use, plus 1 per 5 seats if banquet
                                  facility or conference rooms
Medical/dental clinics            1 per 400 SF GFA
Microbrewery, microdistillery or  1 per 150 SF GFA of retail, tap room, and
microwinery                       restaurant space
Mixed use buildings               See §
                                  1234.10
Multi-tenant use                  See §
                                  1234.10
Nursery schools and day care      2 per facility plus 1 for every 8 clients of
centers                           design capacity
Personal services                 1 per 250 SF GFA
Restaurants                       1 per 100 SF GFA or 1 per 4 seats of design
                                  capacity, whichever is greater
                                  1 per 400 SF GFA for uses up to 20,000 SF GFA
                                  1 per 500 SF GFA for uses 20,001—50,000 SF
Retail businesses                 GFA
                                  1 per 600 SF GFA for uses 50,001—100,000 SF
                                  GFA
                                  1 per 800 SF GFA for uses over 100,000 SF GFA
Tavern or bar                     1 per 150 SF GFA
Vehicle washing establishment     1 per 250 SF GFA of office space
   Industrial, Manufacturing and Processing
Contractor equipment and storage  1 per 250 SF GFA of office space
yards
Industrial service uses           1 per 800 SF GFA
Industrial uses, heavy            1 per 1,000 SF GFA
Industrial uses, light            1 per 1,000 SF GFA
Metal salvage and junk storage    1 per 250 SF GFA of office space
Recycling center                  1 per 250 SF GFA of office space
Research and development          1 per 750 SF GFA
facilities
Self-storage facilities           1 per 100 units
Truck and heavy equipment sales   1 per 250 SF GFA of office space
Truck terminals                   1 per 250 SF GFA of office space
Vehicle storage                   1 per 250 SF GFA of office space
Warehouses                        1 per 1,000 SF GFA
Wholesale establishments          1 per 1,000 SF GFA
 
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1234.15 EXISTING PARKING TO BE MAINTAINED.
   Existing off-street parking or loading serving any use may not be reduced in
amount or changed in size to less than required by this chapter.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1234.16 DESIGN, DEVELOPMENT, AND MAINTENANCE OF PARKING AREAS.
   Every parcel of land hereinafter used as a public or private parking area
shall be designed, developed and maintained in accordance with the following
requirements. Such requirements shall be also subject to the landscaping
requirements of §
1232.04: Landscaping Requirements.
   (a)   Screening.
      (1)   When a parking lot in a nonresidential district abuts a residential
district along a shared lot line, either of the following must be provided:
         A.   A 20-foot-wide existing, wooded strip left in its natural state;
or
         B.   A 15-foot-wide strip within which one or a combination of the
following forms of screening shall be provided:
            1.   Dense vegetative planting, trees and/or shrubs of a variety
which shall be equally effective year-round;
            2.   A landscaped mound or berm; or
            3.   An opaque wall or fence.
         C.   Such screening shall be a minimum of six feet in height, measured
from the natural grade, except that the use of walls or fences in compliance
with this section shall comply with any more restrictive fence regulations
found elsewhere in these regulations.
         D.   Applicants may propose the use of a combination of the allowed
forms of screening.
      (2)   For parking lots or segments of parking lots that are 20,000 square
feet or more in area, a minimum of 5% of the gross area must be reserved for
internal landscaping.
   (b)   Paving.
      (1)   Approved driveway materials in the residential districts shall be
either portland cement concrete or bituminous asphaltic concrete. In the R-1D
District, crushed gravel or an approved semi-rigid surface material, as
approved by the Code Administrator, shall also be permitted. Blast furnace slag
and crushed concrete are not approved driveway surfaces.
      (2)   Any off-street parking area and access drives in nonresidential
districts shall be graded and surfaced with concrete or bituminous surface or
with any surfacing equal to or superior to either of these types, as approved
by the Code Administrator.
      (3)   Porous pavement is permitted for use in nonresidential zoning
districts provided:
         A.   The porous pavement is utilized for only the parking spaces and
no driveways or circulation aisles; and
         B.   The applicant shall submit a maintenance plan to the city in
association with the porous pavement.
      (4)   Failure to comply with the maintenance plan shall be deemed a
violation of this code.
      (5)   Grass paver systems are permitted for use as part of any public
recreation area.
   (c)   Overhang of vehicles. An allowance of a two-foot overhang for vehicles
may be counted as part of the parking space as long as it does not infringe
upon any required landscape area or sidewalk.
   (d)   Lighting. Lighting shall be subject to the exterior lighting standards
of §
1226.04: Outdoor Lighting.
   (e)   Space and directional arrow markings. Designated parking spaces shall
be marked on the surface of the parking area with paint or permanent marking
materials and maintained in a clearly visible condition. Unless modified by the
Code Administrator, white shall be the standard color to delineate usable
portions of off-street parking areas. One-way and two-way access ways into
required parking facilities must be identified by directional arrows.
   (f)   Drainage. All required spaces, together with driveways and other
circulation aisles, shall have adequate provision for drainage and for disposal
of stormwater, so that water shall not flow onto adjoining property or adjacent
sidewalks in a quantity or manner that would be detrimental thereto or
inconvenient to persons using the sidewalk.
   (g)   Separation from public right-of-way. Except in residential zoning
districts, all open off-street parking facilities located within a required
front yard shall be separated from public sidewalks or the existing right-of-
way by a landscaped area at least ten feet in width. This area shall be
landscaped and maintained with a suitable combination of trees, shrubs, and
ground cover. A minimum six-inch barrier curb shall be provided on the parking
lot side of the required landscaped areas.
   (h)   Connection of adjoining parking areas. Planned open off-street parking
facilities shall be required to provide interior access to planned or existing
adjoining open off-street parking facilities and private roadways at property
lines. All interior access between adjoining parking facilities and private
roads shall be open to the public.
   (i)   Interior design and landscaping.
      (1)   All parts of open off-street parking facilities which are unusable,
either for parking, circulation or loading, shall be landscaped and maintained
with plantings of grass, flowers, shrubs, and at a minimum, one tree of at
least 1% inch caliper or larger for every 12 parking spaces.
      (2)   In addition, the following planting, landscaping and interior
design requirements shall be met.
         A.   Interior rows. For parking lots with interior rows, one tree
shall be located at the ends of interior rows and one at each end of a
perimeter row.
         B.   Distribution. Any remaining required trees shall be evenly
distributed along the parking lot perimeter or in interior islands.
         C.   Maximum number required. Nothing in this section requires the
planting of more trees than the number calculated using the 1:12 ratio
established in division (i)(1) of this section.
         D.   Interior island. A curbed landscaped interior island is required
for each 20 contiguous parking spaces in a parking row. The island must be
three feet in width and the length of the adjoining spaces. If a tree is
planted in the interior island the width must be four feet.
         E.   Interior end island. A three-foot wide curbed landscaped interior
end island is required at the end of all interior rows. The length of the
island must be equal to the depth of the adjoining parking spaces. If a tree is
planted in the island area the width at the tree planting area must be four
feet.
         F.   Interior mid-row island. For parking lots in excess of 40 spaces,
a curbed landscaped interior mid-row island connecting the interior end islands
must be provided having a minimum width of three feet. If a tree is planted in
the interior mid-row island the width must be four feet.
         G.   Island design. All islands shall be designed for ease of
vehicular movement.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3244.jpg]
   Figure 1234-A: Common Components to Interior Landscaping.
   (j)   Ground cover. Ground cover must be installed appropriate to the
surface conditions sufficient to prevent erosion and sedimentation of the area.
See §
1232.04: Landscaping Requirements.
   (k)   Lighting and walkways. Lighting fixtures and walkways are permitted
within all landscaped islands and perimeter areas.
   (l)   Interior curbs.
      (1)   All off-street parking spaces must include a barrier that shall be
located at least two- and one-half feet from a fence, wall, walkway, or
landscaped area to protect such areas from vehicle encroachment.
      (2)   Such barrier shall be designed to allow for positive drainage of
stormwater and may include:
         A.   Six-inch tall continuous curbs that have scissor cuts or other
breaks for positive drainage flow; or
         B.   Wheel stops with a minimum height of four and one-half inches.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1234.17 BICYCLE AND E-SCOOTER PARKING.
   When bicycle or e-Scooter parking accommodations are provided on a site,
they shall be located in an area adjacent to the primary building and separate
from vehicular or pedestrian traffic circulation to prevent unnecessary
conflicts and safety hazards between vehicles, people, bicycles and e-Scooters.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1234.18 DRIVE-IN AND DRIVE-THROUGH CIRCULATION AND OFF-STREET WAITING SPACES.
   (a)   When products or services are proposed to be provided to the general
public without requiring them to exit their motor vehicles, a vehicular
circulation plan shall be submitted prior to issuing building permits in
accordance with the following requirements:
      (1)   Commercial establishments, such as banks, drive-through
restaurants, automatic car wash facilities and other similar facilities with
service windows or service entrances, shall provide a minimum of ten waiting
spaces, but not less than five spaces per window or entrance when there are two
or more windows or entrances.
      (2)   Self-serve car wash facilities shall provide no fewer than two
waiting spaces per stall.
      (3)   Gasoline stations shall provide no fewer than two waiting spaces
per accessible side of a gasoline pump island.
      (4)   In any case, there shall be no credit given for spaces within the
public right-of-way for vehicles waiting for service at drive-in or drive-thru
facilities.
   (b)   The Code Administrator shall review the plan and determine that it
does not:
      (1)   Constitute a threat to public safety either to vehicles or
pedestrians; or
      (2)   Block access to and from the required parking spaces.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1234.19 OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE.
   (a)   When required.
      (1)   In connection with every nonresidential building or part thereof
having a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet or more, there shall be
provided and maintained at least one off-street loading space.
      (2)   In addition, one additional such loading space for each 20,000
square feet of gross floor area so used in excess of 20,000 square feet.
   (b)   Each off-street loading space shall be not less than ten feet in
width, 45 feet in length and 14 feet in height, unless waived by the Code
Administrator for good cause shown.
   (c)   In the case of mixed uses, the total requirements for off-street
loading facilities shall be the sum of the various uses computed separately.
   (d)   All loading areas shall be graded as necessary and improved with
bituminous or portland cement, and shall be provided with adequate drainage per
plans approved by the Code Administrator.
   (e)   Each loading space shall be served by direct access to a street,
service drive or alley in a manner that will not interfere with traffic or
parking lot circulation.
   (f)   Off-street loading areas shall be located on the same zoning lot as
the specific use to be served
and shall not be located in any front yard or within 25 feet of any street
right of way, except for areas used for the occasional drop-off or pick-up of
goods by vans, step-vans or panel trucks.
   (g)   All operations, materials and vehicles in any loading space that are
visible from public streets or from residential districts shall be screened.
The screening material, upon installation, shall be at least six feet in height
and 100% opaque.
   (h)   Exterior lighting shall be designed and maintained so that glare is
not cast on adjacent properties, regardless of use, or on adjacent streets. All
lighting structures shall be cut-off types which include shields or other
devices which eliminate all light above an angle of 85 degrees, as measured
from the vertical axis of the light source.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1234.20 MAINTENANCE.
   All required planting must be permanently maintained in good growing
condition and replaced with new plant materials when necessary to ensure
continued compliance with applicable landscaping requirements.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1234.21 SIDEWALKS AND SIDEWALK CONNECTIONS TO A RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (a)   Public sidewalks.
      (1)   New public sidewalks, constructed to meet the city’s construction
standards, shall be required along the street frontage of any lot being
developed when the following conditions exist:
         A.   The development includes new construction on a vacant lot or
complete redevelopment of an existing principal building (e.g., the principal
building is torn down and replaced);
         B.   There is no public sidewalk along one or more of the public
street rights-of-way adjacent to the lot; and
         C.   There is adequate existing right-of-way for the public sidewalk.
      (2)   All sidewalks shall be constructed in the same manner as public
sidewalks in Chapter 1010 of the code of ordinances.
   (b)   Internal pedestrian connections.
      (1)   Where a sidewalk exists in a public right-of-way adjacent to the
site, is required to be constructed as part of the development approval, or
where a public transit stop is located along any of the applicable site’s
frontage, a paved pedestrian connection shall be constructed from the sidewalk
to the entrance of the building.
      (2)   The pedestrian connection shall have a minimum width of five feet.
      (3)   All pedestrian walkways located within a site (internal pedestrian
circulation) shall be physically separated from the drive lanes and driveways.
Additionally, all sidewalks and crosswalks shall be constructed of an
impervious surface and shall be visually distinct from the driving surface by
use of pavers, color, bricks, scored concrete, or other material approved by
the Code Administrator or Planning Commission, as applicable. See Figure 1234-
B.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3246.jpg]
   Figure 1234-B: This photograph illustrates how a sidewalk connecting the
public sidewalk to the business can be integrated into the required
landscaping.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1234.22 TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS.
   (a)   Intent. A traffic impact analysis (TIA) is intended to identify the
transportation impacts which are likely to be generated by a proposed use and
to identify improvements required to ensure safe ingress to and egress from a
proposed development, maintenance of adequate street capacity, and elimination
of hazardous conditions.
   (b)   Applicability. A TIA shall be required in the following cases:
      (1)   Any zoning map amendment application that seeks to rezone
properties from R-1A, R-1B, R-1C or R-1D to an R-2 or R-3 Zoning District;
      (2)   Any application for a RPD development plan where there is a
proposed density of four units per acre or more and the site is located
adjacent to a R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, or R-D District;
      (3)   Any application for a MUO development plan; and
      (4)   Any application that due to its size, density, traffic generation
rates or location can reasonably be expected to create traffic issues, as
determined by the Development Review Committee, is required to submit a TIA.
   (c)   Contents of a TIA. The TIA shall be prepared and certified by a
professional traffic engineer and shall include, at a minimum, the following
data and information. Information and statistics required by this section may,
when available, be obtained from the city.
      (1)   Study area.
         A.   Developments wishing to take access from a major thoroughfare
(arterial street) shall provide an analysis of the traffic impact from the
proposed point of access to the nearest signalized intersections in all
directions, or up to a one-half-mile radius, whichever is less.
         B.   Developments wishing to take access from a collector street shall
provide an analysis of the traffic impact from the proposed point of access to
the nearest intersections of the collector with an arterial in all directions,
or up to a one-half-mile radius, whichever is less.
         C.   Developments wishing to take access from a local street shall
provide an analysis of the traffic impact from the proposed point of access to
the nearest arterial streets in all directions, or up to a 0.25-mile radius,
whichever is less.
      (2)   Existing conditions. The report shall contain information clearly
describing, in written or graphic form, the existing and proposed conditions
including:
         A.   The proposed land use of the site and anticipated stages of
construction;
         B.   The existing street system including major intersections, ingress
and egress locations, roadway and right-of-way widths, traffic signals and
traffic control devices and public transportation facilities;
         C.   Any proposed changes in the street system; and
         D.   A 24-hour traffic count on all roadways which have direct access
to the proposed development site and the existing average daily traffic volume
and the highest average peak hour volume for any weekday hour between 3:00 p.m.
and 6:00 p.m.
      (3)   Development impact. The report shall include information on the
average weekday trip generation rate (trip ends) and the highest average hourly
weekday trip generation rate between 3:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. for the proposed
use as determined from figures provided by a qualified traffic engineer.
      (4)   Determination of the capacity of the roadway.
         A.   Data and procedures contained in the Highway Capacity Manual,
Special Report 87, published by the National Highway Research Board, shall be
utilized to calculate the level of service of roadways as required for this
TIA. Roadway service volumes shall be calculated at level of service C for
roads identified as arterials and at level of service D for roads identified as
collectors.
         B.   All arterial roadways operating below level of service C
(inclusive of levels D, E and F) shall be identified as congested locations.
All collector roadways operating below level of service D (inclusive of levels
E and F) shall be identified as congested locations.
      (5)   Determination of the capacity of intersections.
         A.   A load-factor analysis shall be conducted for one 24-hour period
on a weekday on all intersections within the study area. The highest average
hourly load factor between 3:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. shall also be recorded. A
maximum load factor of 3/10 is operating below level of service C (inclusive of
levels D, E, and F) and shall be identified as congested locations.
         B.   A maximum load factor of 7/10 will be allowed for intersections
involving two collector roads. All such intersections with a load factor
greater than 7/10 are operating below level of service D (levels E and F) and
shall be identified as congested locations.
         C.   To determine intersection capacity at levels of service C and D,
Figure 6.8 and Tables 6.4, 6.5, and 6.6 of the Highway Capacity Manual shall be
consulted or any other applicable figures or tables as determined by the City
Engineer or engineering consultant(s) to the city.
      (6)   Conclusions. The projected total future peak hour traffic demand
shall be calculated for all roads fronting on a proposed site and all
intersections within the study area. This demand shall consist of an assumed
normal increase of traffic volume of 2% per year (or the Northeast Ohio
Areawide Coordinating Agency (NOACA) projections, whichever is less) and the
anticipated traffic that will be generated by the proposed development. An
analysis shall be undertaken to determine if roadways and intersections will
operate at the appropriate level of service following completion of the
development, given the future peak hour traffic that will be generated by the
proposed development. This analysis consists of the comparison of the total
future peak hour intersection and roadway traffic demand with the service
volumes for levels C and D computed in division (c)(4) and(c)(5) of this
section. All roadways and intersections that would operate below the required
level of service following completion of the development shall be considered
deficient.
   (d)   Mitigating traffic impacts. If the TIA results in the conclusion that
the level of service of adjacent roadways and/or intersections is or will
become deficient prior to the proposed development and will not be able to
accommodate the increased traffic load generated by the proposed development,
any or all of the following mitigating steps may be required, at the
developer’s expense, by the City Engineer or engineering consultant(s) to the
city. The City Engineer or engineering consultant(s) to the city shall make
their determination prior to approval of a RPD development plan, MUO
development plan, site plan, or zoning permit, whichever is applicable.
      (1)   Limitation of the number and/or location of access points;
      (2)   Design of access points to prevent certain turn movements;
      (3)   Dedication of and/or improvement to the right-of-way abutting the
development of improvements in the immediate vicinity of the development to add
turn lane, through traffic lanes or allow redesign of intersections or access
points to accommodate additional traffic or turning movements;
      (4)   Installation of traffic signals or other traffic control devices as
may be warranted by the Uniform Traffic Control Manual; and/or
      (5)   Development of the site at a lower intensity than originally
proposed.
   (e)   Responsibility for thoroughfare improvements. In cases in which a
proposed street or right-of-way, as shown on a plan adopted by the city, abuts
or crosses the proposed development, the subdivider shall be responsible for
all required public improvements, including the construction of the right-of-
way as delineated by such plan. Certain public improvements may be waived on
review and approval by the Planning Commission; however, right-of-way
dedication shall be required in all cases.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021; Ord. 24-33, passed 3-25-2024; Ord. 25-109,
passed 6-23-2025)
CHAPTER 1236: SIGN STANDARDS
Section
1236.01 Purpose
1236.02 Substitution and protection clause
1236.03 Reclassification of signage
1236.04 Applicability
1236.05 Review and permit requirements
1236.06 Prohibited signs
1236.07 Measurements and computations
1236.08 General requirements for all signs
1236.09 Sign illumination and electronic message centers
1236.10 Permanent signs
1236.11 Temporary signs
1236.12 Nonconforming signs
§ 1236.01 PURPOSE.
   (a)   In the interest of furthering the purpose of this code, these sign
regulations are herein established to provide for the use, location and size of
signs in a manner that ensures that signs are in harmony with the character of
the associated use and surrounding area. More specifically, the purposes of
these regulations are to:
      (1)   Promote and maintain attractive, high value residential, commercial
and industrial areas;
      (2)   Control the size and location so that signs will be aesthetically
harmonious and in context with the area in which they are located;
      (3)   Provide for reasonable and appropriate methods for locating goods,
services and facilities in all zoning districts by relating the size, type and
design of signs to the size, type and design of the uses and districts;
      (4)   Eliminate any conflict that would be hazardous between
identification signs and traffic control signs and devices;
      (5)   Ensure that signs are located and designed to maintain a safe and
orderly pedestrian and vehicular environment; and
      (6)   Prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this code.
   (b)   In establishing these purposes, the city has determined that signs
which do not comply with these regulations (type, size, location and limitation
on the number of signs) are a public nuisance. Unregulated signs are unduly
distracting to motorists and pedestrians, and thereby create a traffic hazard
and reduce the effectiveness of signs needed to direct the public.
   (c)   The city does not intend to infringe on the rights of free speech as
protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution and Chapter
I, § 11 of the Ohio Constitution. All regulations in this chapter are to be
construed, whenever possible, in favor of vigorous political debate and
accommodation of the rights of persons to speak freely.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1236.02 SUBSTITUTION AND PROTECTION CLAUSE.
   Wherever a sign with a commercial message is allowed or permitted under this
chapter, an owner may replace the message with a noncommercial message, subject
to the time, place and manner provisions of this chapter, without applying for
a permit and/or paying a fee that otherwise would be required for the placement
of a commercial message sign on the lot; provided, that the sign structure or
mounting device is legal without consideration of message content. This
provision prevails over any provision to the contrary in this chapter. The
purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial
speech over noncommercial speech, or favoring of any particular noncommercial
message over any other noncommercial message. This provision does not create a
right to increase the total amount of signage on a lot or parcel, nor does it
affect the requirement that a sign structure or mounting device be properly
permitted.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1236.03 RECLASSIFICATION OF SIGNAGE.
   If the type of any sign that legally existed prior to the effective date of
this amendment is reclassified by this amendment, such sign shall be classified
as the sign type defined in this chapter and Chapter 1246: Definitions, and
shall be subject to the applicable standards for such sign type from the
effective date of this amendment. Such reclassification shall be regardless of
any variances that were approved prior to the effective date of this amendment.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1236.04 APPLICABILITY.
   (a)   No person shall erect, place, relocate, expand, modify, maintain or
otherwise alter a sign, or cause a sign to be erected, placed, relocated,
expanded, modified, maintained, or otherwise altered unless all provisions of
this code have been met.
   (b)   Unless otherwise provided, this chapter shall apply to any sign, in
any zoning district, that is visible from a public right-of-way or from an
adjacent property.
   (c)   Any sign legally established prior to the effective date of this
chapter, and which sign is rendered nonconforming by the provisions herein,
shall be subject to the nonconforming sign regulations of §
1236.12: Nonconforming Signs.
   (d)   Any person installing, structurally altering and/or relocating a sign
for which a permit has been issued shall be responsible for the scheduling of
necessary inspections, including, but not limited to, an inspection of footings
on a freestanding sign, building, and electrical inspections and the like,
during the course of the work.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1236.05 REVIEW AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Permit generally. To ensure compliance with these regulations, a
zoning permit shall be required to be issued unless specifically exempted in
this chapter.
   (b)   Historic district. Zoning permits for signs in a historic district or
on a landmark site shall not be considered until a COA has been approved.
   (c)   Design criteria. Signage requests not related to a use or development
that requires site plan approval may be approved administratively by the Code
Administrator, provided that such request(s) adheres to all the applicable code
requirements listed in this section. The Code Administrator shall have the
option to defer the signage request to the Planning Commission for approval.
All permanent signs related to a use or development that requires a site plan
review approval (see §
1214.06: Site Plans) shall be required to be reviewed as part of the site plan
review application prior to issuance of a zoning permit. During such review,
the Planning Commission shall consider the following design criteria, without
consideration of the message, in addition to the numerical standards of this
chapter:
      (1)   The lettering shall be large enough to be easily read but not
overly large or out of scale with the building or site;
      (2)   The number of items, letters, symbols and shapes shall be
consistent with the amount of information which can be comprehended by the
viewer; reflect simplicity; avoid visual clutter; and improve legibility;
      (3)   The shape of the sign shall be simple and not create visual
clutter, and the sign should be consolidated to a minimum number of elements;
      (4)   The size, style and location of the sign shall be appropriate to
the activity of the site;
      (5)   The sign shall compliment the building and adjacent buildings by
being designed and placed to enhance the architecture;
      (6)   Signs shall have an appropriate contrast and be designed with a
limited number of, and harmonious use of, colors;
      (7)   Extraneous elements, by virtue of inappropriate remodeling, and
which exist at the time a new sign is proposed, shall be removed to improve the
clarity and design of the proposed sign and restore the intended character of
the building;
      (8)   Signs, if seen in series, shall have a continuity of design with
the style of sign generally consistent throughout the building or block;
      (9)   Visible frames or supports for projecting signs shall be artistic
in nature; and
      (10)   A sign should be constructed with a minimum of different types of
material so as to provide a consistent overall appearance.
   (d)   Zoning permit exemptions for signs. The following signs are subject to
the requirements of this chapter but do not require a zoning permit. Permit-
exempt signs may still be subject to building code or other applicable code
requirements:
      (1)   Signs and/or notices issued by any court, officer or other person
in performance of a public duty. Any such sign shall be removed no later than
seven days after the last day it is required to be displayed;
      (2)   Whenever any sign, either conforming or nonconforming, is required
to be removed for the purpose of repair, relettering or repainting, the same
may be done without a zoning permit or any payment of fees provided that all of
the following conditions are met:
         A.   There is no alteration or remodeling to the structure or the
mounting of the sign itself;
         B.   There is no enlargement or increase in any of the dimensions of
the sign or its structure; and
         C.   The sign is accessory to a legally permitted or legally
nonconforming use.
      (3)   This shall include the exchange of sign panels when a sign is
designed to have replaceable sign faces unless a zoning permit or site plan
review is required for simultaneous work on the applicable lot, in which case,
the sign panel change shall be reviewed as part of the zoning permit or site
plan review application, as applicable;
      (4)   Signs that are an integral part of the original construction of
vending or similar machines, fuel pumps, automated teller machines or similar
devices that are not of a size or design as to be visible from a street or by
any person other than those using the machine or device;
      (5)   Any sign that is located completely inside a building that is not
visible from the exterior (see also definition of window sign);
      (6)   Signs that are located within a stadium, open-air theater, park,
arena or other outdoor use that are not visible from a public right-of-way or
adjacent property, and can be viewed only by persons within such stadium, open-
air theater, park, arena or other outdoor use;
      (7)   Certain temporary signs as established in §
1236.11: Temporary Signs;
      (8)   No more than four flags located on flagpoles or on wall-mounted
posts provided that the following shall apply:
         A.   The maximum height of flag poles shall not exceed the maximum
building height for structures in the subject zoning district, and a maximum
sign area of area of 40 square feet for any individual flag attached to the
pole; and
         B.   The maximum projection for wall-mounted flag post is six feet and
a maximum sign area of 15 square feet per flag.
      (9)   A single wall sign placed on the facade of an individual dwelling
unit that is not illuminated and does not exceed two square feet in area;
      (10)   Signs that are an integral part of the historic character of a
structure that has been designated an official landmark or historic structure
by any agency or body of the governments of the United States, state, Lorain
County or city;
      (11)   Any signs located on umbrellas, seating or similar patio furniture
provided they are located outside of the right-of-way;
      (12)   Ground signs and markings located completely within the interior
of a lot used for a cemetery where such signs are not designed to be visible
from a public street;
      (13)   Signs that are part of a public art installation;
      (14)   Any sign on a truck, bus or other vehicle that is used in the
normal course of a business (e.g., deliveries or fleet vehicles for
contractors) for transportation (see also § 1236.06(p)), or signage required by
the state or federal government;
      (15)   Signs installed or required by a governmental agency including the
city, Lorain County, state and United States, including local and regional
transit agencies;
      (16)   Any warning signs or traffic safety signs required by public
utility providers;
      (17)   Hand-held signs not set on or affixed to the ground;
      (18)   Any address numbers required by the city, Lorain County or the
state;
      (19)   Changes of copy on signs with changeable copy;
      (20)   Any signs, including illuminated signs, or related decorations
erected in observance of religious, national or state holidays which are not
intended to be permanent in nature and which contain no advertising material;
and
      (21)   General maintenance, painting, repainting, cleaning and other
normal maintenance and repair of a sign or any sign structure unless a
structural change is made.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021; Ord. 22-195, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 1236.06 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   The following types of signs are specifically prohibited within the city:
   (a)   Any sign that copies or imitates a sign installed by any governmental
agency or purports to have been authorized by a governmental agency;
   (b)   Signs that interfere with, obstruct the view of, or are similar in
appearance to any authorized traffic sign, signal or device because of its
position, shape, use of words or color;
   (c)   Signs that constitute a hazard to safety or health by reason of
inadequate or inappropriate design, construction, repair or maintenance, as
determined by the building official;
   (d)   Signs that employ any parts or elements which revolve, rotate, whirl,
spin or otherwise make use of motion to attract attention. This shall not
include electronic message centers as allowed in this chapter;
   (e)   Signs with moving or flashing lights except for electronic message
centers as allowed in this chapter;
   (f)   Feather signs;
   (g)   Beacons and searchlights, except for emergency purposes;
   (h)   Windblown devices, pennants, streamers, and similar signs that are
designed to move by atmospheric, mechanical, electrical or other means, whether
containing words or numerals or containing no message.
   (i)   Air-activated graphics;
   (j)   Balloon signs;
   (k)   Roof signs;
   (l)   Signs that are applied to trees, bus shelters, utility poles, benches,
trash receptacles, newspaper
vending machines or boxes, or any other unapproved supporting structure, or
otherwise placed in the public right-of-way except as otherwise specifically
provided for in this code;
   (m)   Signs that obstruct or substantially interfere with any window, door,
fire escape, stairway, ladder or opening intended to provide light, air,
ingress or egress to any building;
   (n)   Signs which are not securely affixed to the ground or otherwise
affixed in a permanent manner to an approved supporting structure unless
specifically permitted as a temporary sign;
   (o)   Portable signs;
   (p)   Vehicle signs viewed from a public road with the primary purpose of
providing signage not otherwise allowed by this chapter. A vehicle sign shall
be considered to be used for the primary purpose of advertising if the vehicle
fails to display current license plates, inspection sticker, or municipal
decal; if the vehicle is inoperable; if evidence of paid-to-date local taxes
cannot be made available; or if the sign alters the standard design of such
vehicle. Vehicle signs include those attached to or placed on a vehicle or
trailer. Vehicles or trailers shall not be parked continuously in one location
to be used primarily as additional signage. This does not apply to a vehicle
parked at a driver’s residence and is the primary means of transportation to
and from his or her place of employment. See also §
1236.05(d)(14); and
   (q)   Any sign not specifically allowed by this chapter.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1236.07 MEASUREMENTS AND COMPUTATIONS.
   (a)   Sign setback. All required setbacks for signs shall be measured as the
distance in feet from the lot line or right-of-way, whichever is applicable, to
the closest point on the sign structure.
   (b)   Sign height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance
from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached
component of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be the newly
established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming,
mounding or excavating solely undertaken for the purpose of locating or
increasing the height of sign.
   (c)   Sign area. The surface of a sign to be included when computing maximum
allowable square footage of sign area shall be calculated as established in
this section. For the purposes of calculating sign area, any of the following
regular geometric shapes may be used: circle, ellipse, triangle, square,
rectangle, trapezoid, pentagon or hexagon.
      (1)   The calculation of sign area shall not include any supporting
framework, bracing or decorative fence or wall unless such structural support
is determined to constitute an integral part of the sign design by means of
text or other message, as determined by the Code Administrator. See Figure
1236-A.
      (2)   For sign copy mounted or painted on a background panel, cabinet or
surface distinctively painted, textured, lighted or constructed to serve as the
background for the sign copy, the sign area shall be computed by means of the
smallest permitted shape, or combination of permitted shapes, that encompasses
the extreme limits of the background panel, cabinet or surface. See Figure
1236-A and Figure 1236-B.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3248.jpg]
   Figure 1236-A: Illustration of sign area calculation for a ground sign with
a copy on a distinct, rectangular cabinet. The brick structural support is not
included in the sign area calculation.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3252.jpg]
   Figure 1236-B: Illustration of computing the sign area for wall signs with a
background panel or cabinet.
      (3)   For sign copy where individual letters or elements are mounted on a
building facade or window where there is no background panel, cabinet or
surface distinctively painted, textured, lighted or constructed to serve as the
background for the sign copy, the sign area shall be computed by means of the
smallest permitted shape, or combination of permitted shapes, that encloses all
the letters or elements associated with the sign. See Figure 1236-C.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3252.jpg]
   Figure 1236-C: Illustration of sign area calculation for wall signs with
individual letters.
      (4)   In cases where there are multiple sign elements of sign copy on the
same surface, any areas of sign copy that are within two feet of one another
shall be calculated as a single sign area that shall be computed by means of
the smallest permitted shape, or combination of permitted shapes, that encloses
all sign copy within two feet of one another, otherwise the sign area shall be
computed for each separate piece of sign copy. See Figure 1236-D.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3254.jpg]
   Figure 1236-D: Illustration of sign area calculations for multiple sign
areas on a window sign.
      (5)   Decorative edging or other window treatments that are not an
integral part of the sign copy shall not be considered a part of the sign for
the purposes of this chapter. See Figure 1236-D.
      (6)   Except for three-dimensional signs, the sign area for a sign with
more than one face (multifaced signs) shall be computed by adding together the
area of all sign faces when the interior angle is greater than 45 degrees.
      (7)   When two identically sized, flat sign faces are placed back-to-back
or at angles of 45 degrees or less, so that both faces cannot be viewed from
any one point at the same time, the sign area shall be computed by the
measurement of one of the sign faces. If the two faces are unequal, the sign
area shall be calculated based on the larger of the two faces.
      (8)   In the case of a three-dimensional sign where the sign faces are
not mounted back-to-back, the sign area shall be calculated by the smallest
permitted shape, or combination of permitted shapes, that encompasses the
profile of the sign message. The profile used shall be the largest area of the
sign message visible from any one point. See Figure 1236-E.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3256.jpg]
   Figure 1236-E: Illustration of sign area calculations for three-dimensional
sign.
   (d)   Facade measurements.
      (1)   When calculating the permitted sign area based on the width of any
facade, such calculation shall be based on viewing the facade from a 90-degree
angle (i.e., straight on), regardless of facade insets, offsets or angles. See
Figure 1236-F.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3258.jpg]
   Figure 1236-F: Illustration of facade width measurement on varied facade
shapes.
      (2)   The primary facade shall be the portion of a frontage that serves
as the main access point to a building or building unit. A site or building
will be considered to have secondary facades when any of the following site/
building characteristics are present (see Figure 1236-G):
         A.   The subject site is a corner lot;
         B.   The primary parking area is not located adjacent to a public
street; or
         C.   The building or unit has walls with public or customer entrance
points that do not face the public street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3260.jpg]
   Figure 1236-G: Common examples of the location of primary and secondary
facades.
      (3)   When a site has primary and secondary facade as defined herein, the
Code Administrator shall determine which wall shall be the primary building
facade and which wall(s) shall be the secondary building facade. Only one
outside wall of any business shall be considered its primary facade.
      (4)   For multi-tenant buildings, the portion of a building that is owned
or leased by a single occupant or tenant shall be considered a building unit.
The facade width for a building unit shall be measured from the centerline of
the party walls defining the building unit.
      (5)   The Code Administrator shall have the authority to make the
determination of what facades are primary facades and secondary facades for the
purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1236.08 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL SIGNS.
   Unless otherwise specifically stated, the following regulations shall apply
to all signs within the city.
   (a)   Permanent signs are considered accessory uses and shall be accessory
to a principal use provided for in this code. Temporary signs may be permitted
on all lots, regardless of the presence of a principal use, provided the
temporary signs are in compliance with this chapter.
   (b)   All signs shall be constructed in compliance with the applicable
building and electrical codes as well as any other city regulations.
   (c)   Signs shall be structurally designed to withstand wind pressure of 30
pounds per square foot in any direction.
   (d)   Signs shall be fabricated on and of materials which are of good
quality, good durability and are complimentary to the building of which they
become a part.
   (e)   No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent
free ingress or egress, or block any light or ventilation openings.
   (f)   No sign shall obstruct or interfere with fire ingress or egress from
any door, window or fire escape, nor shall it obstruct or interfere with
traffic or traffic visibility, or resemble or imitate signs or signals erected
by the city or other governmental agency for the regulation of traffic or
parking.
   (g)   All signs shall be secured in such a manner as to prevent swinging or
other significant noticeable movement, not including movement related to
permitted electronic message centers.
   (h)   Signs supported by or suspended from a building shall hang so as to
maintain a minimum clear height of eight feet above a pedestrian path and 15
feet above a vehicular path.
   (i)   All signs shall comply with the vision clearance requirements of §
1226.05: Intersection Visibility.
   (j)   Signs in rights-of-way.
      (1)   Signs shall be prohibited in the right-of-way with the exception
of:
         A.   Signs installed by the city, Lorain County, state or United
States, including local and regional transit agencies;
         B.   Permanent monument signs if approved by the Code Administrator
and where a homeowners’ or property owners’ association agreement or covenants
provide for the maintenance of the sign; or
         C.   Any warning signs or traffic safety signs required by public
utility providers.
      (2)   The building official may remove or cause to be removed any
unlawful sign in the public right-of-way.
   (k)   Landscaping permanent freestanding signs.
      (1)   All permanent freestanding signs shall be located in a landscaped
area equal to or larger than the total sign area of the applicable sign. Such
landscaped area may be an area that fulfills any landscaping requirements of
this code.
      (2)   The landscaped area shall include all points where sign structural
supports attach to the ground.
      (3)   Exposed sign foundations shall be constructed with a finished
material such as brick, stone or wood, or be screened with evergreens to the
top of the anchor bolts.
   (l)   Maintenance.
      (1)   Every sign shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and good
structural condition at all times, including the replacement of a defective
part, painting, cleaning and other acts required for the maintenance of the
sign so as not to show evidence of deterioration, including peeling, rust,
dirt, fading, damage, discoloration or holes.
      (2)   Whenever a sign is to be removed pursuant to the requirements of
this section, all parts of the sign and supporting structure (e.g., pole,
foundation, cabinet structure and the like), excluding buildings for wall,
projecting or similar signage, shall be removed in its entirety. This section
shall not require the removal of a raceway if mounted to such structure on a
building.
      (3)   The building official or Code Administrator may order the removal
or repair of any sign that, has become insecure, in danger of falling or
otherwise unsafe, or presents a threat to the public safety.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1236.09 SIGN ILLUMINATION AND ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTERS.
   All signs, unless otherwise stated in this chapter, may be illuminated by
internal or external light sources, provided that such illumination complies
with the following.
   (a)   Illuminated signs shall not have any flashing or blinking lights or
rotating beacons, nor shall any beam of light be projected through a mechanism
which periodically changes the color of the light reaching the sign.
   (b)   All illumination shall be oriented so as to prevent glare onto traffic
or onto adjacent property or structures.
   (c)   All electrical illumination devices shall be designed to be weather-
resistant and shatterproof.
   (d)   Electronic message centers: all electronic message centers shall be
subject to the following requirements.
      (1)   The maximum brightness of the electronic message center shall be:
         A.   The electronic message center shall come equipped with an
automatic dimming photocell, which automatically adjusts the display’s
brightness based on ambient light conditions;
         B.   The brightness level shall not increase by more than 0.3-foot
candles (or 3.23 lumens per square meter or lux) (over ambient levels) as
measured using a foot candle meter at a pre-set distance;
         C.   The procedure and distances for measurement of brightness shall
be as established by the International Sign Association’s Recommend Night-time
Brightness Levels for On-Premise Electronic Message Centers; and
         D.   The owners of such signs shall include specifications
accompanying their zoning permit application, demonstrating that they will
comply with the prescribed brightness limitations set by this code.
      (2)   Electronic message centers shall have a pixel pitch of not more
than 16 millimeters.
      (3)   Electronic message centers shall be designed and equipped to freeze
the device in one position if a malfunction occurs. The displays must also be
equipped with a measure to immediately discontinue the display if it
malfunctions.
      (4)   Any message change shall be a static, instant message change
meaning the sign shall not include animation, full motion video, flashing,
scrolling, strobing, racing, blinking, changes in color, fade in or fade out in
any manner imitating movement, or any other means not providing constant
illumination.
      (5)   Messages can only change once every ten seconds.
      (6)   Only Light Emitting Diodes (LED) technology or similar quality
signs shall be permitted for electronic message centers.
      (7)   Wherever an electronic message center is permitted, a manual
changeable copy sign shall also be permitted. A zoning permit shall be required
to change between each type of sign.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1236.10 PERMANENT SIGNS.
   The following are the types of permanent signs allowed in the city and the
applicable regulations for each type of sign.
   (a)   Freestanding signs in residential districts.
      (1)   Entrance signs. Two wall signs or one permanent monument sign may
be permitted for any subdivision or multi-family dwelling development provided
that the sign meets the following requirements.
         A.   General standards.
            1.   Each sign may have a maximum sign area of 12 square feet.
            2.   No such sign or any portion of the structure shall exceed six
feet in height.
            3.   The sign may only be illuminated through an external light
source.
         B.   Monument sign.
            1.   A maximum of two permanent monument sign may be permitted for
each entrance to the subdivision or development on a collector or arterial
street, as determined by the Development Review Committee.
            2.   Each sign shall be setback 15 feet from the public right-of-
way and 20 feet from any adjacent lot lines.
            3.   One monument sign may be located on the center island of a
boulevard entrance. See §
1236.08(j).
            4.   If an applicant proposes to use monument signs, no wall signs,
as allowed in division(a)(1)C. of this section shall be permitted.
         C.   Wall signs on entry fences, walls, or features.
            1.   A maximum of two wall signs may be permitted for each entrance
to the subdivision or development on a collector or arterial street, as
determined by the Development Review Committee.
            2.   The signs shall be mounted to a decorative wall, fence, or
architectural feature adjacent to the entrance street.
            3.   The placement of wall signs on architectural features shall
only be permitted if such architectural feature is approved as part of a RPD or
a subdivision plat. See Figure 1236-H.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3262.jpg]
   Figure 1236-H: Example of an architectural feature at the entrance of a
subdivision.
            4.   The sign shall be setback 15 feet from the public right-of-way
and 20 feet from any adjacent lot lines.
            5.   If an applicant proposes to use wall signs, no monument sign,
as allowed in division (a)(1)B. of this section shall be permitted.
      (2)   Freestanding signs for conditional uses in residential districts.
         A.   One permanent monument sign may be permitted on a lot containing
a use approved as a conditional use provided the sign meets the following
requirements.
            1.   The sign shall be set back seven feet from the public right-
of-way and 20 feet from any adjacent lot lines.
            2.   The maximum sign area shall be 36 square feet.
            3.   No such sign or any portion of the structure shall exceed six
feet in height.
         B.   Buildings signs shall be permitted on a lot containing a use
approved as a conditional use provided the signs meet the same requirements for
building signs in the B-1 District in division (c) of this section.
   (b)   Freestanding signs in nonresidential districts. All freestanding signs
in B-1, B-2, B-3, I-1, and I-2 districts shall be monument signs that meet the
following requirements.
      (1)   A freestanding sign is only permitted in the B-3 District when the
principal building is set back a minimum of ten feet from the right-of-way.
      (2)   The monument sign shall be set back minimum of seven feet from the
right-of-way and 15 feet from any adjacent lot lines. In the B-3 District, the
sign shall not be required to be set back from the right-of-way.
      (3)   Only one monument sign shall be permitted along each street
frontage. One additional monument sign may be allowed on the same street
frontage provided there is a minimum lot width of 200 feet and the signs are
separated by at least 100 feet.
      (4)   The maximum sign area permitted, per sign, shall be 32 square feet
in the B-3 District and 40 square feet in all other nonresidential zoning
districts.
      (5)   The maximum sign height shall be seven feet.
      (6)   Monument signs may include manual changeable copy signs or
electronic message centers as regulated by this chapter.
      (7)   Where a freestanding sign serves a multi-tenant building, it shall
be the responsibility of the property owner to determine the messaging on the
sign.
      (8)   Exposed sign foundations shall be constructed with a finished
material such as brick, stone or wood.
   (c)   Building signs. Except for the wall sign permitted in §
1236.05(d), building signs shall not be permitted in residential districts
unless accessory to an approved conditional use. In all other districts,
building signs are permitted on principal structures in accordance with the
following.
      (1)   The building sign area allowed in this section shall include the
total amount of all wall, canopy, awning and projecting signs on each facade
wall. Standards for each individual building sign type are established in this
section.
      (2)   Building signs shall not extend above the top of the roofline of
the building to which it is attached. For canopy signs, the signs may be
attached above the canopy, which is attached permanently to the building,
provided that the sign does not extend above the top of the roofline of the
building.
      (3)   Building signs may not be attached to mechanical equipment or roof
screening.
      (4)   Building signs shall not include electronic message centers.
      (5)   Building sign allowance.
         A.   There is no maximum number of permitted building signs.
         B.   Where there is a building sign allowance for a primary facade,
such building sign area shall only be attached to the primary facade.
         C.   Where there is a secondary facade, as determined in §
1236.07(d), there shall only be one designated secondary facade and any
building sign area allowed for the secondary facade shall be attached to the
applicable secondary facade.
 
Table 1236-1: Maximum Building Sign Area
Occupancy     Calculation
Building      Primary facade: 1.5 square foot of sign area per lineal foot of
              primary facade width [1]
             Secondary facade: 1.0 square feet of sign area per lineal foot of
              secondary facade width
              1.5 square foot of sign area per lineal foot of facade width of
Building unit the individual building unit provided that the building unit has
              an exterior entrance [1]
             Secondary facade: 1.0 square feet of sign area per lineal foot of
              secondary facade width assigned to the individual building unit
NOTE:
[1] For building facades that are set back a minimum of 100 feet from a right-
of-way, an additional 0.5 square feet of sign area shall be permitted per
lineal foot on that applicable facade.
 
         D.   For conditionally approved uses in residential zoning districts,
the maximum building sign area shall be based on a calculation of one square
foot of sign area per lineal foot of primary facade with, with a maximum of 100
square feet of total building sign area.
      (6)   Wall sign standards: any wall sign shall comply with the following
standards.
         A.   Wall signs shall be mounted on or flush with a wall and shall not
project more than 18 inches from the wall or face of the building to which it
is attached.
         B.   A wall sign may be mounted on the facade wall or mounted on a
raceway or wireway.
         C.   No wall sign shall extend any closer than 12 inches to either the
top or side edges of the surface or wall to which it is attached. No wall sign
shall cover or obscure any wall opening.
         D.   No wall sign shall extend above the parapet of the main building
to which it is attached, nor beyond the vertical limits of such building.
         E.   Wall signs may be internally or externally illuminated except
when attached to a facade that faces a residential zoning district, in which
case the illumination of the wall sign is prohibited.
         F.   The wall sign allowance may be used for signs attached to roofed
structures over fueling stations or to stand-alone accessory structure such as
Automated Teller Machines (ATMs) or detached accessory buildings.
      (7)   Canopy or awning sign standards: any canopy or awning sign shall
comply with the following standards.
         A.   Signage shall not cover more than 24 square feet of any
individual awning, canopy or marquee.
         B.   Canopies or awnings should not extend more than 36 inches from
the facade.
         C.   Signage may be mounted above any canopy that extends over a
customer entrance provided that the maximum sign height over the canopy shall
be 18 inches as measured from the top of the canopy to the top of the sign.
         D.   Only the area of the sign may be illuminated internally on a
canopy or awning. The remainder of any canopy or awning shall not be
illuminated or may be illuminated by an external source such as gooseneck
lighting.
      (8)   Projecting sign standards: any projecting sign shall comply with
the following standards.
         A.   Only one projecting sign shall be permitted for each tenant of
building space.
         B.   A projecting sign shall be perpendicular to the wall of the
building to which it is attached and shall not extend more than four feet from
the facade wall to which it is attached.
         C.   Projecting signs shall maintain a minimum six-inch clearance from
the facade of any building.
         D.   Decorative supporting structures for projecting signs are
encouraged and shall not count toward the maximum square footage of signs
allowed, however, in no case shall the supporting structure exceed six square
feet.
         E.   The maximum sign area for a projecting sign shall be 24 square
feet.
         F.   Projecting signs must be suspended from brackets or other
supports approved by the building official and contain no exposed guy wires or
turnbuckles.
         G.   Projecting signs shall not encroach into any right-of-way.
   (d)   Window signs.
      (1)   Window signs are prohibited in residential zoning districts with
the exception that temporary signs may be placed in windows. See §
1236.11.
      (2)   Window signs may be temporarily or permanently attached to the
window surface.
      (3)   Window signs shall not occupy more than 25% of the window area. The
sign area is based on the total window area, regardless of the presence of an
awning. Window areas separated by piers, architectural elements or similar
features that are not glass or window framing or support shall be considered
separate and distinct window areas. See Figure 1236-I.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3264.jpg]
   Figure 1236-I: The window area is illustrated within the dashed line area
for the two storefronts in the above image. The dashed lines highlight two
separate window areas due to the separation by an architectural feature not
related to the windows.
   (e)   Drive-through facility signs.
      (1)   Drive-through facility signs shall only be permitted in
nonresidential zoning districts.
      (2)   One drive-through facility sign shall be allowed for each stacking
lane in a drive-through facility provided the total aggregate sign area of all
ground signs associated with each drive-through facility does not exceed 72
square feet. In no case shall a single drive-through facility sign exceed 36
square feet in sign area.
      (3)   Such signs shall be oriented so as to only be visible to occupants
of vehicles in the stacking lanes of the drive-through facility.
      (4)   No drive-through facility sign under this section shall exceed six
feet in height measured from the grade of the adjacent driving surface to the
top of the sign.
      (5)   Drive-through facility signs may be internally or externally
illuminated. Up to 100% of each sign may be an electronic message center if
they comply with the following standards.
         A.   Any message change shall be a static, instant message change.
         B.   Only Light Emitting Diodes (LED) technology or similar quality
signs shall be permitted for electronic message centers.
         C.   The electronic message center shall come equipped with an
automatic dimming photocell, which automatically adjusts the display’s
brightness based on ambient light conditions.
         D.   The electronic message center shall be turned off during the
hours when the related business is closed.
      (6)   Drive-through facility signs attached to a wall of building shall
be calculated as part of the building signage allowance in division (c) of this
section.
      (7)   The maximum sign areas of this section shall not apply where the
drive-through facility sign is located in a manner that is not visible from a
public right-of-way or from an adjacent residential lot, as determined by the
Planning Commission during the site plan review process.
   (f)   Driveway signs.
      (1)   Driveway signs shall not be permitted in residential zoning
district except when accessory to an approved conditional use. In all other
districts, driveway signs shall be permitted provided each sign complies with
the standards of this section.
      (2)   Driveway signs shall only be permitted near driveway entrances to a
public street.
      (3)   A maximum of two driveway signs are permitted per individual
driveway.
      (4)   Driveway signs shall be located within 30 feet of the right-of-way.
      (5)   Each driveway sign shall not exceed four square feet in area and 30
inches in height.
      (6)   Driveway signs may be internally or externally illuminated.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021; Ord. 25-109, passed 6-23-2025)
§ 1236.11 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   The following are the types of temporary signs allowed in the city and the
applicable regulations for each type of sign.
   (a)   Standards applicable to all temporary signs.
      (1)   Temporary signs shall not be mounted, attached, affixed, installed
or otherwise secured in a manner that will make the sign a permanent sign.
      (2)   No temporary sign shall be mounted, attached, affixed, installed or
otherwise secured so as to protrude above the roofline of a structure.
      (3)   Temporary signs shall not be posted in any place or in any manner
that is destructive to public property including, but not limited to, rights-
of-way, utility poles, public trees and the like.
      (4)   Unless otherwise specifically stated, temporary signs shall not be
illuminated.
      (5)   No temporary sign shall require a foundation, support, wiring,
fittings or elements that would traditionally require a building permit or
electrical permit.
      (6)   Temporary signs shall not be affixed to any permanent sign or
permanent structure except when a banner sign is permitted to cover a permanent
sign in accordance with division (d)(3) of this section or when such sign is
attached to the principal building as permitted in this chapter.
      (7)   No streamers, spinning, flashing, windblown devices or similarly
moving devices shall be allowed as part of or attachments to temporary signs.
      (8)   All temporary signs shall be secured in such a manner as to prevent
swinging or other significantly noticeable movement resulting from the wind
that could pose a danger to people, vehicles or structures.
      (9)   Mobile signs on wheels, runners, casters, parked trailers, parked
vehicles or other temporary or movable signs shall not be permitted unless
otherwise specifically stated in this chapter.
      (10)   Because of the nature of materials typically used to construct
temporary signs and to avoid the unsightliness of deteriorating signs and all
safety concerns which accompany such a condition, temporary signs shall be
removed or replaced when such sign is deteriorated.
   (b)   Temporary signs with a noncommercial message. Temporary signs with a
noncommercial message do not require a zoning permit provided they comply with
the following standards.
      (1)   Temporary signs that that contain a noncommercial message shall
still be required to comply with vision clearance requirements. See § 1226.05:
Intersection Visibility.
      (2)   The maximum height of temporary signs with a noncommercial message
shall be four feet.
      (3)   Up to 36 square feet of aggregate sign area with a noncommercial
message shall be permitted on any single lot.
      (4)   The maximum sign area of any individual sign with a noncommercial
message shall be six square feet.
      (5)   Such signs shall be limited to yard signs, banner signs or window
signs.
   (c)   Temporary signs with a commercial message in residential zoning
districts. Temporary signs with a commercial message located in residential
zoning districts do not require a zoning permit provided they comply with the
following standards.
      (1)   Up to two signs with a commercial message shall be permitted on any
single lot.
      (2)   The signs may only be window signs or yard signs subject to the
sign-specific standards in division (e) of this section.
      (3)   The maximum sign area for any individual sign shall be six square
feet with a maximum height of six feet.
      (4)   For lots or subdivisions where there is a minimum lot area of ten
acres and no principal uses, one of the commercial signs may be 40 square feet
in areas with a maximum height of six feet.
      (5)   The signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any public
right-of-way.
      (6)   In lieu of the above regulations, any permitted conditional use
located in a residential zoning district shall be permitted the same amount of
temporary signs with a commercial message as allowed in nonresidential zoning
districts below.
   (d)   Temporary signs with a commercial message in nonresidential zoning
districts. Temporary signs with a commercial message located in nonresidential
zoning districts or on lots in residential zoning districts where the principal
use is conditionally permitted shall meet the following requirements.
      (1)   Signs allowed for an unrestricted time.
         A.   Temporary signs; regulations. The following temporary signs do
not require a zoning permit and are allowed for an unrestricted amount of time
provided signs are maintained in good condition, as required by this code.
            1.   A maximum of 32 square feet of aggregate temporary sign area
with commercial messaging shall be permitted for every 200 feet of lineal
street frontage.
            2.   The maximum size of any single temporary sign shall be 32
square feet.
            3.   The signs are limited to yard signs or banner signs subject to
the sign-specific standards in division (e) of this section.
            4.   The maximum height of the sign shall be seven feet.
            5.   The signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any
public right-of-way.
            6.   Temporary banner signs may not be used to cover an existing
permanent sign unless authorized pursuant division (d)(3) of this section.
         B.   A-frame or T-frame sidewalk signs.
            1.   Only one sidewalk sign is allowed for any one business
establishment, at one time, and shall be located within five feet of such
business.
            2.   There shall be no time limit for sidewalk signs with the
exception that the sign shall only be placed outside during the hours of the
establishment’s operation.
            3.   Such signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in area with a
maximum height of four feet.
            4.   The sign shall only be permitted on a private sidewalk or
walkway provided it is placed on pavement and not in any landscaped areas or on
pavement used for vehicles (e.g., driveways and parking lots).
            5.   If the sign is placed on a sidewalk or walkway, the sign can
only be placed where the paved sidewalk or walkway width, not including curb
top, is at least seven feet wide. The width and placement of the sign shall be
such so that there shall be a minimum width of four feet of clear and passable
sidewalk or walkway for pedestrians.
            6.   The sign must be freestanding and shall not be affixed,
chained, anchored or otherwise secured to the ground or to any pole, parking
meter, tree, tree grate, fire hydrant, railing or other structure.
            7.   The sign must not obstruct vehicular traffic or access to
parking meters, bicycle racks and other features legally in the right-of-way.
            8.   The sign must not interfere with the opening of car doors in
legal spaces, or with the operation of wheelchair lifts and ramps, cab stands,
loading zones or bus stops.
            9.   The sign shall be internally weighted so that it is stable and
windproof.
            10.   The city shall be held harmless from any liability resulting
from accident or injury caused by the placement and/or maintenance of such
sign.
            11.   A zoning permit shall be required for the initial use and
placement of the sidewalk sign.
      (2)   Signs allowed for a restricted time. The following temporary signs
require a zoning permit and are allowed on a restricted time basis in addition
to that allowed in division (d)(1) of this section, provided the signs are
maintained in good condition, as required by this code.
         A.   The maximum sign area shall not exceed the total building sign
area allowed pursuant to §
1236.10(c) or 32 square feet, whichever is less.
         B.   Such temporary signage, regardless of size, shall be permitted up
to 30 days, twice a year.
         C.   The signs are limited to yard signs or banner signs subject to
the sign-specific standards in division (e) of this section.
         D.   The maximum height of the sign shall be six feet.
         E.   The signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any
public right-of-way.
      (3)   Temporary signs for new uses (restricted time). For applications
related to the establishment of a new use within an existing building where
there is existing permanent sign, a banner sign may be approved for up to 60
consecutive days to cover the existing permanent sign. Such banner sign shall
not exceed the sign area of the permanent sign and shall require a zoning
permit.
   (e)   Standards for sign types.
      (1)   Banner signs.
         A.   Unless otherwise specifically stated, there shall be no maximum
number of banner signs provided the aggregate total square footage of all
banner signs does not exceed the maximum sign area allowed in this section.
         B.   Banner signs may be attached to a building, fence or other
similar structure. A banner sign attached to posts and mounted in a yard or
landscaped area shall be regulated as a temporary yard sign.
         C.   The maximum height standard for temporary signs shall not apply
to a banner sign but such signs shall not be mounted in a manner that extends
above the roofline of a building or the top of the structure on which it is
mounted.
      (2)   Window signs.
         A.   Temporary window signs shall be mounted or placed on the interior
of the building.
         B.   Temporary and permanent window signs in nonresidential districts
are regulated in accordance with §
1236.10(d).
      (3)   Yard signs.
         A.   Unless otherwise specifically stated, there shall be no maximum
number of yard signs provided the aggregate total square footage of all yard
signs does not exceed the maximum sign area allowed in this section on
temporary signs.
         B.   There shall be a maximum of two faces to the sign, mounted back-
to-back.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1236.12 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (a)   Any sign that was lawfully in existence at the time of the effective
date of this code, or amendment thereto, that does not conform to the
provisions herein, shall be deemed a legal nonconforming sign and may remain on
a lot of record except as qualified below.
   (b)   A sign shall lose its legal nonconforming status if any of the
following occurs:
      (1)   If such sign is damaged to an amount exceeding 50% of the sign’s
replacement value not including the cost or value related to the foundation or
work below grade, as determined by at least two sign companies requested to
provide a quote by the city;
      (2)   The structure of the sign is altered in any form;
      (3)   The sign is relocated;
      (4)   The principal use of the property is voluntarily discontinued for a
period of at least six months;
      (5)   The sign is defined as a temporary sign and has been in use for
more than one year following the effective date of this amendment; or
      (6)   The nonconforming sign and its structure (including support and
frame and panel) are determined by the building official to be unsafe or in
violation of this code and are declared a nuisance.
   (c)   A nonconforming sign shall not be altered, modified or reconstructed
other than to comply with this chapter except that a sign panel may be replaced
(no other structural alteration) or the sign face may be repainted when there
is a change of use or tenancy.
   (d)   Any sign that loses its legal nonconforming status must be brought
into compliance with the provisions of this chapter and any other city laws and
ordinances by an application for, and issuance of, a zoning permit or by
complete removal.
   (e)   Failure to bring a sign into compliance after loss of a legal
nonconformity status shall cause the sign to be considered an illegal sign.
   (f)   Minor repairs and maintenance of legal nonconforming signs shall be
permitted.
   (g)   Nonconforming signs shall be maintained in good condition pursuant to
the Building and Housing Code.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
CHAPTER 1238: SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
Section
1238.01 Purpose
1238.02 Applicability
1238.03 Conformity with plans and regulations
1238.04 Sale of land in subdivisions; start of construction
1238.05 Subdivider’s agreement
1238.06 Pavement guarantee and financial guarantees
1238.07 General design requirements
1238.08 Lots
1238.09 Blocks
1238.10 Street lighting
1238.11 Railroads
1238.12 Streets and thoroughfares
1238.13 Sidewalks
1238.14 Utilities
1238.15 Green infrastructure
§ 1238.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to further the overall purpose of this code
and additionally, to:
   (a)   Establish standard requirements, conditions and procedures for the
design and review of subdivisions;
   (b)   Provide for the orderly subdivision of land;
   (c)   Encourage the wise use and management of land and natural resources
throughout the city;
   (d)   Ensure that adequate public infrastructure, facilities and services
are available concurrent with development;
   (e)   Encourage a beneficial relationship between the uses of land and
circulation of all forms of traffic throughout the city, and to provide for the
proper location and design of streets;
   (f)   Provide adequate utility systems to support the future needs of the
systems; and
   (g)   Promote efficient and logical placement of utility structures so as to
promote the purpose of this code.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1238.02 APPLICABILITY.
   The developer of a subdivision, or any development that requires public
improvements or rights-of-way, shall dedicate all land required for rights-of-
way, and shall furnish and install all required improvements serving the
subdivision or development. All improvements shall be extended to the boundary
of the subdivision or development in order to provide a complete and
coordinated system of streets and utilities in accordance with all applicable
plans or policies of the city.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1238.03 CONFORMITY WITH PLANS AND REGULATIONS.
   (a)   The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all
streets shall conform to the city’s thoroughfare plan, comprehensive land use
plan or other adopted plans and policies, and shall be considered in their
relation to existing and planned streets, topographical conditions, public
convenience and safety, and in appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the
land to be served by such streets. Where not shown on the master thoroughfare
plan, the arrangement and other design standards of streets shall conform to
this chapter.
   (b)   Any plans or documents submitted for subdivision or development
approval shall comply with the city’s standard drawings and specifications and
subsequent amendments, as adopted by City Council, on file in the office of the
Code Administrator.
   (c)   The engineering details and standards of streets and other public
improvements are subject to such modification as the Code Administrator may
deem necessary to the public interest or maintenance of established standards.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1238.04 SALE OF LAND IN SUBDIVISIONS; START OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   No owner, or authorized agent, of any land located within a
subdivision shall transfer, sell, or agree to sell any land by reference to, by
exhibition of, or by the use of, a plan or plat of a subdivision, nor proceed
with any construction work before such plan or plat has been approved and
recorded in the manner prescribed in these regulations. Any sale or transfer
contrary to the provisions of this section is void. The description of such lot
or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other documents
used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction
from the provisions of these regulations.
   (b)   The Code Administrator shall not issue zoning permits for any
structure or activity on a lot in a subdivision for which a plat has not been
approved and recorded in the manner prescribed in these regulations.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1238.05 SUBDIVIDER’S AGREEMENT.
   (a)   As part of any major subdivision, a subdivider will be required to
enter into a subdivider’s agreement. Such agreement shall include, at a
minimum:
      (1)   The timing of the construction of public improvements, including
estimates for inspections;
      (2)   The approved subdivider agreement with Avon Lake Regional Water;
      (3)   Estimated costs and fees, as required by this code including, but
not limited to, pavement guarantees, Street Tree Fund, inspection fees and
recreation impact fees;
      (4)   Financial guarantee agreements, including the length of the
pavement guarantee;
      (5)   Protection requirements for existing street, utilities and other
installations;
      (6)   That the subdivider will hold the city free and harmless from any
and all claims for damages of every nature arising or growing out of the
construction of such improvements, and shall defend, at his or her cost and
expense, any suit or action brought against the city by reason thereof, until
the improvement has been accepted by the city;
      (7)   That in the event of any violation of or noncompliance with any of
the provisions and stipulations of the agreement, the city may stop the work
forthwith and complete or cause the completion of such improvements according
to the approved plat and agreement, and that in such event, the owner shall
reimburse the city for any and all expenses incurred thereby; and
      (8)   Any additional information or requirements as deemed necessary by
the Code Administrator.
   (b)   The subdivider’s agreement shall be approved as to content and form by
the city’s Law Director, with confirmation by the Code Administrator, prior to
approval of the final plat.
   (c)   Installations in R-1A Districts.
      (1)   A subdivider who wishes to have public improvements, including
streets, water, sanitary and storm sewers, and sidewalks, installed in a
subdivision area in an R-1A District, shall enter into a subdivider’s agreement
with the city to provide for preliminary engineering studies, the cost of which
will be paid by such petitioner in accordance with R.C. §§ 727.01 through
727.49.
      (2)   Such agreement, a sample of which is attached to original Ordinance
49-79, passed April 23, 1979, is hereby approved and made a part of this
section by reference.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1238.06 PAVEMENT GUARANTEE AND FINANCIAL GUARANTEES.
   (a)   Pavement guarantee.
      (1)   The subdivider shall, prior to the approval of the final plat, be
required to post with the city a financial guarantee in an amount equal to 20%
of the cost of pavement construction in the subdivision as computed by the City
Engineer or engineering consultant(s) to the city. Such financial guarantee
shall be held by the city to ensure that the subdivider shall replace or
repair, upon request of the city, any defective pavement areas which may appear
during the time period of the guarantee.
      (2)   The pavement guarantee shall be for three years.
      (3)   The subdivider agreement shall also include timing for the
developer to request, in writing, that the pavement be inspected and
deficiencies noted for repairs.
      (4)   After repairs are made, pavement joints within the subdivision
shall be cleaned and resealed with hot sealer if needed as directed by the City
Engineer prior to final acceptance of pavement.
   (b)   Financial guarantees. The following are the types of financial
guarantees allowed by the city. The standards for each type of guarantee shall
apply to any situation where a financial guarantee is required, regardless if
it is related to a subdivision application or not.
      (1)   Certified check, wire transfer, escrow or cash deposit. The
following standards shall apply if a certified check, wire transfer, escrow, or
cash deposit is utilized as a financial guarantee.
         A.   The subdivider shall provide a certified check, wire transfer,
escrow to a third-party escrow account, or cash deposit for the amount of the
guarantee, payable to the city.
         B.   If a third-party escrow account is to be established, the account
shall be with a bank approved by the Law Director and shall be in an account
set up for the sole ownership of the city.
         C.   When the public improvements are complete, the city shall issue a
check for the released amount based on this division.
         D.   The city shall not be responsible for paying interest for the
period of time the city retains the guarantee.
         E.   The subdivider’s agreement may provide for the making of payments
from such funds from time to time, upon certification of City Council, provided
that the balance remaining after such payments will, in his or her opinion, be
adequate to pay the remaining costs of the improvements.
      (2)   Sidewalk bonds. If a subdivider intends to install sidewalks after
the filing of the final plat, then the subdivider shall, prior to the approval
of the final plat, file a financial guarantee without an expiration date, to
secure the installation of the concrete sidewalks.
      (3)   Maintenance bonds. The following standards shall apply if a
maintenance bond is utilized as a financial guarantee:
         A.   A bond in the amount determined in accordance with this section
shall be filed with the City Engineer or engineering consultant(s) to the city.
         B.   The bond may be in the form of a maintenance bond or a cash bond
of the kind approved by law for securing deposits of public money.
         C.   The bond shall be executed by the subdivider as principal, and if
a maintenance bond, shall be executed by a corporation authorized to act as a
the guarantor under the laws of the state.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021; Ord. 24-33, passed 3-25-2024)
§ 1238.07 GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   General suitability of land for development. If the Planning
Commission and the City Council find that land proposed to be subdivided is
unsuitable for subdivision development due to flooding, poor drainage,
topography or inadequate water supply, wastewater treatment facilities,
transportation facilities, or such other conditions as may endanger health,
life or property, and if, from investigations conducted by the public agencies
concerned, it is determined that, in the best interest of the public, the land
should not be developed for the subdivision proposed, the Planning Commission
and the City Council shall not approve the land for the purpose unless adequate
methods are advanced by the subdivider for solving the problems that will be
created by the development of the land.
   (b)   Projection of improvements. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided
or developed, the arrangement of streets and utilities in new subdivisions
shall make provision for the proper projection of streets (i.e., provide for
temporary dead-end streets and utilities where street connections can be made
to the adjacent land) as required by the City Engineer or engineering
consultant(s) to the city. Such arrangements shall be made to the subdivision
boundary or up to the edge of the phase of buildable lots.
   (c)   Topography, floodplain areas, wetlands and natural areas.
      (1)   Natural amenities (including views, mature trees, creeks, riparian
corridors, rock outcrops, and similar features) shall be preserved and
incorporated into proposed development to the greatest extent feasible.
      (2)   All subdivisions of land and installation of public improvements
involving areas subject to flooding, as defined by National Flood Insurance
Program Maps and Data, shall conform to all applicable floodplain regulations
and the requirements of adopted regulations involving the city’s participation
in the National Flood Insurance Program.
      (3)   Land which is determined by the Planning Commission to be
unsuitable for subdivision or development due to flooding, the presence of
federal jurisdiction wetlands, or other features which will reasonably be
harmful to the safety, health and general welfare of the present or future
inhabitants of the subdivision and/or its surrounding areas shall not be
subdivided or developed unless methods adequate to resolve the problems are
formulated by the developer and approved by Council, upon recommendation by the
Planning Commission and upon advice of the City Engineer or engineering
consultant(s) to the city.
      (4)   The natural topography shall be retained wherever possible in order
to reduce excessive runoff onto adjoining property and to avoid extensive
regrading of the site.
   (d)   Creeks, ditches and waterways.
      (1)   Where a major watercourse, as defined and mapped by the City
Engineer or engineering consultant(s) to the city, exists within a proposed
subdivision, the developer thereof shall grant unto the city an easement for
necessary maintenance and shall also grant unto the city an easement to provide
access to the watercourse. The width of the dominant maintenance easement shall
be determined by the City Engineer or engineering consultant(s) to the city,
and the width and precise location of the subservient access easement shall be
determined by the City Engineer or engineering consultant(s) to the city in
consultation with the developer, with due regard for the preservation of
natural features of such area.
      (2)   No permanently attached or unmovable fixture or structure, except
for a footbridge or the like, as necessary to join sections of the same
property, shall be permitted within the maintenance easement or access
easement. A footbridge or similar structure shall be approved by the City
Engineer or engineering consultant(s) to the city and shall not be constructed
and placed within said maintenance easement without the appropriate approval of
the City Engineer or engineering consultant(s) to the city. Any construction in
areas designated as floodways by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
shall be subject to the regulations of that agency.
      (3)   In the event that there are special circumstances or conditions
affecting a property owner which deprive the property owner of the use of that
property pursuant to the factors as considered by the ZBA in the granting of an
area variance, a property owner may appeal an administration decision denying
the use of the property pursuant to an easement created by this chapter and
request a hearing by the ZBA.
   (e)   Inspection fees. The subdivider shall provide all necessary
engineering and surveying services for preparing the plat and improvement
plans. The city will inspect the installation of improvements and private
utilities. The developer shall reimburse the city the actual cost of these
inspections before the plat is placed upon a Planning Commission agenda.
   (f)   Homeowners’ or property owners’ associations. See §
1230.06: Standards for Owners’ Associations for requirements for homeowners’ or
property owners’ associations.
   (g)   Debris and waste. No cut trees, diseased trees, timber, debris, earth,
rocks, stones, soil, junk, rubbish or other waste materials of any kind shall
be buried in any land, or left or deposited on any lot or street at the time of
the issuance of a zoning permit. No items and materials as described in the
preceding sentence shall be left or deposited in any area of the subdivision at
the time of dedication of public improvements.
   (h)   Monuments and markers.
      (1)   Monuments and monument boxes shall be installed at the intersection
of all centerlines of all streets, points of curvature and points of tangency
on all curves.
      (2)   Property pins shall be set at all lot corners, points of tangency
and points of curvature.
      (3)   Steel rods shall be used for property pins permanently installed
that comply with the state’s requirements.
      (4)   Monuments and lot corner markers shall be of a design approved by
the City Engineer or engineering consultant(s) to the city and meeting State of
Ohio Minimum Standards for Boundary Surveys.
   (i)   Street trees and Street Tree Fund.
      (1)   Trees planted within a street right-of-way shall conform to the
city master tree plan. Prior to construction a planting plan shall be approved
by the Urban Forester.
      (2)   All new subdivisions shall be required to contribute to the Street
Tree Fund for the installation of trees in public rights-of-way. The fee shall
be payable as a cash amount calculated by the Urban Forester and shall be paid
prior to Final Plat approval. The fund shall be used by the city to install
tree lawn trees within public rights-of-way of new subdivisions. The fund shall
not apply to private streets. The cost for said fee shall be as set forth in
Chapter 208 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021; Ord. 24-33, passed 3-25-2024)
§ 1238.08 LOTS.
   (a)   The lot arrangement and design shall be such that all lots will
provide satisfactory building sites that can accommodate a structure and
required setbacks in the applicable zoning district.
   (b)   Lots shall also be arranged so that all lots will have frontage on a
public street or road and will provide building sites properly related to
topography and the character of surrounding development. Lots may have frontage
on a private street only if approved as part of a PUD or RPD.
   (c)   The lots shall be more or less rectangular in form; triangular,
elongated, or other shapes that restrict its use as a building site shall be
avoided to the maximum extent feasible unless the applicant can demonstrate
special circumstances requiring irregular lots to the Planning Commission.
   (d)   All side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines and
generally radial to curved street lines except where the Planning Commission
determines that a variation to this rule will provide a better street and
sublot layout.
   (e)   Corner lots shall be of sufficient width to permit the required
building set-back line for each street the lot abuts.
   (f)   Flag (panhandle) lots or double frontage (through) lots shall be
discouraged and may only be approved if necessitated by unique features or
other special physical conditions as deemed necessary by the Planning
Commission. These lots shall meet the requirements established for the
applicable lot type in §
1226.01: Lot and Principal Building Regulations.
   (g)   Every lot shall have access to it that is sufficient to afford a
reasonable means of ingress and egress for emergency vehicles as well as for
all those likely to need or desire access to the property in its intended use.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1238.09 BLOCKS.
   (a)   The arrangement of blocks shall be such as to conform to the street
planning criteria set forth in §
1238.12: Streets and Thoroughfares, and shall be arranged to accommodate lots
and building sites of the size and character required for the zoning district
as set forth in this code.
   (b)   Subdivisions shall be designed with blocks of sufficient width to
permit two tiers of lots of appropriate depth, to the maximum extent feasible.
   (c)   Where a subdivision adjoins a major thoroughfare, the block shall be
oriented so that there will be the fewest points of direct ingress and egress
along such major thoroughfare as possible.
   (d)   Irregularly shaped blocks, those intended for cul-de-sac or loop
streets, and those containing interior parks or playgrounds, may be approved if
properly designed and located, and if the maintenance of interior public spaces
is covered by agreements.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1238.10 STREET LIGHTING.
   Street lighting for all new subdivisions within the city shall be provided
by the electric company, subject to the following provisions.
   (a)   The developer’s choice of the means and styles of street lighting for
any particular new subdivision shall be limited to those styles and systems
currently available from the local electric company for such street lighting
purposes.
   (b)   The street lighting system for a new subdivision shall be of a uniform
nature and style within that subdivision.
   (c)   Any street lighting system proposed by the developer of a subdivision
must first be approved by the Public Works Department and must comply with the
laws of the city pertaining to such subdivisions and street lighting plans.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1238.11 RAILROADS.
   Where railroads are involved, provision for grade separation, buffer strips
and other protective media shall be required to the extent and type as may be
practical.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1238.12 STREETS AND THOROUGHFARES.
   (a)   General street design.
      (1)   The arrangement, character, width, grade, construction and location
of all streets shall conform to the comprehensive land use plan, or other
applicable street plans, for the city that are in effect at the time of final
plat submission.
      (2)   The street layout shall provide access to all lots and parcels of
land within the subdivision.
      (3)   Residential local streets shall be designed to discourage through
traffic, but offset streets shall be avoided whenever possible.
      (4)   Where practical, the arrangement of streets in new subdivisions
shall make provision for the continuation of existing streets in adjoining
areas.
      (5)   A street that is not constructed to city standards will not be
accepted by the city for dedication as a public street.
   (b)   Traffic control devices. The subdivider shall provide all traffic
control devices for the proposed development, including, but not limited to,
traffic signals, signs, pavement markings and the like. Refer to the Ohio
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (OMUTC) for details of the devices to
be used, and, in some cases, warrants for their use.
   (c)   Street signage.
      (1)   All new subdivisions shall be required to install the street
signage within each phase on all public and private streets. The signage shall
be installed prior to acceptance by the city, and the road being open to
vehicular traffic. The signage must be shown on the improvement plans/site
plans as submitted for review by the Development Review Committee.
      (2)   The types and location layouts for the signs on public streets must
be in conformance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices and the
Ohio Department of Transportation specifications and be in compliance with
Chapter 404 of this code of ordinances.
      (3)   In addition to the required street signage, one additional
replacement street name sign shall be provided to the Public Works Department
for each new street. The signs shall be delivered to the Public Works
Department for inventory purposes. Supplying of signs shall only apply to
street name signs on public streets.
      (4)   The maintenance of signage for private streets shall be the
responsibility of the subdivider and/or homeowners associations.
   (d)   Street names and numbering.
      (1)   Streets that are or will eventually be continuations of existing or
platted streets shall be named the same. Street names shall be included on the
preliminary plat and final plat.
      (2)   When a new street is a direct extension of an existing street, the
name shall remain the same.
      (3)   Address numbers shall be assigned by the city in accordance with
the current numbering system.
   (e)   Rounding of property corners.
      (1)   At all street intersections, the corner of property lines shall be
rounded by a radius of not less than 15 feet.
      (2)   In nonresidential district, a cut-off corner may be substituted in
place of a circular arc.
      (3)   Where two alleys intersect, an eight-foot cutoff shall be provided.
   (f)   Private streets.
      (1)   Private streets shall not be permitted except as provided below, in
approved PUDs or RPDs;
      (2)   The PUD or RPD developer shall demonstrate that any proposed
private streets are necessary to create a superior design or eliminate a
practical hardship;
      (3)   No more than 20 dwelling units shall be served by a single entrance
from a public street to a private street;
      (4)   The pavement width of private streets and minimum turning radius
shall be sufficient enough to accommodate emergency vehicle access;
      (5)   The pavement design is judged adequate to handle the projected
traffic without resurfacing for 15 years;
      (6)   The private street shall comply with all stormwater drainage
requirements applicable to a public street;
      (7)   The subdivider shall demonstrate that adequate provision has been
made for the long-term maintenance of private vehicular areas; and
      (8)   The city shall not be required to accept a private street as a
public street. The city may consider acceptance of the dedication of the street
as a public street if the private street is brought up to the same standards as
required for public streets by this code.
   (g)   Street types.
      (1)   Street rights-of-way.
         A.   Street right-of-way widths shall not be less than the following:
 
Table 1238-1: Minimum Street Right-of-Way Widths
Street Type                        Minimum Right-of-Way Width
Main thoroughfare - arterial       80 feet
Primary street - major collector   80 feet
Secondary street - minor collector 60 feet
Minor street - local street        60 feet
Cul-de-sac                         60 feet
 
         B.   Where there are unusual topographical or other physical
conditions, the Planning Commission may require a greater or lesser right-of-
way width than that indicated in this section.
      (2)   Cul-de-sacs.
         A.   The maximum length of a cul-de-sac shall be 600 feet. Each cul-
de-sac shall be provided with a turnaround having a minimum right-of-way radius
of 65 feet. The road surface within the cul-de-sac right-of-way shall conform,
for dimensions, to the city’s standard drawings.
         B.   As part of the subdivision plat review, the city shall review the
location of mailboxes, lighting, and landscaping in the right-of-way to ensure
no interference from safety service vehicles maneuvering through a cul-de-sac.
      (3)   Half streets. The dedication of half streets shall not be permitted
except in special situations. Where there exists a dedicated or platted half
street or alley adjacent to the tract being subdivided, the other half shall be
platted if deemed necessary by the Planning Commission.
   (h)   Street pavement.
      (1)   All streets shall be paved with portland cement concrete with
integral curbs. The concrete shall be made with air-entraining type cement or
an air-entraining agent shall be added. All concrete shall conform to “Class C”
requirements as described in the Ohio Department of Transportation
specification. Concrete shall be placed, finished and cured in accordance with
the latest Ohio Department of Transportation specifications. Concrete pavement
shall be not less than eight inches thick and with a minimum four-inch
aggregate subbase. Underdrains shall be required on all concrete streets. Sub-
base shall as set forth in the current State of Ohio Department of
Transportation Construction and Materials Specifications. Pavement widths shall
be 27 feet from back of curb to back of curb on public streets and a minimum of
22 feet on private residential streets.
      (2)   Contraction, expansion and construction joints shall be provided at
intervals as required and shall be properly sealed after construction. The
pavement shall be constructed to established grades with an adequate radius at
each corner and proper slope to all drainage structures. Test cylinders will be
made and the costs of all tests shall be borne by the developer.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1238.13 SIDEWALKS.
   (a)   Sidewalk installation and maintenance shall be as stated in
Chapter 1010 of this code of ordinances.
   (b)   For private roads, sidewalks shall only be required on one side of the
road.
   (c)   See also §
1234.21: Sidewalks and Sidewalk Connections to a Right-of-Way for sidewalk
requirements outside of subdivisions.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1238.14 UTILITIES.
   (a)   Generally. All utilities which are to be located under the pavement
shall be installed before the pavement is laid.
   (b)   Water system. All streets shall have installed therein a water main,
the size of which shall be not less than the size designated for water lines of
the city. The lines shall be so located as to form complete circuits without
dead ends. Water mains shall be constructed and installed and shall have
valves, fittings and fire hydrants spaced and located according to Municipal
standards. Such standards shall be determined by the Board of Municipal
Utilities and the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency. All proposed potable
water lines shall be approved by the Board of Municipal Utilities prior to
installation.
   (c)   Sewers and drainage.
      (1)   All streets shall have installed therein sanitary sewers and/or
combined sewers of the type and size designated for sewers in the city, or as
recommended by the Code Administrator, City Engineer or the engineering
consultants to the city, as applicable. Such plans may be revised from time to
time as necessary at the discretion of the city. All such sewers shall be
approved by the Board of Municipal Utilities prior to installation.
      (2)   All streets shall have installed therein storm sewers of the type
and size designated for sewers in the city, or as recommended by the Code
Administrator, City Engineer or engineering consultants to the city, as
applicable. Such plans may be revised from time to time as necessary at the
discretion of the city.
      (3)   The subdivider or developer shall submit a complete topographical
plan of all storm drainage improvements proposed for the subdivision and a
grading plan showing proposed building elevations for each lot, as well as
specific treatment necessary to ensure positive surface drainage within and
adjacent to the subdivision. Further, in any area where the up-grade private
property is dependent for drainage on a swale and/or drain pipe passing over or
in other privately owned property, a drainage easement will be dedicated as
part of the plat. This easement will be in favor of the city and all up-stream
properties that contribute to the drainage course as shown on the approved
grading plan.
   (d)   Electric, telephone, gas, cable television or fiber optics.
      (1)   The installation, construction and expansion of electric,
telephone, cable television and/or all new services for subdivisions shall
generally be placed underground.
      (2)   If the service lines cannot be located underground, they shall be
located at the rear of the lots.
      (3)   If electric. telephone, gas, cable television or fiber optic lines
are installed underground, the 12-inch utility easement shall be provided along
the front of all lots.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1238.15 GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE.
   (a)   Green infrastructure techniques.
      (1)   The city encourages the use of green infrastructure techniques
because of their connection to sustainable development practices and
environmental quality. The proper use of green infrastructure can dramatically
improve stormwater runoff quality, decrease runoff volume, protect downstream
streams and rivers, and create more interesting places to live.
      (2)   The following green infrastructure techniques may be incorporated
into new subdivisions with approval from the Code Administrator, City Engineer
or engineering consultants to the city, as applicable, provided that the
applicant submits documentation that the proposed green infrastructure
technique is effective and will equal or exceed the function of traditional
infrastructure techniques and meet the requirements of this code:
         A.   Narrower pavement widths;
         B.   Narrower right-of-way widths;
         C.   Grassy swales and shoulders without curb and gutter;
         D.   Pedestrian walkways that do not constitute the sidewalks required
of this code and Chapter 1010 of this code of ordinances;
         E.   Permeable pavements (e.g., pavers, permeable concrete, permeable
asphalt pavement);
         F.   Bioretention swales;
         G.   Planter boxes;
         H.   Curb extensions; or
         I.   Other techniques.
   (b)   Criteria for green infrastructure waivers. The Code Administrator,
City Engineer, or engineering consultants to the city, as applicable, may grant
a green infrastructure waiver for use of the green infrastructure techniques
provided:
      (1)   The techniques will utilize the landscape or nature’s ability to
reduce, slow, filter and/or absorb stormwater runoff from streets, parking
lots, and buildings in a method that equals or exceeds the existing
infrastructure requirements of the city;
      (2)   The techniques are consistent with best management practices;
      (3)   Covenants or other agreements have been presented to the city, in a
format acceptable by the Law Director, that provide for the long-term
maintenance of any approved green infrastructure; and
      (4)   The technique has been designed by a professional engineer and is
accompanied by documentation stating that the proposed technique does not pose
a threat to the public safety.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
CHAPTER 1240: RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEMS
Section
1240.01 Purpose
1240.02 Applicability
1240.03 Use regulations
1240.04 Design and performance standards
1240.05 Insurance
1240.06 Maintenance
1240.07 Decommissioning of wind energy systems
1240.08 Nonconforming renewable energy systems
1240.09 Remedies
§ 1240.01 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the construction, modification
and operation of renewable energy systems in the city including Avon Lake’s
jurisdictional limit two miles into Lake Erie, subject to reasonable conditions
that will protect the public health, safety and welfare while preserving the
enjoyment of private property, promoting orderly land use and development, and
allowing the safe, effective and efficient use of renewable energy systems
installed to reduce the on-site consumption of utility supplied electricity.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1240.02 APPLICABILITY.
   (a)   No person shall construct, erect, maintain, extend or remove a
renewable energy system in any zoning district in the city, including the
territory extending into Lake Erie to the distance of two miles from the
natural shore line, without compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   Renewable energy systems constructed prior to the effective date of
this chapter shall not be required to meet the requirements of this code
provided that any physical modification to such pre-existing renewable energy
system, which materially alters the size, type and number of wind turbines or
other equipment, shall require compliance with this chapter, including
conditional use approval in the case of wind energy systems.
   (c)   Like-kind replacements as determined by the Code Administrator shall
not require review by the Planning Commission or approval from City Council.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1240.03 USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Wind energy systems.
      (1)   A wind energy system shall be considered a conditional use in any
zoning district.
      (2)   No wind energy system shall be constructed or located within the
city unless a conditional use permit and site plan have been recommended for
approval by the Planning Commission and confirmed by Council pursuant to this
code.
      (3)   Any addition or modification to a wind energy system that alters
the size, type or number of wind turbines, or other equipment shall be subject
to site plan review.
      (4)   In all cases, the applicant must demonstrate compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and the requirements of any other applicable
chapter of this code.
      (5)   Wind energy systems not meeting the requirements of this chapter
shall not be permitted without the granting of a waiver or waivers from such
standards by the Planning Commission.
   (b)   Solar energy systems. Solar energy systems shall be considered a
permitted use in any zoning district, subject to the requirements of this
chapter and the requirements of any other applicable chapter of this code.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1240.04 DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (a)   General standards.
      (1)   Renewable energy systems shall be lit only if required by the
Federal Aviation Administration or other applicable authority or if it is
determined that doing so repels wildlife migratory patterns. Lighting of other
parts of the renewable energy system, such as appurtenant structures, shall be
limited to that required for safety and operational purposes, and shall be
reasonably shielded from abutting properties.
      (2)   To the extent applicable, the renewable energy system shall comply
with the Ohio Building Code and any other applicable building codes.
      (3)   All renewable energy systems shall comply with all relevant FAA
guidelines.
      (4)   Permit applications for renewable energy systems shall be
accompanied by a line drawing of the electrical components, as supplied by the
manufacturer, in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the manner
of installation conforms to all relevant and applicable local, state and
national codes, including the National Electrical Code UL 174 and IEE 1547.
Renewable energy systems shall incorporate back-up technologies such as surge
and lighting arrestors. All renewable energy systems shall be grounded to
reduce lightning strikes. All electrical lines and utility wires shall be
buried underground.
      (5)   All renewable energy systems shall be connected to the electric
utility grid. Permits for renewable energy systems shall not be issued until
evidence has been provided that the utility company approves the customer’s
intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator. Applicant shall
supply the letter of approval from the utility at the time of application.
      (6)   Renewable energy systems shall maintain the default manufacturer’s
color. No appurtenance other than those associated with the renewable energy
system shall be affixed to any renewable energy system. The factory or original
equipment manufacturer identification and/or logo are permitted. Required
signage shall be appropriate warning signs (Danger-High Voltage or Caution-
Electrical Shock Hazard or any other recognized safety precaution signage)
installed at the base of the wind turbine or solar array. In the case of a wind
energy system, a sign, no larger than two square feet in area, shall be affixed
to the system and placed no higher than six feet from grade, shall display the
owner’s, manufacturer’s and installer’s names and contact information, and
shall be subject to approval as part of the conditional use permitting process.
      (7)   A renewable energy system installation shall commence within six
months of the issuance of the zoning permit and shall be completed and
operational within one year from the date of commencement of installation.
Commencement of installation shall be the date the tower or supporting
structure is placed into position. If the renewable energy system is not
completed within the stated time period, then the facility owner or operator or
the landowner shall be required, at his, her or their expense, to complete
decommissioning of the site subject to the requirements of § 1240.07:
Decommissioning of Wind Energy Systems within six months.
   (b)   Standards specific to wind energy systems.
      (1)   All wind turbines shall set back from all property lines, occupied
buildings, public rights-of-way and public utility lines a distance of not less
than one and one-tenth times the wind turbine height. The setback distance
shall be measured from the center of the supporting structure of the wind
turbine at pre-existing ground level.
      (2)   Provided that the total extended height of the wind turbine meets
sound and setback requirements, there shall be no specific height limitation,
except as imposed by Federal Aviation Administration regulations.
      (3)   The design of the tower, if any, shall be a monopole design
constructed of a single, self- supporting metal tube, anchored to a foundation
with controls locked inside the tube. The use of guy wires, guy wire anchors or
lattice towers is prohibited.
      (4)   Sound produced by the wind energy system shall not exceed 60 dBA,
under normal operating conditions, as measured at the property line of a
residential zoning district. Sound levels may be exceeded during short-term
events out of anyone’s control such as utility outages and/or severe wind
storms.
      (5)   Small wind energy system equipment proposed to be installed and/or
constructed shall bear an approval from any wind certification program
recognized by the American Wind Energy Association or any equivalent certifying
agency. Large wind energy system equipment shall have ANSI Certification IEC
61400-SER series of wind energy system tests (power performance, safety and
function, duration, noise, and power quality) or certification from another
recognized industry standard. The proposed installation shall comply with all
applicable laws and regulations. The city reserves the right to require
additional equipment certification.
      (6)   Any climbing foot pegs or rungs below 12 feet of a freestanding
tower shall be removed to prevent unauthorized climbing. All access doors to
wind turbines and electrical equipment shall be locked or fenced, as
appropriate to prevent entry by non-authorized persons.
      (7)   The wind energy system owner and operator shall make reasonable
efforts to minimize shadow flicker to any occupied building on a non-
participating landowner’s property.
      (8)   The height of a rooftop or other building-mounted wind turbine
shall not exceed the maximum permitted building height for the property by more
than 20%.
   (c)   Standards specific to solar energy systems.
      (1)   Solar access easements. R.C. § 5301.63 sets forth the requirements
for solar access easements. For the purpose of ensuring adequate access of
solar energy collection devices to sunlight, any person may grant a solar
access easement. Such easements shall be in writing and shall be subject to the
same conveyance and recording requirements as other easements. Any instrument
creating a solar easement shall be recorded in the Lorain County Recorder’s
office.
      (2)   Solar panels. Solar panels must be installed in accordance with the
manufacturer’s design and operation standards as well as all local, county,
state and federal guidelines.
      (3)   Roof-mounted systems. Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall be
permitted in all zoning districts provided the roof mounted solar energy system
shall not exceed the maximum building height for the zoning district, and shall
be installed in compliance with all applicable local and state fire and
building codes. The collectors shall be generally mounted parallel with the
roof pitch. The distance between the roof and the uppermost portion of the
solar panels shall not exceed 18 inches. Roof-mounted panels on a flat roof
shall not project vertically more than five feet from the surface of the roof.
      (4)   Ground-mounted systems.
         A.   Ground-mounted solar panels located on the ground or attached to
a framework located on the ground shall not exceed three feet in height above
the adjacent grade.
         B.   All related mechanical equipment, other than the actual
photoelectric panels, shall be fully screened from the adjacent properties by
fencing or a combination of evergreen and deciduous plantings.
         C.   Nonresidential: ground-mounted solar energy systems shall be
permitted in the front yard, side yard, and rear yard of a commercial or
industrial property, but shall not be located within the applicable front yard,
side yard or rear yard setback of any commercial or industrial property.
Ground-mounted solar energy equipment shall be installed in compliance with the
applicable building code.
         D.   Residential: ground-mounted solar energy systems shall not be
permitted in the front yard or a residential property. It shall be permitted in
the side yard of a residential property, but shall not be located within the
applicable side yard setback. It shall be permitted in the rear yard or a
residential property. Such equipment shall be subject to the applicable rear
yard coverage regulations and setbacks for accessory structures in residential
districts as set forth in §
1224.01: Accessory Uses and Structures.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1240.05 INSURANCE.
   (a)   Solar energy system. The solar energy system shall be listed as an
appurtenant structure on owner’s property liability insurance policy. Policies
shall be made available to the city upon request. Additional insurance beyond
owners’ property liability coverage shall not be required.
   (b)   Small wind energy system. A small wind energy system shall be listed
as an appurtenant structure on owner’s property liability insurance policy.
Policies shall be made available to the city upon request. Additional insurance
beyond owners’ property liability coverage shall not be required.
   (c)   Large energy wind system. There shall be maintained a current general
liability policy naming the city as additional insured covering bodily injury
and property damage with limits of at least $1,000,000 per occurrence and
$1,000,000 in the aggregate. Policies shall be made available to the city upon
request.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1240.06 MAINTENANCE.
   All structures, buildings, fences and property used in connection with a
renewable energy system shall be maintained in good condition and in safe
working order. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to painting,
structural repairs and upkeep of security measures. Failure to do so shall
require decommissioning under the requirements of this chapter and any other
applicable governmental regulations.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1240.07 DECOMMISSIONING OF WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS.
   (a)   The owner/operator shall be responsible for obtaining an independent
and certified professional engineer for the preparation of an analysis and
report of the cost of removal and site restoration, and be responsible for the
payment of all costs associated with the preparation of the analysis and
report. At all times the facility owner or operator of the wind energy system
shall maintain decommissioning funds in the form of a performance bond or
equivalent financial instrument sufficient to cover the demolition and removal
of the wind energy system. Such bond or other instrument shall be sufficient to
guarantee full and faithful performance of the requirements of this section and
shall be satisfactory to the Law Director. Proof that the requirement of this
section is met shall be made available to the city upon request. The city may
invoke use of any or all of the mechanisms to provide for decommissioning of
the wind energy system. This requirement for a performance bond or equivalent
financial instrument shall not apply in the case of a wind turbine that does
not exceed 35 feet height.
   (b)   The wind energy system owner, operator or landowner shall, at their
expense, complete decommissioning of the wind energy system within 12 months
after the end of the useful life of the wind energy system following all
applicable federal, state and local mandates and statutes.
   (c)   The wind energy system will presume to be at the end of its useful
life if no electricity is generated for a continuous period of 12 months.
   (d)   Decommissioning shall include removal of wind energy system including
all wind turbines, structures, buildings, cabling, electrical components, roads
and foundations to a depth of 36 inches, and any other associated systems to
the state it was prior to application.
   (e)   Disturbed earth shall be graded and re-seeded, unless the landowner
requests in writing that the access roads or other land surface areas not be
restored.
   (f)   If neither the wind energy system owner or operator nor landowner
complete decommissioning within the period prescribed above, the city shall
take such measures as necessary to complete decommissioning of the wind energy
system. Said costs may be certified to the County Auditor as a lien upon the
property. The entry into and submission of evidence of a participating
landowner agreement to the city shall constitute agreement and consent of the
parties to the agreement, their respective heirs, successors and assigns that
the city may take such action as necessary to implement the decommissioning
plan.
   (g)   The escrow agent shall release the decommissioning funds when the wind
energy system owner, operator or landowner has demonstrated and the city
concurs that decommissioning has been satisfactorily completed, or upon written
approval of the city in order to implement the decommissioning.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1240.08 NONCONFORMING RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEMS.
   If any preexisting renewable energy system is destroyed or damaged to the
extent of more than 50% of its fair market value at the time of destruction or
damage, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with this chapter.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1240.09 REMEDIES.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate or
fail to comply with or take any action which is contrary to the terms of this
chapter, or any permit issued under this chapter, or cause another to violate
or fail to comply, or to take any action which is contrary to the terms of this
chapter or any permit issued under this chapter.
   (b)   If the city determines that a violation of this chapter or the permit
has occurred, the Code Administrator shall provide written notice to any
person, firm or corporation alleged to be in violation of this chapter. If the
alleged violation does not pose an immediate threat to public health or safety,
the city and the parties shall engage in good faith negotiations to resolve the
alleged violation. Such negotiations shall be conducted within 30 days of the
notice of the violation.
   (c)   If after 30 days from the date of the notice of violation the city
determines, at its discretion, that the parties have not resolved the alleged
violation, the city may institute civil enforcement proceedings or any other
remedy at law to ensure compliance with this chapter or permit.
   (d)   Notwithstanding divisions (a) through (c) of this section, the
provisions of
Chapter 1244: Enforcement and Penalties shall apply.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
CHAPTER 1242: NONCONFORMITIES
Section
1242.01 Purpose
1242.02 General provisions
1242.03 Determination of legal nonconformity status
1242.04 Nonconformities and variances
1242.05 Nonconforming uses
1242.06 Nonconforming structures and sites
1242.07 Nonconforming lots of record
1242.08 Nonconforming signs
1242.09 Repair and maintenance
§ 1242.01 PURPOSE.
   Within the districts established by this code, some lots, uses of lands or
structures, or combinations thereof may exist which were lawful prior to the
effective date or amendment of this code, but that are prohibited, regulated or
restricted under the terms of this code. The legitimate interests of those who
lawfully established these nonconformities, especially when dealing with a
person’s residence, are herein recognized by providing for the continuance of
such uses, subject to regulations limiting their completion, restoration,
reconstruction, extension and/or substitution. Nevertheless, while it is the
intent of this code that such nonconformities be allowed to continue until
removed, they should not be encouraged to survive, unless otherwise allowed in
this chapter or specifically addressed in this code.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1242.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Any structure, land or use of land or a structure that existed at the
time of the effective date of this code that was legally established under a
previous code amendment or versions may be continued even if such use,
building, structure or use of land does not conform to the provisions of this
code.
   (b)   Passage of this code in no way legalizes any illegal uses existing at
the time of its adoption.
   (c)   An applicant for any development review procedure (e.g., zoning
permit, site plan review, variance and the like) that deals with a
nonconformity shall bear the burden of proof in demonstrating that the use was
a legal nonconformity on the effective date of this code.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1242.03 DETERMINATION OF LEGAL NONCONFORMITY STATUS.
   (a)   At the time of application for a zoning permit, or request for
variance regarding a nonconforming lot, building, structure or use, the
property owner shall submit sufficient evidence for the Code Administrator or
ZBA, as applicable, to determine that such lot, building, structure, or use was
lawfully created or established in accordance with the code regulations in
existence at that time.
   (b)   If the evidence submitted indicates the lot, building, structure or
use was legally established and has since become nonconforming because of the
establishment of, or amendment to, this code, the Code Administrator shall
issue a zoning permit identifying it as a legal nonconformity. A copy of such
certificate shall be kept on file in the offices of the Code Administrator.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1242.04 NONCONFORMITIES AND VARIANCES.
   (a)   Whenever any nonconformity has been changed so that the use, structure
or condition conforms to the requirements of this code, such use, structure or
condition shall no longer be defined as a nonconformity, nor shall the property
or structure be returned to the former nonconformity.
   (b)   When a property owner or authorized agent is granted a variance for a
nonconformity that addresses the nonconformity, the structure or lot shall no
longer be considered nonconforming. In no case shall the resolved nonconformity
be expanded or altered to create further nonconformities.
   (c)   If a property owner or authorized agent is granted a variance for a
nonconformity that addresses some nonconformities but additional
nonconformities continue, the structure or condition that remains a
nonconformity shall still be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1242.05 NONCONFORMING USES.
   Where, at the time of adoption of this code, lawful uses of land or
structures exist that would not be permitted by the regulations of this code,
the uses may be continued so long as they remain otherwise lawful and provided:
   (a)   Enlarging or increasing. No such nonconforming uses shall be enlarged
or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied
at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this code unless it complies
with the provisions of division (d) of this section;
   (b)   Moving. No such nonconforming use shall be moved, in whole or in part,
to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such uses at
the effective date of adoption or amendment of this code;
   (c)   Additional structures. No additional structures shall be constructed
on a lot with a nonconforming use unless such new structure complies with the
requirements of this code and the applicable zoning district;
   (d)   Change or substitution of nonconforming use.
      (1)   If no structural alterations are made that increase the
nonconformity, a nonconforming use of a building may be changed to another
nonconforming use of the same or of a more restricted use, as determined by the
Planning Commission. Such determination shall be made at a public hearing held
in the same manner as a conditional use (see §
1214.03: Conditional Uses), including notice, but the conditional use review
criteria of §
1214.03(d) shall not apply. At the hearing, the Planning Commission shall make
a determination if the proposed use, which must be a permitted use in the
applicable zoning district, is similar in nature and intensity, or is a more
restricted use, allowable as a change or substitution under this section.
      (2)   Whenever a nonconforming use is changed to a less intensive
nonconforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a more intensive
nonconforming use.
      (3)   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which
a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform
to the regulations for the applicable zoning district in which such structure
is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
   (e)   Expansion of a nonconforming use.
      (1)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions to the contrary, a
structure containing a nonconforming residential use (not including mixed use
buildings) may be increased or improved, regardless of the applicable zoning
district, provided the structure continues thereafter to be used for
residential purposes only and meets all required setbacks.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions to the contrary, a
structure containing a nonconforming, nonresidential use, may be increased or
improved, regardless of the applicable zoning district, where the owner of such
use can demonstrate through application to the Planning Commission (in the same
manner as division (d) of this section) that the manner in which the useable
area of the nonconforming use will be increased or improved will have minimal
adverse impact upon adjacent properties and other permitted land uses in the
surrounding neighborhood or can be made compatible with the adjacent properties
and the uses in the surrounding neighborhood upon compliance with specified
conditions.
      (3)   Factors that may be considered in determining an adverse impact
include, but are not limited to:
         A.   Noise, odor and/or vibrations;
         B.   Traffic;
         C.   Visual impacts;
         D.   Access to light and air from adjoining properties;
         E.   Existence of screening;
         F.   The hours of operation;
         G.   The effect on the access to the property by fire, police or other
public services; and
         H.   The predominant or prevailing land use, building and structure
patterns of the surrounding neighborhoods.
      (4)   Variances to expand a nonconforming use into a required setback or
to otherwise vary a regulation that applies to the subject site shall be
prohibited.
   (f)   Existing use reclassified as a conditional use. In the event an
existing use that was permitted by right at the time the use was established is
thereafter reclassified as a conditional use in the applicable district due to
a zoning text amendment, such use shall be considered to be an approved
conditional use without any further action. However, any subsequent change to
such use shall require review and approval in accordance with §
1214.03: Conditional Uses. Such use, provided it is conditionally permitted in
the applicable district, shall not be considered a nonconforming use.
   (g)   Termination of nonconforming uses.
      (1)   Termination of use through discontinuance.
         A.   When any nonconforming use is discontinued or abandoned for more
than six months in residential zoning districts and one year in nonresidential
zoning districts, any new use shall conform to the regulations of the district
in which it is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be
resumed. The intent to continue a nonconforming use shall not be evidence of
its continuance.
         B.   There may be cases when a structure, or structure and premises in
combination, may not be converted to a conforming use because of the original
floor plan and design (e.g., townhouses in a single-family residentially zoned
area). In these cases, the Planning Commission may determine that the
nonconforming use may continue if the nonconforming use is the original use of
the structure and/or premises. Appropriate safeguards, conditions and design
standards may be required by the Planning Commission so as to minimize the
impact of such continuance on the area.
      (2)   Termination of use by damage or destruction.
         A.   If a nonconforming single-family dwelling use, in any district,
is damaged or destroyed to any extent, such structure and use may be
reestablished on the same lot provided it meets the same size in height and
footprint, as well as complying with the same setbacks as previously existed.
         B.   If any nonconforming use, other than a single-family dwelling, is
damaged, but not to an extent greater than 50% of the principal structure’s
market value according to the Lorain County Auditor, such structure and use may
be reestablished on the same lot to the same size and intensity of use as was
previously existing immediately prior to the damage or destruction. Such
reestablishment of the use shall require the issuance of a zoning permit, which
must be issued within six months of the damage or the use shall not be
reestablished.
         C.   If any nonconforming use, other than a single-family dwelling, is
damaged beyond 50% of the principal structure’s market value according to the
Lorain County Auditor, such structure and use may only be reestablished with
approval by the Planning Commission after consideration of surrounding uses and
the impact of the nonconforming use.
         D.   If the city and the owner cannot agree as to the market value of
the building or structure, the market value shall be determined by a panel of
three appraisers, one of which is selected by the city, one by the owner and,
the third by agreement of the other two appraisers.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1242.06 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND SITES.
   A nonconforming structure or site may continue to be used or occupied by a
use permitted in the applicable zoning district so long as it remains otherwise
lawful and does not constitute a public nuisance, subject to the following
provisions.
   (a)   Any nonconforming structure or site may be enlarged, maintained,
repaired or altered provided, however, no such enlargement, maintenance, repair
or alteration shall either create an additional nonconformity or increase the
degree of the existing nonconformity of all or any part of such structure or
site, unless otherwise specified in this code.
   (b)   A nonconforming structure shall not be relocated in whole or in part
to any other location on the same or any other lot unless the entire structure
shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the applicable zoning district
after being relocated.
   (c)   The principal use of a nonconforming building may be changed to any
other use permitted in the applicable zoning district as long as the new use
complies with all regulations of this code specified for such use, except the
regulations to which the building did not conform prior to the change in use.
   (d)   The governmental acquisition of a portion of a lot for a public
purpose that results in reduction in a required yard or building setback below
that required in the applicable zoning district shall not render a structure
nonconforming.
   (e)   Damage or destruction of a nonconforming structure containing a
conforming use.
      (1)   If a nonconforming structure is damaged, but not to an extent
greater than 50% of the structure’s reproduction value, such structure and use
may be reestablished on the same lot to the same size and intensity of use as
was previously existing immediately prior to the damage or destruction. Such
reestablishment of the use shall require the issuance of a zoning permit within
one year of the initial damage. If an owner rebuilds a legally nonconforming
structure under this provision, they may expand the structure provided any
expansion or change does not increase the nonconformity that existed prior to
the damage.
      (2)   If a nonconforming structure is damaged beyond 50% of the
structure’s reproduction value, such structure shall only be rebuilt in
compliance with the requirements of this code. Such reconstruction shall
require the application and issuance of all necessary zoning and building
permits.
      (3)   If the owner voluntarily removes the structure or reduces the
nonconformity, that has not been damaged or destroyed, that owner shall not be
permitted to rebuild the structure to the original height, size or setback.
      (4)   The determination of the reproduction value shall be made by three
practicing building construction contractors, one to be appointed by the owner,
one to be appointed by the city and the third to be selected by the mutual
consent of the two parties.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1242.07 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
   (a)   In any R-1A, R-1B, R-1C or R-1D zoning district, a single-family
dwelling and customary accessory uses may be erected on any single lot of
record that was legally created on or before the effective date of this code,
or as amended, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this
code. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage
with other lots in the same ownership. Such lot shall also have frontage on a
public street or on a private street in an approved subdivision. These
provisions shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for
area or width, or both, generally applicable in the district, provided that
yard dimensions and requirements, other than those applying to area or width,
or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which
such lot is located. A request to vary the site development standards shall
only be allowed through the issuance of a variance.
   (b)   Vacant single nonconforming lot of record on improved street: when a
nonconforming lot can be used in conformity with all of the regulations
applicable to the intended use, except that the lot is smaller than the
required minimum lot area and/or lot width set forth in the district
regulations and that the lot is located on a street in an existing platted
subdivision where all improvements on the street have been completed and
accepted by the city as of January 1, 2004, then the lot may be used as
proposed just as if it were conforming, provided each of the following lot
conditions are met:
      (1)   Identified with a separate permanent parcel number as of January 1,
2004;
      (2)   Has never been combined with another lot;
      (3)   Has a minimum street frontage of 35 feet;
      (4)   Does not contain any primary or accessory structure as of January
1, 2004; and
      (5)   Is not in an R-1A zoning district.
   (c)   Vacant single nonconforming lot of record on unimproved street: when a
nonconforming lot can be used in conformity with all of the regulations
applicable to the intended use, except that the lot is smaller than the
required minimum lot area and/or lot width set forth in the district
regulations and that the lot is located on a street in an existing platted
subdivision where no improvements on the street have been completed and/or
accepted by the city as of January 1, 2004, then the lot may be used as
proposed just as if it were conforming, provided each of the following lot
conditions are met:
      (1)   The lot was of record on or before September 14, 1953 and the owner
thereof at that time did not own any adjoining lot;
      (2)   No adjoining lot or adjoining parcel of land with continuous
frontage was in the same ownership on the effective date of this code, being
Ordinance 52-99, passed 3-22-1999;
      (3)   No adjoining lot or adjoining parcel of land with continuous
frontage is in the same ownership as a result of acquisition after the
effective date of this revision of Ordinance 52-99, passed 3-22-1999; and
      (4)   Is not in an R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, or R-1D Zoning District.
   (d)   If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with
continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or
amendment of this code, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the
requirements established for lot frontage and area, the lands involved shall be
considered to be an undivided parcel for purposes of this code and shall be
legally combined prior to the issuance of any permits in accordance with the
zoning lot provisions of §
1226.01(b)(2). No portion of such parcel shall be used or sold in a manner
which diminishes compliance with lot frontage and area requirements established
by this code, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot
frontage or area below the requirements stated in this code.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1242.08 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   See §
1236.12: Nonconforming Signs for the regulation of nonconforming signs.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1242.09 REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE.
   (a)   On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a
nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs, or on repair or
replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, provided that
the footprint and height of the structure as it existed, when it became
nonconforming, shall not be increased unless in accordance with this chapter.
   (b)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening
or restoring to safe condition of any building, or part thereof, declared to be
unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, including,
but not limited to the Code Administrator or building inspector, upon order of
such official. Where appropriate, a building permit for such activities shall
be required.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
CHAPTER 1244: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
Section
1244.01 Enforcement by the Code Administrator
1244.02 Sale or transfer of land before recording
1244.03 Public services
1244.04 Nuisances
1244.05 Fees
1244.06 Voiding of permits
1244.99 Penalty
§ 1244.01 ENFORCEMENT BY THE CODE ADMINISTRATOR.
   The provisions of this code shall be administered and enforced by the Code
Administrator or his or her designated agent.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1244.02 SALE OR TRANSFER OF LAND BEFORE RECORDING.
   (a)   Whoever, being the owner, or agent of the owner, of any land within
the city, willfully transfers any lot, parcel or tract of such land from or in
accordance with a plat of a subdivision, as specifically defined in this code,
before the plat has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder, shall
forfeit and pay the sum of not less than $10 nor more than $500 for each lot,
parcel or tract of land so sold. The description of the lot, parcel or tract by
metes and bounds in the deed or transfer shall not serve to exempt the seller
from the forfeiture provided in this section.
   (b)   The sum as provided in division (a) of this section may be recovered
in a civil action brought in any court of competent jurisdiction by the Law
Director in the name of the city and shall be used for the street repair
thereof.
   (c)   The sale of lots, parcels or tracts from a plat of a subdivision on
which any and all areas indicated as streets or open grounds are expressly
indicated for the exclusive use of the abutting or other owners in the
subdivision, and not as public streets, ways or grounds, shall not serve to
exempt the seller from the requirements of this chapter or from the forfeiture
provided in this section.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1244.03 PUBLIC SERVICES.
   The city shall withhold all public services of whatever nature, including,
without limitation, the maintenance of streets and the furnishing of sewerage
facilities and water service, from all subdivisions which have not been
approved, and from all areas dedicated to the public which have not been
accepted by Council in the manner prescribed in this code.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1244.04 NUISANCES.
   Any lot, street, alley or other feature maintained contrary to the
provisions of this code shall constitute a public nuisance.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1244.05 FEES.
   The developer shall pay to the city the actual cost incurred by the city of
checking, investigating, inspecting and other such matters required by law and
the provisions of this code.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1244.06 VOIDING OF PERMITS.
   No department official or employee of the city who is vested with the duty
or authority to issue a zoning permit shall issue such permit for any use,
building or purpose if the same is in conflict with any of the provisions of
this code. Any permit so issued shall be void.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1244.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this code,
for which no penalty is otherwise provided, shall be fined not less than $25
nor more than $500 for each offense or imprisoned for not more than 30 days or
both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which
a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
CHAPTER 1246: DEFINITIONS
Section
1246.01 Rules of construction and interpretation
1246.02 General definitions
§ 1246.01 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION AND INTERPRETATION.
   (a)   Intent. All provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in
this code shall be construed according to this code’s stated purpose and
intent.
   (b)   Lists and examples. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, lists of
items or examples that use terms such as including, such as, or similar
language are intended to provide examples, and not to be exhaustive lists of
all possibilities.
   (c)   Computation of time. Unless the terms of a specific provision state
otherwise (e.g., some provisions specify “business days”), periods of time
defined by a number of days shall mean a number of consecutive calendar days,
including all weekend days, holidays and other non-business/working days;
however, if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, that day shall
be excluded.
   (d)   References to other regulations, publications and documents. Whenever
reference is made to an ordinance, resolution, statute, regulation or document,
that reference shall be construed as referring to the most recent edition of
such regulation (as amended), resolution, statute or document or to the
relevant successor document, unless otherwise expressly stated.
   (e)   Public officials and agencies. All public officials, bodies and
agencies to which references are made are those of the city, unless otherwise
expressly stated and may include a designee of said public official, body or
agency.
   (f)   Technical words. Technical words and phrases not otherwise defined in
this code that may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law
shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   (g)   Mandatory and discretionary terms. The word “shall” is always
mandatory, and the words “may” or “should” are always permissive.
   (h)   Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly suggests the contrary,
conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:
      (1)   “And” indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions or
events shall apply; and
      (2)   “Or” indicates that one or more of the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply.
   (i)   Tense and usage. Words used in one tense (past, present or future)
include all other tenses, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
The singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the
singular.
   (j)   Gender. The masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa.
   (k)   Meaning. For the purpose of this code, words and phrases shall have
the meanings set forth in this chapter.
   (l)   Terms related to specific chapters and sections. Some terms have a
specific definition related to a set chapter or section in this code but could
otherwise be misinterpreted as a common term and definition defined elsewhere
in this code. Where such terms exist, a parenthetical reference is included
following the term and shall relate to the sections identified in Table 1246-
1 below. Such terms may also relate to other definitions in this chapter.
 
Table 1246-1: Parenthetical References to Specific Chapters and Sections
Parenthetical Reference        Related Chapter or Section
(Wireless Telecommunications)  See §
                               1216.06(j)
(Historic Preservation)        See §
                               1214.07, 1214.08, and 1228.05
(Adult Entertainment Business) See §
                               1216.06(l)
(Renewable Energy)             See
                               Chapter 1240: Renewable Energy Systems
 
   (m)   Other terms not defined. Words and phrases not otherwise defined in
this code shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of
American English. For the interpretation of uses, the Code Administrator may
utilize outside sources including, but not limited to, common dictionaries and
planning and zoning related sources from the American Planning Association
(APA) and Urban Land Institute (ULI).
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1246.02 GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABUT, ADJOIN or ADJACENT. The land, lot or property adjoining the property
in question along a lot line or separated only by an alley, easement or street.
   ACCESS. Any driveway or other point of entry and/or exit onto or from a
street, road or thoroughfare, which connects to the general street system.
   ACCESSIBILITY RAMPS. Permanent or portable ramps utilized to provide a
disabled person with accessibility to a structure.
   ACTIVE RECREATIONAL FACILITIES. Any park or recreational facility that is
owned, managed or operated by the City of Avon Lake, a local township, Lorain
County, the State of Ohio or a non-profit agency. Such park or recreational
facility requires grading of the land, construction of facilities, lighting, or
is developed for athletic fields, tennis courts, swimming pools, skate parks,
disc golf, golf courses and other similar outdoor facilities. Such uses may
include accessory retail uses that are customarily incidental recreational uses
including, but not limited to, souvenir or concession stands. Such uses shall
include the general use of the land as well as any activities or programming of
the land or structures that are a part of the active recreational facility use.
   ADMINISTRATIVE, BUSINESS OR PROFESSIONAL OFFICES. A building or portion of a
building wherein services are performed involving predominately administrative,
professional or clerical operations which carries on no retail trade and
maintains no stock of goods for sale.
   ADULT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically
controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-
producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting or
describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE.
      (1)   A commercial establishment which, as one of its purposes, offers
for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the
following:
         A.   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions,
slides or other visual representations, which are characterized by the
depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas”; or
         B.   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use
in connection with “specified sexual activities”.
      (2)   A commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material
depicting or describing “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas” and still be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or
adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such
commercial establishments from being categorized as an ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT
NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE so long as one of its principal business
purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified
materials which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.” For the purposes of this
code any retail establishment which devotes at least 20% of the total linear
feet available for the display of items or materials for sale or rental to the
display of items or material for sale or rental which are characterized by the
depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas” shall be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty
store or adult video store.
   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:
      (1)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity;
      (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
“specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities”; or
      (3)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult
novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio or sexual
encounter center.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES. Adult entertainment businesses shall include
any use identified in §
1216.06(l)(2) that relates to sexually-oriented businesses or activities
including, but not limited to, adult arcades, adult bookstores, adult novelty
stores, adult video stores, adult cabarets, adult motion picture theaters,
adult theaters and the like.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where, for any form
of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar
photographic reproductions are regularly shown, or show various electronic
media, such as the Internet, are made available for the showing of materials,
which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity
or semi-nudity, or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
“specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities”.
   AGRICULTURAL.
      (1)   Any use of land for the growing and harvesting of legal
agricultural crops and trees for commercial agricultural purposes. Agricultural
uses include, but not limited to, raising of crops, horticulture, floriculture
and viticulture and the necessary accessory uses for parking, treating or
sorting the products; provided, however, that the operation of any such
accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal agricultural
activities.
      (2)   Any use of land for the raising and caring of livestock. This
includes necessary buildings and structures which shall be used for
agriculture, raising and caring for livestock and animal and poultry husbandry,
including necessary accessory uses for parking, treating or sorting the
products; provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses
shall be secondary to that of the normal agricultural activities.
      (3)   For the purposes of this code, this use shall also include
commercial stables and riding academies defined as the use of a building for
animals to lodge and feed in, especially having stalls for horses. Such
building may also be used for educational instruction in the care or riding of
horses.
      (4)   Buildings occupied as residences by persons engaged in agricultural
operations shall not be considered to be used for agricultural purposes.
   AIR-ACTIVATED GRAPHIC. A sign, all or any part of, which is designed to be
moved by action of forced air so as to make the sign appear to be animated or
otherwise have motion. See also the definition for SIGN, BALLOON.
   ALLEY. A minor, service roadway providing a secondary means of public access
to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation, but is
not a public or private street as defined by this code.
   ALTERATION.
      (1)   Any change, addition or modification in construction, any change in
the structural members of a building, such as walls or partitions, columns,
beams or girders, the consummated act of which may be referred to herein as
“altered” or “reconstructed”; any act or process that changes one or more of
the exterior architectural features of a structure, including, but not limited
to, the erection, construction, reconstruction or removal of any structure.
      (2)   Any change of copy, sign face, color, size, height, shape,
illumination, position, location, construction or supporting structure of any
sign.
   ALTERATION (HISTORIC PRESERVATION). Any material or visual change other than
normal maintenance and repair to the exterior of any structure located within
an historic district or to any historic property or to the publicly accessible
interior of any listed property which was listed in whole or in part because of
the interior’s historic or architectural significance.
   ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL. Any change in the supporting members of a building
such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
   AMATEUR RADIO TOWERS AND ANTENNAS. A system of cables, electrical
conductors, insulators, metallic or non-metallic tubing, poles, reflecting
discs, rods, wires, or similar objects used for transmission or reception of
radio signals or electromagnetic waves for amateur radio service.
   ANIMAL BOARDING, TRAINING OR DAYCARE FACILITIES. Any building, structure or
land, or combination thereof, used, designed or arranged for the boarding,
training, breeding, or care of domestic animals or pets, for profit, but
exclusive of animals used for agricultural purposes. Such facilities include
any lot or premises on which more than five dogs or cats (four months old or
older), or combination thereof, are cared for as a commercial operation. Such
use shall not include overnight boarding related to animal hospitals/clinics.
   ANIMAL HOSPITAL/CLINICS AND ANIMAL GROOMING. A building where animals or
pets are given medical or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time
of such treatment, including overnight stays. Such uses shall not have any
outdoor facilities for the boarding or keeping of animals. Such use may include
facilities for animal grooming.
   ANTENNA. Any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs or similar
devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves when
such system is either external to or attached to the exterior of a structure.
   ANTENNA, BUILDING MOUNTED. Any antenna, other than one with its supports
resting on the ground, directly attached or affixed to a building, tank, tower,
building-mounted mast or similar structure used for providing
telecommunications services, other than towers or antennas as defined by this
code.
   ANTENNA, DIRECTIONAL. A device which transmits and/or receives radio
frequency signals in a directional pattern of less than 360 degrees. May also
be known as a PANEL ANTENNA.
   ANTENNA, GROUND MOUNTED. Any antenna with its base, single or multiple
posts, placed directly on the ground.
   ANTENNA, OMNI-DIRECTIONAL. Any antenna which transmits and/or receives radio
frequency signals in a 360-degree radial pattern.
   ANTENNA, PARABOLIC. A device which incorporates a reflective surface that is
solid, open mesh or bar configured that is a shallow dish, cone, horn, or bowl
or saucer-shaped, and is used to transmit and/or receive electromagnetic or
radio frequency communication signals in a specific directional pattern. This
may also may be known as a SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA.
   ANTENNA, PORTABLE. Any device used to transmit and/or receive
electromagnetic or radio frequency communications signals in a specific
pattern, located on a portable or moveable base, to be placed for either
temporary or long-term use at a given site.
   ANTENNA, WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS. Any antenna system designed to
transmit and/or receive communications as authorized by Federal Communications
Commission (FCC), including amateur radio operators’ antennas.
   APPEAL. A review procedure by which a person may call into question an
administrative decision made in accordance with this code. See §
1214.11: Appeals.
   APPLICANT. Unless otherwise specified, an owner of a property or an agent
for the owner, including, a subdivider, developer, attorney or similar
representative, who has filed an application for development review pursuant to
Chapter 1214: Review Procedures.
   APPLICATION. The process by which the applicant submits a request for any
type of development review or approval identified in Chapter 1214: Review
Procedures. APPLICATIONS include all written documentation, verbal statements
and representations, in whatever forms and quantities as required by the city.
   ARCHITECTURAL DETAILING. Unique details and components, such as decorative
moldings or architectural ornamentation, which define the nature and quality of
the building.
   ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE. A prominent or significant part or element of a
building, structure or site.
   ASSEMBLY HALLS or CONFERENCE CENTERS. Facilities or buildings available for
lease by private parties that may include kitchen facilities for the
preparation or catering of food, the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-
premises consumption during scheduled events not open to the public, and/or
outdoor gardens, decks or reception facilities.
   AUTOMOBILE, MOTORCYCLE, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SALES AND LEASING. Any building
or land where new or used passenger cars, pick-up trucks, motorcycles, boats,
trailers and other recreational vehicles, in operational condition, are sold or
leased to customers.
   AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR AND SERVICE (MAJOR). Any general repair, rebuilding,
reconditioning, body or fender work, framework, painting or the replacement of
major parts of motor vehicles (e.g., major engine repair). This use type may
also include towing services that provide towing or conveyance of a wrecked,
inoperable, disabled or illegally parked motor vehicle but shall not include
storage of such vehicles on site.
   AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR AND SERVICE (MINOR). Any structure or premises used for
the sale of vehicle parts and fluids, excluding fuel sales, including
lubrication of motor vehicles and replacements or installation of minor parts
and accessories, but not including major repair work such as motor replacement,
body and fender repair, or spray painting. Such uses shall also include
establishments that sell parts or tires for vehicles as a retail establishment,
regardless if the parts are installed on-site. See also AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR AND
SERVICE (MAJOR).
   AVON LAKE HISTORICAL PRESERVATION COMMISSION. The commission established
under the provisions of the enabling legislation.
   AWNING. A shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a
building constructed of non-rigid materials on a supporting framework. See also
definition of CANOPY.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3266.jpg]
   Figure 1246-A: Examples of traditional awnings
   BASEMENT or CELLAR. That portion of a building located partly or fully
underground but having at least one-half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height
below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
   BASKETBALL HOOPS. Small accessory basketball hoops, not related to a “tennis
or other recreational court” either mounted to a wall or freestanding, by which
occupants of the principal use can play basketball.
   BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS. Any place of lodging that provides four or
fewer rooms for rent on a temporary basis, is the owner’s personal residence,
is occupied by the owner at the time of rental, and where meals may be served
to guests.
   BERM. An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest, screen
undesirable views, and/or decrease noise. The height of a berm shall be
measured from the average natural grade at the base of the BERM.
   BIKE AND SKATEBOARD RAMPS. An accessory structure utilized for recreational
purposes related to bicycle and skateboard use.
   BLOCK. The property lying between the two nearest intersecting streets,
crossing or terminating, or between the nearest such street and a railroad
right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, a river or live stream, or between any of
the foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of development or the
corporate lines of the city.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3268.jpg]
   Figure 1246-B: Illustration of block
   BLOCK FACE. All lots that have frontage on the same street as the subject
lot between an intersecting street or other boundary.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3270.jpg]
   Figure 1246-C: Illustration of block face
   BOAT RENTAL AND CHARTER. A business establishment that rents or charters
boats, jet skis, kayaks, canoes or other similar watercraft for short-term use.
   BUFFER. A combination of landscaped space and/or structures designed to
provide separation between different uses.
   BUFFER or BUFFER YARD. An area of natural or planted vegetation adjoining or
surrounding a land use and unoccupied in its entirety by any building
structure, paving (with limited exceptions) or portion of such land use, for
the purposes of separating, screening, and softening the effects of the land
use. A BUFFER may include a wall, fence or berm as provided in accordance with
the provisions of
Chapter 1232: Landscaping and Screening Standards.
   BUILDING. Any structure, of more or less permanent construction, having one
or more floors and a roof supported by columns or walls, which is completely
enclosed and is designed or intended for the shelter or protection of persons,
animals, or property. When separated by party walls, each portion of such
building shall be considered a separate structure.
   BUILDING, ACCESSORY. A subordinate building detached from, but located on
the same lot as, the principal or main building, the use of which is incidental
and accessory to the principal building or use and that is constructed
subsequent to the principal building or main use of the land.
   BUILDING CODE. Part Fourteen of these City of Avon Lake code of ordinances.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance of a building as measured in §
1226.01(f).
   BUILDING, LEGALLY NONCONFORMING. A building or portion thereof, lawfully
existing on the effective date of this code, or amendments thereto, and that
does not conform to the provisions of the code in the district in which it is
located.
   BUILDING LINES. The lines along the interior side of required front, rear
and side yards setbacks.
   BUILDING, MIXED-USE. A building that contains a mixture of both residential
uses and nonresidential uses.
   BUILDING PERMIT. A permit issued to commence construction or use of land as
permitted by this code and issued in accordance with the Avon Lake Code of
Ordinances.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL OR MAIN. A building occupied by the main use of the lot
on which said building is located.
   BUILDING UNIT. Any building subdivided into separate units or spaces, any
interior space occupying any portion of the ground floor of any building, and
having its own exterior entrance, and separated from other such spaces by a
party wall or walls.
   CALIPER. The American Association of Nurserymen standard for trunk
measurement of nursery stock. CALIPER of the trunk shall be taken six inches
above the ground up to and including four-inch caliper size, and 12 inches
above the ground for a caliper size greater than four inches.
   CAMOUFLAGE. The art and science of concealing wireless telecommunications
antennas and towers by means of mimicking other objects; to disguise with
colors, foliage and the like, including the placement of such devices.
   CANOPY. A permanent structure made of cloth, metal or other material
attached or unattached to a building for the purpose of providing shelter to
patrons or automobiles, or as a decorative feature on a building wall. A canopy
is not a completely enclosed structure but typically is supported by features
other than the building facade (e.g., structural legs, building extensions and
the like). See also the definition of AWNING.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3272.jpg]
   Figure 1246-D: Example of a canopy and related sign
   CELLULAR. Wireless transmission technology which uses a grid of antennas
(cell sites) to send and receive signals from mobile telephones. The antennas
“hand-off” signals as the user travels between cell sites, enabling the same
frequency, or channel, to be used by many callers simultaneously.
   CELLULAR TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. Personal communicating accessed by
means of cellular equipment and services.
   CEMETERIES. Land used for the burial of the human dead and dedicated for
cemetery purposes, including columbariums, crematories, mausoleums and
mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such
cemetery. This definition shall not be construed to include the burial of
animals or pets.
   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS (COA). A certificate issued by the Avon Lake
Historical Preservation Commission indicating that a proposed change,
alteration, construction or demolition of a designated historic building or
structure or within a designated historic site or district is in accordance
with the provisions of this code.
   CHANGE. Any alteration, addition, demolition, removal or construction
involving any property subject to the provisions of this code.
   CHANGE (HISTORIC PRESERVATION). Any alteration, demolition, removal or
construction involving any building, structure or property subject to the
provisions of this code. This change shall not be related to ordinary
maintenance or repair of any property provided that such work involves no
change in material, design, texture, color or outer appearance of such
property.
   CHANNEL. A natural stream that conveys water; a ditch or channel excavated
for the flow of water.
   CITY. The City of Avon Lake, Ohio in Lorain County, Ohio.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Avon Lake, Ohio
   COA. Certificate of appropriateness.
   CODE ADMINISTRATOR. The Code Administrator of the City of Avon Lake, Ohio.
The individual designated to administer and enforce this code, unless otherwise
stated.
   CODE OF ORDINANCES. The City of Avon Lake, Ohio, Code of Ordinances.
   CODE TEXT OR MAP AMENDMENT. An amendment or change to the text of this code
or to the zoning map as reviewed and decided upon by the City Council in
accordance with §
1214.02: Code Text and Map Amendments.
   COLLOCATION. The use of a wireless telecommunications facility, comprising a
single wireless telecommunications tower, building or other structure
permanently affixed to real property, supporting two or more antennas, disks,
pods or other similar devices used for telecommunications by more than one
telecommunications provider, whether public or private. COLLOCATION shall apply
to such devices whether readily discernible to the naked eye or camouflaged
(see definition).
   COMMERCIAL AND BUSINESS SUPPORT SERVICES. A profit-making activity which
renders services to other commercial or industrial businesses such as, but not
limited to, courier services, information technology consultants and internet
providers.
   COMMERCIAL MESSAGE OR SPEECH. Any sign, wording, logo or other
representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises or calls
attention to a business, product, service or other commercial activity.
   COMMERCIAL RECREATIONAL FACILITIES (INDOORS). A facility for any indoor
profit-making activity which is providing participatory and/or spectator
activities, such as, but not limited to, motion picture theaters, live
performances, bowling alleys, commercial recreation, video game rooms, billiard
halls, indoor skating rinks, bingo parlors and similar entertainment
activities. COMMERCIAL RECREATIONAL FACILITIES shall not include adult
entertainment businesses.
   COMMERCIAL RECREATIONAL FACILITIES (OUTDOORS). Land or facilities for any
profit-making activity which is providing outdoor participatory and/or
spectator activities such as, but not limited to, privately managed or owned
parks, amusement park, water parks, rollerblade rental, pay-to-play athletic
fields, golf courses, miniature golf courses, driving ranges, outdoor ice-
skating rinks, batting cages or swimming pools. COMMERCIAL RECREATIONAL
FACILITIES shall not include adult entertainment businesses.
   COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES. Wireless telecommunications
services by private providers licensed by the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC), including cellular, personal communications services (PCS), specialized
mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging and
similar services that are marketed to the general public.
   COMMON AREA. Any land area and/or facilities that is held in common
ownership by the residents through a homeowners’ association, community
association or other legal entity, or which is held by the individual members
of a condominium association as tenants-in-common.
   COMPLETED APPLICATION. An application that contains all information and/or
data necessary to enable an informed decision to be made with respect to an
application.
   COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN. The current, adopted long-range plan intended
to guide the growth and development of the city, based on study and analysis of
the city’s existing conditions, including population and housing, historic and
natural features, general land use patterns and zoning regulations, and other
development considerations.
   CONDOMINIUM. A multi-family dwelling or development containing individual
owners’ dwelling units and jointly owned and shared areas and facilities, which
dwelling or development is subject to the provisions of a homeowners’
association and/or Ohio law.
   CONSTRUCTION. Any act or process that requires a building permit and that
adds an addition or modification onto an existing building or erects a new
principal or accessory structure.
   CONSTRUCTION, START OF. A substantial change or alteration in the physical
properties of a zoning lot or structure where the incorporation of labor and
materials incurs substantial cost or liability.
   CONSTRUCTION STRUCTURES. A mobile home, trailer, dumpster or similar
temporary structure that is used as an office, storage or collection of debris
in conjunction with a construction project.
   CONTRACTOR EQUIPMENT AND STORAGE YARDS. An unenclosed area or portion of a
lot upon which a construction contractor maintains its principal office or a
permanent business office used to store and maintain construction equipment and
other materials customarily used in the trade carried on by the construction
contractor.
   COUNTY. Lorain County, Ohio
   CULTURAL FACILITIES. Public or private facilities use for display,
performance or enjoyment of heritage, history or the arts. This use includes,
but is not limited to, museums, libraries, art performance venues, cultural
centers and interpretative sites.
   DECK. A flat surface, that is not paved, which is capable of supporting
weight similar to a floor, constructed outdoors and elevated from the ground
that is either freestanding or attached to a building. DECKS may also include
stairways. DECKS are unenclosed by solid or nonsolid walls or a roof.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3274.jpg]
   Figure 1246-E: Example of a deck.
   DEDICATION. The intentional and voluntary appropriation or transfer of land
from the private owner to the city or other public agency for the land to be
pledged to a proper public use or purpose.
   DEMOLITION. Any act or process that destroys in whole or in part any
building or structure.
   DENSITY. The number of dwelling units permitted per acre of land.
      (1)   GROSS DENSITY. The number of dwelling units permitted per acre of
total land area.
      (2)   NET DENSITY. Shall be calculated in accordance with §
1226.01(c).
   DETACHED GARAGES AND CARPORTS. An accessory building primarily intended for
and used for the enclosed storage or shelter of not more than four private
motor vehicles of the owner or occupant of the principal building that is
detached from the principal building. While a garage is completely enclosed by
walls and a garage door, a carport is a roofed structure, with a foundation,
that provides space for the parking of vehicles and that is completely open on
at least one side.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3276.jpg]
   Figure 1246-F: Example image of a detached garage (left) and detached
carport (right).
   DETACHED STORAGE/UTILITY SHEDS, GAZEBOS AND OTHER DETACHED BUILDINGS. An
accessory building, other than a detached garage, that is typically uses for
storage of items utilized by the occupants of the dwelling or a building used
for the general enjoyment of the occupants including, but not limited to,
gazebos, structural trellises, storage sheds and the like. Such term shall not
include “playsets, treehouses, and trampolines”.
   DEVELOPER. Any individual, subdivider, firm, association, syndicate,
partnership, corporation, trust or other legal entity commencing proceedings
under this code to affect the development of land for himself, herself or for
another.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any building, construction, renovation, mining, extraction,
grading, dredging, filling, excavation or drilling activity or operation; any
material change in the use or appearance of any structure or in the land
itself; the division of land into parcels; any change in the intensity or use
of land, such as an increase in the number of dwellings units in a structure or
a change to a commercial or industrial use from a less intense use.
   DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE. A committee of staff and appointment members
intended to assist in the administrative review of certain applications as
specified in Chapter 1214: Review Procedures.
   DISTRICT. See ZONING DISTRICT.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. An animal customarily kept, and cared for, by the occupants
of a dwelling for personal pleasure, and which are not raised for food, fur or
monetary gain. Typically, this includes dogs, cats, birds and other small
mammals and reptiles, but not fowl, herd animals, goats or horses.
   DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY. Any portion of a building from which business is
transacted, or is capable of being transacted, directly with customers located
in a motor vehicle during such business transactions. The term DRIVE-THROUGH
shall also include DRIVE-UP and DRIVE-IN but shall not include vehicle washing
establishments, automotive fuel sales, or automotive repair and service
establishments.
   DRIVEWAY. A private access way used by vehicles and pedestrians for access
to a parking space, garage, dwelling, structure, or a use of land.
   DWELLING. A building designed or used exclusively as the living quarters for
one or more families or housekeeping units.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building designed for or used exclusively for
residential purposes by one family or housekeeping unit.
   DWELLINGS, MULTI-FAMILY. A building or portion thereof designed with more
than one dwelling unit.
   DWELLING UNIT. A single unit of one or more rooms providing complete,
independent living facilities for one family, or alternatively by one
housekeeping unit.
   EASEMENT. A right granted by the owner of land to other parties to use such
land for a specific purpose, such as public utility lines or for access to
other properties.
   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS (HIGHER EDUCATION). Any private or public secondary
educational institution that includes, but is not limited to: secretarial
schools, colleges and universities, business schools, seminaries or any other
institution providing collegiate level curriculum.
   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS (PRESCHOOL AND K-12). A public or private facility
that provides a curriculum of primary, elementary, secondary or college
preparatory academic instruction, including, but not limited to, preschools,
kindergartens, elementary schools, junior high schools, and high schools. This
definition shall not be deemed to include colleges, trade or business schools,
or other post-secondary education facilities. See EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
(HIGHER EDUCATION).
   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER. A sign designed so that the characters, letters
or illustrations can be changed or rearranged automatically on a lampbank or
through mechanical means (e.g., electronic or digital signs).
   EROSION.
      (1)   The wearing away of the land surface by running water, wind, ice or
other geological agents, including such processes as gravitational creep; and
      (2)   The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by wind,
water, ice or gravity.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by
city utilities or city departments, boards or commissions, of overhead, surface
or underground gas, electrical steam or water, distribution or transmission
systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including
mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, tunnels, wires, cables, fire alarm
boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, poles, electrical
substation, gas regulator stations and other similar equipment and accessories
in connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate
service by such city utility or city department, board, or commission or for
the public health, safety or general welfare, shall be exempt from the
regulations of this code. Provided, however, that the installation shall
conform to Federal Communications Commission and Federal Aviation Agency rules
and regulations, and those of other authorities having jurisdiction.
   ESTABLISHMENT (ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS). Means and includes any of the
following:
      (1)   The opening or commencement of any adult entertainment business as
a new business;
      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult
entertainment business, to an adult entertainment business;
      (3)   The additions of any adult entertainment business to any other
existing adult entertainment business; or
      (4)   The relocation of any adult entertainment business.
   FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration.
   FACADE. The exterior walls of a building or building face exposed to public
view; the exterior face of a building that gives it a distinctive character.
   FACADE, FRONT. The facade of a building that contains the primary entrance
of the building.
   FACADE, PRIMARY. For the purpose of the sign regulations, a PRIMARY FACADE
shall be as defined in §
1236.07(d).
   FACADE, SECONDARY. For the purpose of the sign regulations, a SECONDARY
FACADE shall be as defined in §
1236.07(d).
   FACILITY (WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS). Any entire wireless
telecommunications facility, including a tower, equipment building, parking
area and other structures and signs, or one of the same, or a combination of
these objects and devices.
   FACILITY OWNER (RENEWABLE ENERGY). The entity or entities having equity
interest in the wind energy system, including their respective successors and
assigns.
   FAMILY. One or more persons, with their direct lineal descendants and
adopted children (and including the domestic employees thereof), together with
not more than two persons not so related, living together in the whole or part
of a dwelling comprising a single housekeeping unit. Every additional group of
two or fewer persons living in such housekeeping unit shall be considered a
separate FAMILY for the purpose of this code.
   FARMERS MARKET. An outdoor location where vendors congregate to offer one or
more of the following items for sale:
      (1)   Fresh unprocessed fruits and vegetables, herbs, grains, legumes,
nuts, honey or other bee products and maple syrup;
      (2)   Flowers and plants;
      (3)   Livestock food products (including meat, milk, yogurt, cheese and
other dairy products);
      (4)   Products of a cottage food production operation as defined by R.C.
§ 3715.01;
      (5)   Beer and wine made in Ohio for off-premises consumption only,
provided such sale complies with all applicable state statutes, rules and
regulations; and
      (6)   Handmade items made by the vendor provided they comprise less than
20% of the total displayed inventory at the farmers market. (Commercially
manufactured goods or products shall not be offered for sale.)
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission, which is primarily responsible
for the administration of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. Law No. 104-
104, Sec. 1(a), Feb. 8, 1996, 110 Stat. 56.
   FENCE. Any accessory wall or structure composed of wood, metal, stone, vinyl
or other material erected in such a manner and positioned to enclose, partially
enclose, screen or divide any premises or part of premises. Trellises or other
structures supporting or for the purpose of supporting vines, flowers and other
vegetation when erected in such position as to enclose, partially enclose,
screen or divide any premises or any part of any premises shall be included
within the definition of FENCE.
   FINANCIAL GUARANTEE. A financial deposit to ensure that all improvements,
facilities or work required will be completed in conformance with the approved
plan.
   FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS. Any building, property or activity of which the
principal use or purpose of which is for depository purposes and including the
provision of financial services including, but not limited to banks, credit
unions, savings and loan institutions.
   FLAG. Any fabric or other flexible material attached to or designed to be
flown from a flagpole or similar device.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of a
building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls of a building
or from the centerline of a common wall separating two or more units of a
building, including accessory storage areas located within selling or working
space, but not including space in cellars or basements, space in machinery
penthouses or floor space used for accessory off-street parking.
   FOOTCANDLE. A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of
which are one foot from a uniform point source of one standard candle.
   FRACTION or FRACTION THEREOF. Where a calculation required by this code
results in a fraction, the fraction shall be rounded to the closest whole
number. Any fraction one-half or less shall rounded down and any fraction over
one-half shall be rounded up to the next highest whole number.
   FRATERNAL, CHARITABLE AND SERVICE ORIENTED CLUBS. A building or portion
thereof or premises owned or operated by an entity, person or group of persons
for a social, educational, religious or recreational purpose, but not primarily
for profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on as a
business.
   FRONTAGE. All of the property abutting on one side of a street or places
(crossing or terminating) or, if the street or place is dead-ended, then all of
the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street or place and
the dead end of the street or place.
   FRONTAGE, BUILDING. The length of an enclosed building facing a public or
private street. When a business does not front a public right-of-way the Code
Administrator shall have the authority to designate the building frontage. In
structures with more than one business, the frontage of each business shall be
calculated separately in determining its sign area. See Figure 1246-G.
   FRONTAGE, STREET OR LOT. The distance between the side lot lines measured
along the required front setback line. In the case of a corner lot, frontage
shall be measured along the shortest front lot line. Property lines which abut
limited access roads shall not be construed to be included within any
calculation of frontage. See Figure 1246-G.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3278.jpg]
   Figure 1246-G: Illustration of building frontage versus street frontage.
   FUEL STATIONS. An establishment that sells unleaded and diesel gasoline or
any other fuel used for in vehicles.
   FUNERAL HOMES. Any dwelling or establishment used and occupied by a
professional licensed mortician for human burial preparation and funeral
services.
   GARAGE OR ESTATE SALES. Sales by residents of used or surplus personal
possessions including, but not limited to, all sales entitled garage, yard,
lawn, basement, attic, porch, room, tent, backyard, patio, or moving. This term
shall include garage sales, lawn sales, attic sales, rummage sales or any
similar casual sale of tangible personal property which is advertised by any
means whereby the public at large can be made aware of such sale.
   GAZEBO. A freestanding (not detached) accessory structure that has a covered
roof and supporting structure but is open on all sides. See Figure 1246-H.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3280.jpg]
   Figure 1246-H: Example image of a gazebo.
   GENERATORS and HVAC EQUIPMENT.
      (1)   GENERATORS. Equipment that utilizes gas or other fuels to create
electrical energy on a temporary basis when there is an electrical outage on
the public electric grid.
      (2)   HVAC EQUIPMENT. Include all cabinets or outdoor equipment used as
part of a building’s heating, ventilation and air-conditioning equipment
including, but not limited to, compressor units and condenser units.
   GOVERNMENT OFFICES AND BUILDINGS (NO OUTDOOR ACTIVITIES). Buildings or
office space utilized for the provision of services by the City of Avon Lake,
Lorain County, the State of Ohio or the federal government that does not
include outdoor activities other than parking. Such uses include, but are not
limited to, the municipal building, fire stations, police stations, government
offices and other similar uses.
   GRADE. The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to
the sign, building or other structure being measured.
   GRADING. The stripping, cutting, filling or stockpiling, or any combination
thereof of earth-disturbing activity, inclusive of land in its cut or filled
conditions
   GRASS. A species of perennial grass grown as permanent lawns or for
landscape purposes.
   GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE. Stormwater management techniques that use natural
systems, or engineered systems, that mimic natural process.
   GROUND COVER. A plant growing less than two feet in height at maturity that
is grown for ornamental purposes. GROUND COVERS are used as an alternative to
grasses. On slopes, GROUND COVERS control erosion while eliminating the
maintenance of mowing on hillsides. GROUND COVERS also provide permanent
covering of open ground to prevent erosion and/or create visual appeal.
   HEDGE. A barrier of natural vegetation usually consisting of evergreen
trees, shrubs or tall grasses that can be used to enclose, screen or separate
areas.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT. Any area designated by ordinance of the city which
contains within definable geographic boundaries, buildings, structures or sites
of historic, architectural or archaeological significance.
   HOME OCCUPATION. A business, profession, occupation or trade that is
conducted on a residential property for the economic gain or support of a
resident living on that property and is incidental and secondary to the
residential use of the lot and does not adversely or perceptively affect the
character of the lot or surrounding area.
   HOMEOWNERS’ ASSOCIATION. A community association that is organized within a
development in which individual owners share common interests and
responsibilities for open space, landscaping, private roads or other such
facilities.
   HOSPITALS. An institution providing inpatient and outpatient medical and
surgical care, diagnosis and treatment for sick or injured persons including
beds for overnight care, laboratories, medical offices, training facilities and
other necessary accessory facilities.
   HOTELS and MOTELS. A facility offering temporary lodging accommodations, in
individual rooms or suites, on a daily rate, to the general public and
potentially providing additional accessory services such as, but not limited
to, restaurants, meeting rooms and recreational facilities.
   HOUSEKEEPING UNIT. Five or fewer unrelated persons occupying a single
dwelling unit, living as a single group, and doing their own cooking on the
premises as distinguished from a group occupying a hotel, motel or other group
living arrangement. Such definition shall also include RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES
that allow for more than five persons when permitted as a licensed residential
facility.
   IMPROVEMENT PLANS. The engineering plans showing types of materials and
construction details for the proposed subdivision improvements.
   IMPROVEMENTS. Street pavement or resurfacing, curbs, gutters, sidewalks,
water lines, sewer lines, storm drains, street lights, flood control and
drainage facilities, utility lines, structures, landscaping and other related
matters normally associated with the subdivision of raw land into building
sites.
   INDUSTRIAL SERVICE USES. Establishments primarily engaged in rendering
services to office, business or industrial establishments on a fee or contract
basis, such as advertising and mailing; building maintenance; employment
services; management and consulting services; protective services; office
equipment rental and leasing; commercial research; development and testing;
photo finishing; machine repair, and personal supply services.
   INDUSTRIAL USES, HEAVY. Uses engaged in the basic processing and
manufacturing of materials or products predominately from extracted or raw
materials, or a use engaged in storage of, or manufacturing processes using
flammable or explosive materials, or storage or manufacturing processes that
potentially involve hazardous conditions. HEAVY INDUSTRIAL USES shall also mean
those uses engaged in the operation, parking and maintenance of vehicles,
cleaning of equipment or work processes involving solvents, recycling
establishments, public works yards and container storage.
   INDUSTRIAL USES, LIGHT. The manufacturing, processing, or assembly of
products within a fully enclosed structure where noise, odor, light or
vibrations is not noticeable from the adjacent properties.
    LANDMARK. Any building, structure, site, work of art or object that has
been designated as a LANDMARK by ordinance of the city, pursuant to procedures
prescribed herein, that is worthy of preservation, restoration or
rehabilitation because of its historic, architectural or archaeological
significance.
   LANDSCAPING. The improvement of a lot, parcel, tract of land, or portion
thereof, with grass, shrubs and trees. LANDSCAPING may include pedestrian
walks, flower beds, trees, shrubs, and ornamental objects such as fountains,
statuary and other similar natural and artificial objects. In no case shall
landscaping include the use of artificial plants or flowers as a replacement
for living plant material unless such artificial plant closely resembles its
natural counterpart in size, form, and color.
   LARGE WIND ENERGY SYSTEM. A wind energy system which has a rated capacity of
more than 20 kilowatts (kW) and not more than one and one-half MW and which is
intended to primarily reduce non-residential on-site consumption of utility
supplied electricity.
   LATTICE TOWER. A tower constructed of vertical metal struts and cross braces
forming a square or triangular structure that tapers from the foundation.
   LAW DIRECTOR. The Law Director or designated legal counsel of the City of
Avon Lake, Ohio
   LIGHT FIXTURE. The assembly that holds the lamp in a lighting system. It
includes the elements designed to give light output controls, such as a
reflector (mirror) or refractor (lens), the ballast, housing, and the
attachment parts.
   LIGHT, CUTOFF. An artificial outdoor light source designed to ensure that no
light is directly emitted above a horizontal line parallel to the ground as
regulated and illustrated in §
1226.04: Outdoor Lighting.
   LIGHT, NON-CUTOFF. An artificial outdoor light source designed to allow
light to be directly emitted above a horizontal line parallel to the ground as
regulated and illustrated in §
1226.04: Outdoor Lighting.
   LOADING AREA. An off-street space or berth for the loading or unloading of
freight carriers on the same lot as the structure they serve.
   LOADING SPACE. An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building
or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials that has
an appropriate means of access.
   LOCATE OR LOCATION (WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS). To place (or the placement
of) a tower or related wireless telecommunications facility and incidental
structures on a zoning lot within the corporate boundaries of the city pursuant
to securing the required permits through ordinary due process.
   LOT. A parcel of land occupied, or to be occupied, by a main building and
accessory buildings, or utilized for the principal use and uses accessory
thereto, together with such open spaces as are required and having the minimum
size required for a lot under the provisions of this code. Every lot shall abut
upon and have permanent access to a public street and have a minimum frontage
required in the zoning district in which the lot is located.
   LOT AREA. The total area within the lot lines of a lot, excluding any street
right-of-way or other legal public dedication. See §
1226.01(b).
   LOT, CORNER. A lot which adjoins the point of intersection or meeting of two
or more streets and in which the interior angle formed by the street lines is
one 135 degrees or less. See Figure 1246-I.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3282.jpg]
   Figure 1246-I: Illustration of typical lot types.
   LOT COVERAGE. That portion of a lot, which when viewed directly above, which
would be covered by a building or structure, parking and loading areas and
other surfaces that are impermeable or substantially impervious to water.
   LOT, CURVED OR CUL-DE-SAC. A lot with frontage along a curved street or cul-
de-sac. See §
1226.01: Lot and Principal Building Regulations.
   LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the
rear lot line, measured in the general direction of the side lot lines.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE (THROUGH). A lot having a frontage on two non-
intersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. See §
1226.01: Lot and Principal Building Regulations.
   LOT, FLAG (PANHANDLE). A lot that does traditionally have a frontage on or
abutting a public street but where access is provided through a narrow strip of
land that fronts or has access to the street. See §
1226.01: Lot and Principal Building Regulations.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot that has a single street frontage, a rear lot line, and
at least two side lot lines. See §
1226.01: Lot and Principal Building Regulations.
   LOT LINE. The boundary line defining the limits of the lot. LOT LINE is
synonymous with PROPERTY LINE.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. In the case of an interior lot, means that line separating
such lot from the street. In the case of a corner lot or double frontage lot,
the FRONT LOT LINE is that line separating such lot from either street. See §
1226.01: Lot and Principal Building Regulations.
   LOT LINE, REAR. A lot line opposite a front yard. A REAR LOT LINE is
generally parallel to or less than 45 degrees to the front street right-of-way
line. See §
1226.01: Lot and Principal Building Regulations.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. A lot line generally extending perpendicular to the front
and rear lot lines. The SIDE LOT LINE extends between the front lot line and
the rear lot line. See §
1226.01: Lot and Principal Building Regulations.
   LOT, NONCONFORMING. A lot that does not meet the minimum lot width, street
frontage and/or lot area requirements of the applicable zoning district.
   LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the part of which has
been recorded in the office of the Lorain County Recorder, or a parcel of land
the deed to which was recorded, prior to adoption of this code.
   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at
right angles to the lot depth at the front setback line. See §
1226.01(d).
   LOT, ZONING.
      (1)   For the purposes of this code, a parcel of land of sufficient size
to enact minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage and area, and to provide
such yards and other open spaces as are herein required. The term ZONING LOT is
used synonymously with LOTS in this code. A ZONING LOT may consist of:
         A.   A single lot of record;
         B.   A portion of a lot of record; and
         C.   A combination of complete lots of record, and portions of lots of
record.
      (2)   See §
1226.01(b)(2).
   MAIN THOROUGHFARE. A street or road which serves or is intended to serve as
streets within the city that can carry the highest levels of traffic. Such
street may be also be referred to as an ARTERIAL STREET.
   MAXIMUM EXTENT FEASIBLE. That no feasible and prudent alternative exists,
and all possible efforts to comply with the regulation or minimize the
potential harm or adverse impacts have been undertaken. Economic considerations
may be taken into consideration.
   MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT. Equipment, devices and accessories, the use of which
relate to water supply, drainage, heating, ventilating, air conditioning and
similar purposes.
   MEDICAL/DENTAL CLINICS. Office or clinic uses concerned with the diagnosis,
treatment and care of human beings. This definition does not include hospitals,
skilled nursing facilities or personal care facilities.
   METAL SALVAGE AND JUNK STORAGE. Land or buildings used for one of the
following operations:
      (1)   The purchase, sale, exchange, storage, baling, packaging,
disassembly or handing of waste, used materials or secondhand materials
including, but not limited to, batteries, scrap iron and other old scrap
ferrous or nonferrous materials, metals, paper, rubber tires, tires, debris or
waste, electronic parts, and bottles;
      (2)   The dismantling or wrecking of motor vehicles or trailers, or the
storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, or partially dismantled, obsolete, or
wrecked vehicles or their parts; or
      (3)   The storage, keeping, buying or selling of wrecked, scrapped or
dismantled motor vehicles or motor parts. The presence on any lot of two or
more motor vehicles, which, for a period exceeding 30 days, have not been
capable of operating under their own power and from which parts have been
removed for reuse or sale, shall constitute a vehicle or automotive wrecking or
salvage yard.
   MICROBREWERY, MICRODISTILLERY or MICROWINERY. An establishment with where
beer, liquor, wine or other alcoholic beverage is manufactured on the premises.
The manufacturing may be the principal use of the facility or may be
subordinate to a restaurant, bar or tavern as allowed in §
1216.05: Allowed Principal Uses. A MICROBREWERY, MICRODISTILLERY or MICROWINERY
may include some off-site distribution of its alcoholic beverages consistent
with state law.
   MIXED USE BUILDINGS. A building that contains a commercial or office use and
a residential use within a single building as provided for in this Part Twelve.
   MODIFICATION. Any change in use, addition or alteration of a building or
structure, or any change in type and/or increase in quantity of regulated
substances used, stored, handled or produced.
   MONOPOLE TOWER. A tower constructed of a single, self-supporting metal tube,
anchored to a foundation with controls locked inside the tube.
   MONUMENT. A box with an iron pin at the intersection of the centerlines of
two streets or at a location where the point of tangency meets the point of
curvature for curved sections of streets.
   MULTI-TENANT USE. A principal building with multiple uses of a similar use
classification (e.g., commercial, industrial and the like) but that has
multiple tenant spaces and/or multiple use types. A strip mall or strip center
with a mixture of retail uses such as restaurants, retail stores, and personal
service establishments is an example of a multi-tenant building. Such use does
not include any use within the residential use classification.
    NONCOMMERCIAL SPEECH. Any sign, wording, logo or other representation that,
does fall under the definition of COMMERCIAL MESSAGE OR SPEECH.
   NONCONFORMING SITE CONDITION. A site improvement that was legally
established, but no longer conforms to the parking, landscaping, architectural
or other design standards for the site exclusive of the lot area, lot width, or
other site development standards established in this code. See also LOT,
NONCONFORMING.
   NONCONFORMITY, LEGAL. Lots, uses of land, structures, and uses of structures
and land in combination, lawfully existing at the time of enactment of this
chapter or its amendments, which do not conform to the regulations of the
applicable zoning district, and are therefore incompatible. See also the
definitions for USE, NONCONFORMING, LOT, NONCONFORMING, BUILDING,
NONCONFORMING, NONCONFORMING SITE CONDITION and STRUCTURE, NONCONFORMING.
   NON-IONIZING ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION (NIER). Electromagnetic radiation
primarily in the visible, infrared and radio frequency portions of the
electromagnetic spectrum.
   NON-PARTICIPATING LANDOWNER (RENEWABLE ENERGY). Any landowner except a
landowner on whose property all or a portion of a wind energy system is located
pursuant to an agreement with the wind energy system owner or operator.
   NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals,
pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque
covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque
covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals
in a discernibly turgid state.
   NURSERY SCHOOLS and DAY CARE CENTERS. A facility administering to the needs
of infants, toddlers, pre-school children and school children outside of school
hours, by persons other than their parents or guardians, custodians, or
relatives by blood, marriage or adoption for any portion of the 24-hour day in
a building other than the child’s own home. This use may include, but is not
limited to, after school programs, office day care centers and principal
structures used for only day care/nursery school programs. This term may also
include adult day care centers where persons other than children, family
members or guardians care for an adult for a portion of a 24-hour day in a
building other than the adult’s home.
   OCCUPANT. A person who, on a regular basis, spends nights at a residence. A
person is considered an OCCUPANT regardless of whether they spend the majority
of their nights at a residence, if the times they do stay overnight are regular
and recurrent. In addition, a person shall be considered an OCCUPANT if their
clothes or other daily living supplies are maintained at the residence.
   OCCUPIED BUILDING (RENEWABLE ENERGY). A residence, educational institution,
hospital, place of workshop, cultural institution or other building used for
private or public gathering that is occupied or in use when an application is
submitted related to a wind energy system.
   OPEN SPACE. Open areas, including parks, nature areas, playgrounds, trails
and improved open space areas. See
Chapter 1230: Open Space and Recreation Impact Fee Requirements.
   OPEN SPACE, IMPROVED. A generally planned and structured area that includes
formally designed landscape plantings. The space is regularly maintained and
may include streetscape furnishings (e.g., benches, lighting and sculptures),
recreational improvements (e.g., playground, swimming pool, tennis courts) and
street improvements.
   OPERATOR (RENEWABLE ENERGY). The entity responsible for the day-to-day
operation and maintenance of a wind energy system.
   OUTDOOR DINING. Areas on sidewalks (public or private), patios, or other
unenclosed areas, excluding vehicular use areas, that are designated for
outdoor seating where patrons may be served food and beverage for on-site
dining.
   OUTDOOR DISPLAYS AND SALES. The placement of small products or materials for
sale outside of a retail or wholesale sales establishment.
   OUTDOOR LIGHTING. Any source of light that is installed or mounted outside
of an enclosed building or structure, but not including streetlights installed
or maintained along public streets by a government agency or public utility.
See §
1226.04: Outdoor Lighting.
   OUTDOOR STORAGE AND BULK SALES. A facility or lot used for the outdoor
storage of materials and/or vehicles that are to be used for construction or
for manufacturing processes and where such uses are the principal use of the
lot. Such use may also include the sales of materials related to construction
or manufacturing where the sales are direct to contractors or business and not
open to the general public for retail sales. This use may also include the
outdoor storage of fleet vehicles.
   OUTDOOR VENDING MACHINES and DROP-OFF BOXES.
      (1)   VENDING MACHINES. Small machines that are capable of accepting
money in return for the automatic dispensing of goods (e.g., drink machines,
snack machines, video machines).
      (2)   DROP-OFF BOXES. Small collection facilities where recyclable
materials, clothing or household goods are accepted from the public (e.g.,
neighborhood recycling stations and thrift store collection boxes).
   OWNER. Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership
corporation, trust or any other legal entity, having legal title to or
sufficient proprietary interest in the land.
   PARKING AISLE. The driveway or access drive by which a car enters and
departs a parking space.
   PARKING AREA. An area designed for the parking of vehicles that includes
parking spaces and any driveways or access drives specifically related to the
parking spaces.
   PARKING LOTS. An outdoor area made up of marked parking spaces and
associated access drives where motor vehicles may be stored for the purpose of
temporary off-street parking. Also known as a PARKING AREA.
   PARKING SPACE. A suitably surfaced and permanently maintained area on
privately owned property either within or outside of a building of sufficient
size to store one standard automobile.
   PASSIVE PARKS, OPEN SPACE AND NATURAL AREAS. Any park or recreational
facility where there is no grading of the land, the construction of facilities,
lighting or development of ball fields with the exception that passive parks,
recreational facilities, and conservation areas may include the development of
trails and sidewalks.
   PATIO. An unenclosed outdoor hard-surfaced area that is no higher than 18
inches above the ground. If a pergola or other roof structure is attached to
the principal building and extends over the patio, then the patio and roofing
shall be considered a PORCH.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3208.jpg]
   Figure 1246-J: Illustrative example of a patio.
   PCS. Personal communication services, including digital transmission,
typically wireless or cellular telecommunications generally.
   PENNANTS. A triangular or irregular piece of fabric or other material,
whether or not containing a message of any kind, commonly attached by strings
or strands, or supported on small poles, intended to flap in the wind.
   PERFORMANCE STANDARD. A criterion established to control enclosure, dust,
smoke, fire and explosive hazards, lighting, glare and heat, noise, odor, toxic
and noxious matter, vibrations and other conditions created by or inherent in
uses of land or buildings. See §
1226.02: Performance Standards.
   PERGOLA. An accessory structure that can be attached to a building or can be
detached with a roof that is not fully covered, supported by a structure that
is open on all sides.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3286.jpg]
   Figure 1246-K: Example image of a pergola.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, joint venture, agency,
unincorporated association, municipal corporation, Lorain County or state
agency within Ohio, the federal government, or any combination thereof. An
agency is further defined in the R.C. § 111.15 as any governmental entity of
the state and includes, but is not limited to, any board, department, division,
commission, bureau, society, council, institution, state college or university,
community college district, technical college district or state community
college. Agency does not include the general assembly, the controlling board,
the adjutant general’s department, or any court.
   PERSONAL CARE. The provision of personal services such as help in walking
and getting in and out of bed; assistance with bathing, dressing, and feeding;
preparation of a special diet; and supervision over medications which can be
self-administered.
   PERSONAL SERVICES. Establishments that are primarily engaged in providing
services generally involving the care of the person or person’s possessions.
PERSONAL SERVICES may include, but are not limited to, laundry and dry-cleaning
services, barber shops, beauty salons, health and fitness studios, music
schools, informational and instructional services, tanning salons and portrait
studios.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. Communications services
provided by a commercial mobile service provider. It includes a common carrier
wireless exchange access service, cellular services and unlicensed wireless
services.
   PLACE or PLACEMENT (WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS). To locate a tower or
related wireless telecommunications facility and incidental structures on a
zoning lot.
   PLACES OF WORSHIP. A religious institution where a congregation of any
denomination, regularly participates in or holds religious services, meetings
and other activities, including buildings in which the religious services are
held and which may include accessory indoor uses such as, but not limited to,
day care or educational institution facilities.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A development that is planned for a single use, or
to integrate a variety of uses into a comprehensive development, in which lot
size, setback lines, yard areas and building types may be varied and modified
to achieve particular design objectives and make provision for open spaces,
common areas, utilities, public improvements and collateral uses. For the
purposes of this code, PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS are developments approved
prior to the effective date of this amendment. See
Chapter 1220: Planned Unit Developments (PUD).
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the City of Avon Lake, Ohio
   PLAT. A map graphically indicating a proposed land subdivision or re-
subdivision prepared in a form suitable for filing for record, with necessary
affidavits, dedications and acceptances, and with complete bearings and
dimensions of all lines defining lots, blocks, streets, alleys, public areas,
and other dimensions of land.
   PLAT, FINAL SUBDIVISION. The final map of all or a portion of the
subdivision which is presented to the Planning Commission and City Council for
final approvals in accordance with this code, and which, if approved, shall be
filed with the proper county recording officer.
   PLAT, PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION. A plat of all parts of a subdivision prepared
by a professional registered engineer or surveyor, incorporating
recommendations and requirements of planning authorities, and showing
topography, means of drainage, roadways, grades, sanitary and water service,
and other information for preliminary approval by the Planning Commission in
accordance with §
1214.05: Major Subdivisions.
   PLAYSETS, TREEHOUSES and TRAMPOLINES. Recreational equipment for children
that may include, but is not limited to, swings, slides, monkey bars and play
enclosures.
   PORCH. An unenclosed area with a roof that is attached to a building but not
used for livable space. A PORCH also includes paved areas without a roof if the
surface area is higher than 18 inches above the adjacent grade (e.g., stoops).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8aaea3eef04ed215023563d39de10f13ec1b6e09/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3288.jpg]
   Figure 1246-L: Examples of a front porch (left) and back porch (right).
   PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS. Any portable enclosed unit of whatever type of
construction or material, designed for permanent or temporary storage, which
can be transported by vehicle and left on-site.
   PREMISES (WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS). A zoning lot, or the immediate
vicinity of a tower and related wireless telecommunications facility,
consisting of land and structures and appurtenances thereof.
   PRESERVATION (HISTORIC PRESERVATION). The process of applying measures
necessary to sustain the existing form, integrity and materials of an historic
property.
   PROVIDER. A private or public (including governmental and quasi-
governmental) entity, licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC),
which provides wireless telecommunications services.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Persons, corporations or governments supplying gas,
electric, cable television, transportation, water, sewer or land line telephone
service to the general public. For purposes of this code, telecommunications
facilities of any kind shall not be considered PUBLIC UTILITIES.
   PUBLIC UTILITY BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES. Structures and land used for
storage, transmission or recovery facility for water, sewerage, telephone,
electric or gas and other similar utilities owned or operated by any public
agency or by any utility subject to the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities
Commission (PUCO). Such uses may also include salt storage or other outdoor
activities necessary for the efficient operations of the local, state or
federal government.
   QUASI-PUBLIC. Real property owned or controlled at least in part by a
governmental entity, or a public non-profit agency or organization duly
authorized by law.
   RACEWAY or WIREWAY. An elongated metal enclosure used to mount individual
channel lettering and to conceal related transformers and wiring.
   RADIO FREQUENCY (RF). Any of the electromagnetic wave frequencies that lie
in the range extending from below three kilohertz to about 300 gigahertz and
that include frequencies for radio, television and wireless telecommunications.
   RECONSTRUCTION (HISTORIC PRESERVATION). The act or process of depicting, by
means of new construction, the form, features and detailing of a non-surviving
site, landscape, building, structure or object for the purpose of replicating
its appearance at a specific period of time and in its historic location.
   RECYCLING CENTER. A building or facility that is used to collect, sort, and/
or prepare recyclable materials for distribution to other facilities.
   REHABILITATION (HISTORIC PRESERVATION). The act or process of making
possible a compatible use for a property through repair, alteration and
addition while preserving those portions or features which convey its
historical, cultural or architectural values.
   RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEM. An energy system powered by a natural resource such
as sunlight or wind rather than by the use of a conventional source of energy
such as petroleum products, natural gas, manufactured gas, or electricity
produced from a nonrenewable source, and, specifically including a wind energy
system and/or a solar energy system as defined in this code.
   RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FACILITIES. An establishment or facility for
carrying on investigation in the natural, physical or social sciences, or
engineering and development as an extension of investigation with the objective
of creating end products. Such establishment shall not include the
manufacturing or assembly of products beyond the development of prototype
systems or products. All activities shall take place within an enclosed
building.
   RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITY CENTERS. A building used for the meeting, recreation,
or social activity designed to accommodate and serve the residents of a
subdivision or development with which the use is associated and that may be
privately owned or jointly owned by property owners.
   RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES. Any residential facility meant as a permanent
residence for persons, licensed by the State of Ohio, designed to allow not
more than 16 persons, needing specialized care, counseling, ongoing medical
treatment or supervision to live in the same building or complex of buildings
and engage in some congregate living activity in a non-institutional
environment as regulated by R.C. Chapters 5119 and 5123.
   RESIDENTIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENT. A development that is planned for a single
residential use type, or to integrate a variety of residential use types into a
comprehensive development, in which lot size, setback lines, yard areas and
building types may be varied and modified to achieve particular design
objectives and make provision for open spaces, common areas, utilities, public
improvements and collateral uses. For the purposes of this code, RESIDENTIAL
PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS are developments approved after to the effective date of
this amendment. See
Chapter 1222: Residential Planned Development District (RPD).
   RESPONSIBLE DRC MEMBER. The member of the Development Review Committee that
is designated to provided communication with an applicant, provide notice of an
application, and generally be the lead staff member related to a particular
application.
   RESTAURANTS. An establishment whose principal business is the selling of
food and beverages to the customer in a ready to consume state, in individual
servings.
   RESTORATION (HISTORIC PRESERVATION). The act or process of accurately
depicting the form, features and character of a property as it appeared at a
particular period of time by means of the removal of features from other
periods in its history and reconstruction of missing features from the
restoration period. The limited and sensitive upgrading of mechanical,
electrical and plumbing systems and other code-required work to make properties
functional is appropriate within a restoration project.
   RETAIL BUSINESSES. Any business selling goods, wares or merchandise directly
to the ultimate consumer for direct consumption and not for resale. A RETAIL
BUSINESS use includes, but is not be limited to such activities as:
supermarkets; stores that sell electronics, hardware, apparel, footwear,
appliances, furniture, department stores and discount stores.
   RETAIL COMMERCIAL USES. For the purposes of accessory uses, this term shall
mean “retail businesses” that are accessory to the principal use.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip or area of land dedicated for use as a public roadway,
railroad or dedicated for other public uses. For streets, the RIGHT-OF-WAY
typically includes the paved roadway, curbs, lawn strips, sidewalks, lighting,
drainage facilities and utilities and may include special features (required by
the topography or treatment) such as grade separation, landscaped areas,
viaducts and bridges.
   ROOF LINE. Either the edge of the roof or the top of the parapet, whichever
forms the top line of the building silhouette. In regards to sign placement,
where a building has several roof levels, the pertinent roofline or parapet
shall be the one belonging to that portion of the building on whose wall the
sign is located.
   SATELLITE DISHES. A parabolic dish antenna including its structural
supports, used for reception of various satellite television programming
signals.
   SCREENING. A method of visually shielding or obscuring a structure, parking,
mechanical equipment, refuse collection center or incompatible land use, from
another and from public view by fencing, walls, beams or densely planted
vegetation.
   SELF-STORAGE FACILITIES (INDOOR). A building that contains varying sizes of
individual, compartmentalized or controlled-access stalls or lockers for the
dead storage of a customer’s goods or wares where all access to such stalls or
lockers occurs within the inside of the building and where there is no outdoor
storage.
   SELF-STORAGE FACILITIES (OUTDOOR). A building or group of buildings in a
controlled-access and fenced compound that contains varying sizes of
individual, compartmentalized or controlled-access stalls or lockers for the
dead storage of a customer’s goods or wares where the access to such stalls or
lockers occurs from the exterior of the building. Such use may include the
outdoor storage of vehicles as an accessory use if approved by the Planning
Commission as part of the conditional use approval.
   SEMI-NUDITY or SEMI-NUDE CONDITION. The showing of the female breast below a
horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or the
showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the
entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any
portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress,
blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel, provided that
the areola is not exposed in whole or part.
   SETBACK. The required minimum horizontal distance between a lot line or the
proposed right-of-way, whichever is more restrictive and a building, surface
parking lot or structure as established by this code.
   SETBACK, BUILDING. The setback required from any right-of-way and the
principal or accessory building as established in this code.
   SETBACK, FRONT. The minimum distance required between a building, structure,
parking area, outside storage area or other use of the property, and the front
lot line. See §
1226.01: Lot and Principal Building Regulations.
   SETBACK LINE. A line established by this code generally parallel with and
measured from the lot line or the right-of-way, whichever is more restrictive,
defining the minimum distance a building, structure, parking area or outdoor
storage area shall be located from the said lot or thoroughfare line, except as
may be provided in this code. For example, a front yard setback line is the
line formed by applying the minimum front yard setback from any applicable
front lot lines.
   SETBACK, REAR. The minimum distance required between a building, structure,
parking area, outside storage area or other use of the property, and the rear
lot line. See §
1226.01: Lot and Principal Building Regulations.
    SETBACK, SIDE. The minimum distance required between a building, structure,
parking area, outside storage area or other use of the property, and a lot that
that is shared with another lot where such lot line is defined as a side lot
line. See §
1226.01: Lot and Principal Building Regulations.
   SHADOW FLICKER. The on-and-off flickering effect of a shadow caused when the
sun passes behind the rotor of a wind energy system.
   SHRUB. A woody plant, smaller than a tree, consisting of several small stems
from the ground or small branches near the ground.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of the road right-of-way, easement or private
property that is improved for the use of pedestrian traffic by the general
public.
   SIGN. Any object, device, display or structure or part thereof situated
outdoors or adjacent the interior of a window or doorway which is used to
advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person,
institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any
means including words, letters, pictures, logos, figures, designs, symbols,
fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images.
   SIGN, A-FRAME. A freestanding sign which is ordinarily in the shape of an
“A” or some variation thereof, which is readily moveable, and is not
permanently attached to the ground or any structure. See also the definition of
T-FRAME SIGNS.
   SIGN AREA. The entire display area of a sign including the advertising
surface located on one or more sign faces and any framing, trim and molding,
but not including the supporting structure as measured pursuant to §
1236.07(c).
   SIGN, AWNING. A permanent sign painted on, printed on or attached flat
against the surface of an awning.
   SIGN, BALLOON. A sign that is an air inflated object, which may be of
various shapes, made of flexible fabric, resting on the ground or a structure,
and equipped with a portable blower motor that provides a constant flow of air
into the device. BALLOON SIGNS are restrained, attached or held in place by a
cord, rope, cable or similar method. See also the definition for AIR-ACTIVATED
GRAPHIC.
   SIGN, BANNER. A temporary sign constructed of canvas, plastic, fabric or
similar lightweight, non-rigid material that can be mounted to a structure with
cord, rope, cable or a similar method. Where a banner signs is supported by
stakes or another type of supporting structure for posting in the ground, such
sign shall be classified as a temporary YARD SIGN.
   SIGN, BUILDING. Any permanent sign attached to any part of a building
including awning, canopy, marquee, projecting, hanging or wall signs.
   SIGN, CANOPY. A permanent sign attached to the soffit or fascia of a canopy
of a covered entrance or walkway, or to a permanent awning or marquee.
   SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY. A sign designed so that the characters, letter or
illustrations can be changed or rearranged manually or electronically without
altering the sign display surface. See also the definition of SIGN, MANUAL
CHANGEABLE COPY and ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER.
   SIGN COPY. Those letters, numerals and figures, symbols, logos and graphic
elements comprising the content or message of a sign.
   SIGN, DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY. Any permanent signage allocated along a drive-
through lane that is oriented toward the customer or user in the drive-through
lane.
   SIGN, DRIVEWAY. A small permanent sign located near driveway access points
and/or at the intersection of internal access drives.
   SIGN FACE. The surface of the sign upon, against or through which the
message of the sign is exhibited.
   SIGN, FEATHER. A temporary sign that is constructed of cloth, canvas,
plastic fabric or similar lightweight, non-rigid material and that is supported
by a single vertical pole mounted into the ground or on a portable structure.
   SIGN, FREESTANDING. Any sign supported upon the ground by a monument,
pedestal, pole, bracing or other permanent measure and not attached to any
building.
   SIGN, ILLUMINATED. Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs
or outlines illuminated externally or internally by any light source other than
non-reflected natural daylight.
   SIGN, MANUAL CHANGEABLE COPY. A changeable copy sign designed so that the
characters, letter or illustrations can be changed or rearranged manually. May
also be known as READERBOARDS.
   SIGN, MONUMENT. A permanent freestanding sign other than a pole sign, not
attached to a building, which is placed upon or supported by the ground
independently of any other structure, typically on a monument or pedestal
structure.
   SIGN, NONCONFORMING. Any sign which was erected legally prior to the
adoption of this code, but which does not comply with subsequently enacted sign
restrictions and regulations or a sign which does not conform to the sign code
requirements.
   SIGN, PERMANENT. A sign permitted by this code to be located on the premises
for an unlimited period of time and designed to be permanently attached to a
structure or the ground that is constructed of rigid, non-flexible materials.
   SIGN, PORTABLE. Any sign not attached to the ground or a sign designed to be
transported, including signs designed to be transported by means of wheels.
   SIGN, PROJECTING. A permanent sign that is affixed perpendicular to a
building or wall and extends more than 18 inches beyond the face of such
building or wall.
   SIGN, ROOF. Any sign erected on a roof.
   SIGN, SIDEWALK. A temporary sign that may be placed on the sidewalk, in the
public right-of-way, during business hours in accordance with this section and
all other applicable ordinances and resolutions. See definition of SIGN, T-
FRAME and SIGN, A-FRAME.
   SIGN, T-FRAME. A freestanding sign which is ordinarily in the shape of an
upside down “T” or some variation thereof, which is readily moveable, and is
not permanently attached to the ground or any structure. See also the
definition for A-FRAME SIGNS.
   SIGN, TEMPORARY. A sign that is neither permanently anchored to the ground,
nor permanently affixed to a structure, nor mounted on a chassis, and/or is
intended for a limited period of display.
   SIGN, WALL. A permanent sign attached directly to an exterior wall of a
building and which does not extend more than 18 inches from nor above the roof
line or beyond the limits of the outside wall, with the exposed face of the
sign in a plane parallel to the building wall. Murals and other painted signs
are considered WALL SIGNS pursuant to this section.
   SIGN, WINDOW. Any sign that is applied to the interior or exterior of a
window or door, or a sign located near a window or door within a building, for
the purpose of being visible and read from the outside of the building.
   SIGN, YARD. Any temporary sign placed on the ground or attached to a
supporting structure, posts or poles, that is not attached to any building.
   SITE IMPROVEMENT. Alterations to land that enhance the utility of any new or
existing structure on the lot(s).
   SITE PLAN. A plan prepared to scale accurately showing, with complete
dimensions, the boundaries of the site, the location of buildings, exterior
lighting, landscaping, vehicular use areas, access drives, signs, outdoor
storage areas and any other features that comprise a proposed development that
are further defined in §
1214.06: Site Plans and that demonstrate a development’s compliance with this
code.
   SITE PLAN REVIEW. The review of proposed site plans as reviewed and decided
upon in accordance with §
1214.06: Site Plans.
   SKILLED NURSING. Those nursing services and procedures employed in caring
for the sick which require training, judgment, technical knowledge and skills
beyond those which the untrained person possesses. It involves administering
medications and carrying out procedures in accordance with the orders,
instructions and prescriptions of the attending physician or surgeon.
   SKILLED NURSING OR PERSONAL CARE FACILITIES. A long-term or short-term
residential facility that provides skilled nursing services or personal care in
a facility that is not in a traditional dwelling type (e.g., single-family
dwelling). Such facility shall not mean the same as hospitals or residential
facility.
   SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM. A wind energy system which has a rated capacity of
not more than 20 kilowatts (kW) and which is intended to primarily reduce on-
site consumption of utility supplied electricity.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (ACTIVE OR PASSIVE). The equipment and requisite
hardware that provides and is used for collecting, transferring, converting,
storing or using incident solar energy for water heating, space heating,
cooling, generating electricity or other applications that would otherwise
require the use of a conventional source of energy such as petroleum products,
natural gas, manufactured gas, or electricity produced from a nonrenewable
resource. Such systems include passive solar energy systems that capture the
sun’s energy in building design and construction components; solar thermal
energy systems that convert sunlight to heat as in a hot water tank or swimming
pool; and photovoltaic solar energy systems that convert sunlight to
electricity.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
      (1)   The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered; or
      (2)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks or female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following:
      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;
      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or
      (3)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
above activities.
   STATIC/INSTANT MESSAGE CHANGE. On electronic message centers, a static or
instant message change is when one message changes to another message instantly
without scrolling, flashing or other movement of the message.
   STORY. The part of a building, except a mezzanine as defined herein,
included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the next floor,
or, if there is no floor above, then the ceiling next above, and having a
height consistent with the requirement of occupiable space as defined in the
residential building code.
   STREAMER. A ribbon-shaped or cord-like rope which may have pennants and/or
banners attached and which is stretched or hung between two or more supports.
   STREET.
      (1)   A right-of-way dedicated or deeded and accepted for public use,
which provides for vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
      (2)   A street will typically include:
         A.   The paved area, or cartway, principally for use by motorized
vehicles, and usually bordered with curbs and gutter;
         B.   A sidewalk between the paved area and right-of-way line
principally for use by pedestrians; and
         C.   A landscaped area between the sidewalk and paved area which is
often called a “tree lawn”.
   STREET, ARTERIAL. See definition of MAIN THOROUGHFARE.
   STREET, CUL-DE-SAC. A short street having one open end to traffic and the
other end permanently terminated by a vehicle turnaround.
   STREET, DEAD-END. A street temporarily having only one outlet for vehicular
traffic and intended to be extended or continued in the future.
   STREET, MINOR. A street supplementary to a secondary street and of limited
continuity which serves or is intended to serve the local needs of a
neighborhood. Such streets may also be referred to as a LOCAL STREET.
   STREET, PRIMARY. A street or road of considerable continuity which serves or
is intended to serve as the principal trafficway between large and separated
areas and which is the main means of access to the main thoroughfare system.
(Lake Road, Walker Road, Electric Boulevard, Miller Road, Moore Road, Avon
Belden Road, Jaycox Road, Lear Road). Such streets may also be referred to as a
MAJOR COLLECTOR STREET.
   STREET, PRIVATE. An area set aside to provide access for vehicular traffic
within a development that is not dedicated or intended to be dedicated to the
city and that is not maintained by the city.
   STREET, PUBLIC. A street that has been dedicated or deeded to the public for
public use and which affords principal access to abutting property.
   STREET, SECONDARY. A main residential street which carries the burden of
local traffic to primary streets. Such streets may also be referred to as a
MINOR COLLECTOR STREET.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change or rearrangement in the supporting members
of a building, such as beams, girders, bearing walls, columns or partitions or
any increase in the area or cubical contents of the building.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the
ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings,
factories, sheds, detached garages, freestanding signs, cabins, manufactured
homes and other similar items. Patios, parking lots, or other similarly paved
surfaces shall not be deemed STRUCTURES.
   STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY. A structure on the same lot with, and of a nature
customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure.
   STRUCTURE, LEGALLY NONCONFORMING. A structure or portion thereof, lawfully
existing on the effective date of this code, or amendments thereto, and which
does not conform to the provisions of the code in the district in which it is
located.
   STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY. A structure permitted for limited duration with the
intent that such use will terminate or the structure will be removed
automatically upon expiration of the fixed time period. A TEMPORARY STRUCTURE
is without a foundation or footing.
   STRUCTURE (WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS). Any human-made building or object
affixed to a zoning lot on which is located a wireless telecommunications tower
and related facility, and is incidental, ancillary or otherwise supportive to
that facility.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing proceedings under this
code to effect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself, herself or for
another.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of any parcel of land, shown as a unit or as
contiguous units on the last preceding tax roll, into two or more parcels,
sites or lots, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of
ownership, provided, however, that the improvement of one or more parcels of
land for residential, commercial or industrial structures or groups of
structures, not involving the division, combination, alteration, or allocation
of land for the opening, widening or extension of any street or streets, and
the division or allocation of land as open spaces for common use by owners,
occupants or lease holders or as easements for the extension and maintenance of
public sewer, water, storm drainage or other public facilities, shall be
exempted.
   SUBDIVISION, MAJOR. A subdivision that is not classified as a minor
subdivision.
   SUBDIVISION, MINOR. A division of a parcel of land along an existing street
not involving the opening, widening or extension of any street or road and
involving no more than five lots after the original tract has been completely
subdivided. See further distinction in §
1214.04(b).
   SUBDIVISION MODIFICATION. A modification to any of the public improvement or
subdivision design standards of
Chapter 1238: Subdivision Design Standards, as authorized by the Planning
Commission in accordance with §
1214.05(f).
   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT (ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS). Substantial
enlargement of an adult entertainment business means the increase in floor area
occupied by the business by more than 25% as the floor areas exist on the date
this code takes effect.
   SURVEY. The process by which a parcel of land is measured, and its
boundaries and contents are ascertained, by a professional land surveyor. The
results of a survey are a map and legal description of such parcel of land.
   SWIMMING POOLS. Any pool, lake or open tank, primarily used for swimming or
wading, not located within a completely enclosed building and containing or
normally capable of containing water to a depth at any point greater than one
foot. Such use shall be designed, used, and maintained for swimming or wading
by the residents, tenants, or occupants of the subject property.
   TAVERNS or BARS. Establishments providing or dispensing, for on-site
consumption, any fermented malt beverage, malt beverage, special malt, vinous
or spirituous liquors. The sale of food products including, but not limited to,
sandwiches and light snacks may be a secondary use to the service of the
aforementioned drinks.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. All communications services and the use thereof, whether
by means of public or private providers, and includes cellular
telecommunications, personal wireless services and amateur radio broadcasting,
by any transmission, emission or reception of signals, writing, images and
sounds, or information of any nature by wire, radio, visual or the
electromagnetic system.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS ACT OF 1996. Public Law 104-104, as adopted by the
Congress of the United States, February 8, 1996, as may from time to time be
amended. This law is the basic law governing wireless telecommunications.
   TEMPORARY EVENT WITH EXTENSIVE IMPACT. A short-term event or activity that
may occur for a longer time period; will require broader city resources; or
will have more extensive impacts on the city or adjacent properties than a
temporary use with limited impact.
   TEMPORARY EVENT WITH LIMITED IMPACT. A short-term event or activity with
minimal impact on street, public services or adjacent properties.
   TEMPORARY SALES OFFICE AND MODEL HOMES. A dwelling unit temporarily
converted into a sales and display office or a temporary sales office
established in a development or subdivision for the purpose of providing an
example of the units in the development.
   TEMPORARY SEASONAL SALES. A temporary use of a lot, or portion of a lot, for
the outdoor sales of seasonal or agricultural products as established in §
1224.02: Temporary Uses and Structures.
   TENNIS AND OTHER RECREATIONAL COURTS (OUTDOOR). An area of a yard that is
permanently improved and surfaced for the recreational use of the property
owner for games such as tennis, basketball, racquetball and similar sports or
games.
   TOWER.
      (1)   Any ground or above-ground mounted pole, spire, structure or
combination thereof, taller than 15 feet, including supporting lines, cables,
wires, braces or masts, and including smoke stacks, water towers and other
similar structures which can accommodate the mounting of an antenna,
meteorological or telecommunications device, or similar apparatus above-grade.
      (2)   TOWER also includes the following.
         A.   TOWER, CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS. Any tower, as defined
in this code, used to support a cellular or wireless telecommunications
antenna. Such tower may be a mast, pole, monopole, guyed tower, lattice tower,
freestanding tower or other structure designed and primarily used to support
antennas. A building permanently affixed to real property which supports a
device as defined in this section as a tower, when that device extends above
the highest point on such building by more than 15 feet, and used for
telecommunications purposes, the device so extending shall be considered a
TOWER under this code.
         B.   TOWER, LATTICE. A support structure constructed of vertical metal
struts and cross braces forming a triangular or rectangular structure which
often tapers from the foundation to the top.
         C.   TOWER, MONOPOLE. A support structure constructed of a single,
self-supporting pole or similar device securely anchored to a foundation, not
necessarily the ground.
         D.   TOWER, MULTI-USER. A tower to which is attached the antennas of
more than one wireless telecommunications service provider, including a
governmental entity or other similar provider.
         E.   TOWER, SINGLE-USER. A tower to which is attached only the antenna
(s) of a single provider, although such tower may be designed to accommodate
the antennas of multiple uses.
   TRAILER. Any vehicle without motive power that is designed or used for
carrying property or persons wholly on its own structure and for being drawn by
a motor vehicle.
   TRUCK AND HEAVY EQUIPMENT SALES. An establishment engaged in the temporary
storage for the sale or repair of tractor trailer trucks and other equipment or
vehicles used in commercial, industrial or construction enterprises such as,
but not limited to, bulldozers, cranes, backhoes, rollers and lifts.
   TRUCK TERMINALS. A facility intended to provide services to the trucking
industry including, but not limited to, the following activities: the
dispensing of fuel, the storage of truck tractors and truck trailers, weighing
facilities, truck washing facilities, convenience retail sales and other driver
accommodations.
   TYPE A DAY CARE HOMES. A permanent residence of the administrator in which
child day care is provided for seven to 12 children at one time or a permanent
residence of the administrator in which child day care is provided for four to
12 children at one time if four or more children at one time are under two
years of age. In counting children for the purposes of this definition, any
children under six years of age who are related to a licensee, administrator or
employee and who are on the premises of the TYPE A HOME shall be counted. A
TYPE A HOME does not include a residence in which the needs of children are
administered, if all of the children whose needs are being administered to are
siblings of the same immediate family and the residence is the home of the
siblings.
   TYPE-B DAY CARE HOME. A permanent residence of the provider in which child
day care is provided for one to six children at one time and in which no more
than three children may be under two years of age at one time. In counting
children for the purposes of this definition, any children under six years of
age who are related to the provider and who are on the premises of the TYPE B
HOME shall be counted. A TYPE B HOME does not include a residence in which the
needs of children are administered, if all of the children whose needs are
being administered to are siblings of the same immediate family and the
residence is the home of the siblings.
   USE. Any purpose for which a lot, building or other structure, or a tract of
land may be designated, arranged, intended, maintained or occupied; or any
activity, occupation, business or operation carried on or intended to be
carried on in a building or other structure or on a tract of land.
   USE, ACCESSORY. A use located on the same lot with the principal use of
building or land, but incidental and subordinate to and constructed subsequent
to the principal use of the building or land.
   USE, CONDITIONAL. A use which may be appropriate or desirable in a specified
zoning district, but requires special approval through the conditional use
approval (see § 1214.03.) because, if not carefully located or designed, it may
create special problems such as excessive height or bulk or abnormal traffic
congestion.
   USE, LEGALLY NONCONFORMING. Any building or land lawfully occupied by a use
that was in accordance with the zoning regulations, if any, in existence when
the use commenced and which, through subsequent enactments or changes of zoning
regulations either prior to the passage of this code or by the passage of this
code or amendments thereto, does not conform or did not conform thereafter with
the use regulations of the district in which it is situated.
   USE, PRINCIPAL OR MAIN.
      (1)   The MAIN USE of land or buildings as distinguished from subordinate
or accessory uses.
      (2)   A PRINCIPAL USE may be either permitted, permitted with standards,
or conditionally permitted.
   USE, TEMPORARY. A use that is established for a fixed period of time with
the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of such time and does
not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent structure. See §
1224.02: Temporary Uses and Structures.
   UTILITY STRUCTURES. Any above ground structure, facility or equipment,
including, but not limited to, pedestals, boxes, cabinets, meters, storage
facilities or utility stations, that are associated with a utility providing
services to its customers. Such services shall include, but are not limited to:
electricity, natural gas, telecommunications, cable, video and internet
service, and water. UTILITY STRUCTURE shall not include fire hydrants, utility
poles, traffic control devices or city equipment.
   VARIANCE. A modification of the strict terms of these regulations where such
modification will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to
conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the action of the
applicant, a literal enforcement of these regulations would result in a
practical difficulty. See §
1214.09: Variances.
   VEHICLE, FLEET. Trucks, vans and other vehicles, including motorized
equipment, which are used as part of the operation of a principal use, but not
including privately owned customer or employee vehicles.
   VEHICLE STORAGE. The storage of trucks, vans and other vehicles, including
motorized equipment, which are used as part of the operation of a principal
use, but not including privately owned customer or employee vehicles.
   VEHICLE WASHING ESTABLISHMENTS. The use of a site for washing and cleaning
of passenger vehicles, recreational vehicles or other light duty equipment.
This shall include establishments that provide car detailing services.
   VEHICULAR USE AREA. The entire paved area that encompasses all parking
spaces, loading areas, waiting spaces and the access drives that provide access
to those spaces but that does not include the entry drive or driveway with no
direct access to a parking space, waiting space or loading space.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the regulations of this code.
   WAITING SPACE. A portion of the vehicular use area on a site that is
dedicated to the temporary storage or “standing” of vehicles engaged in drive-
through use of the site or development.
   WALL. An architectural partition with a height and length greater than its
thickness; used to divide or enclose an area or to support another structure.
   WALL, RETAINING. A structure that holds back soil or rock from a building,
structure or area. RETAINING WALLS prevent downslope movement or erosion and
provide support for vertical or near-vertical grade changes.
   WAREHOUSES. A business establishment primarily engaged in the storage,
loading and unloading of merchandise, goods and materials, not including self-
storage facilities.
   WATERCOURSE. Any natural or artificial waterway (including, but not limited
to, streams, rivers, creeks, ditches, channels, canals, conduits, culverts,
drains, drainageways, waterways, gullies, ravines or washes) in which waters
flow in a definite direction or course, either continuously or intermittently,
and including any area adjacent thereto which is subject to inundation by
reason of overflow of flood water.
   WETLAND. Those areas that are inundated and saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life
in saturated soil conditions. WETLANDS generally include swamps, marshes, bogs,
and similar areas.
   WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENTS. An establishment or place of business primarily
engaged in selling merchandise to retailers, including associated showrooms and
warehousing; to industrial, commercial, institutions or professional business
users; to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying
merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies.
   WIND ENERGY SYSTEM. An electric generating system, whose main purpose is to
supply electricity, consisting of one or more wind turbines, supporting
structures and other accessory structures, buildings, including substations,
meteorological towers, electrical infrastructure, transmission lines and other
appurtenant structures and systems.
   WIND ENERGY SYSTEM OWNER. The entity or entities having an equity interest
in the wind energy system, including their respective successors and assigns.
   WIND TURBINE. A wind energy conversion system that controls or converts wind
energy into electricity through the use of a generator.
   WIND TURBINE HEIGHT. The height from pre-existing natural grade to the
highest point of the wind turbine rotor plane.
   WINDBLOWN DEVICES. Objects and signs designed to inform or attract
attention, all or part of which is set in motion by or remains inflated by
wind, mechanical, electrical, or any other means and may include, but are not
limited to pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners, or similar objects.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS. Has the same meaning as TELECOMMUNICATIONS,
PERSONAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEM(S), PCS or COMMUNICATIONS.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING OR EQUIPMENT BUILDING. The
structure in which the electromagnetic receiving and relay equipment for a
wireless telecommunications facility is housed.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES. A facility consisting of the
equipment and structures involved in receiving telecommunications or radio
signals from a mobile radio communications source and transmitting those
signals to a central switching computer which connects the mobile unit with the
land-based telephone lines for the provision of personal wireless services.
   YARD. An open space on the same lot with a building unoccupied and
unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as
otherwise provided in this code. See §
1226.01: Lot and Principal Building Regulations for rules of measurement and
determination for all yard types.
   YARD, FRONT. Unless otherwise stated in §
1226.01: Lot and Principal Building Regulations, a FRONT YARD is an open space
extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum
horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest point of the
main building.
   YARD, REAR. Unless otherwise stated in §
1226.01: Lot and Principal Building Regulations, a REAR YARD is an open space
extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum
horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest point of the main
building.
   YARD, SIDE. Unless otherwise stated in §
1226.01: Lot and Principal Building Regulations, a SIDE YARD is an open space
between a main building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard to
the rear yard, the width of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest
point of the side lot line to the nearest point of the main building.
   ZONING DISTRICT. An area within the city limits for which the regulations
and requirements governing use are uniform as defined by §
1216.02: Establishment of Zoning Districts.
   ZONING DISTRICT, NONRESIDENTIAL. Includes the B-1, B-2, B-3, MUO, I-1, I-
2 and P-I Districts, regardless if residential uses are permitted.
   ZONING DISTRICT, RESIDENTIAL. Includes the R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-1D, R-2 and
R-3 Districts.
   ZONING MAP. An accurate map depicting the City of Avon Lake, Ohio, and
indicating the official boundaries of the zoning districts established by this
code. See §
1216.03: Zoning District Map and District Boundaries.
   ZONING PERMIT. A permit issued by the Code Administrator stating that a
proposed development or activity complies with this code as established in §
1214.10: Zoning Permit.
(Ord. 21-161, passed 12-13-2021; Ord. 23-46, passed 3-13-2023; Ord. 24-33,
passed 3-25-2024)
PART FOURTEEN - BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE
   TITLE TWO - Building Standards
      
Chap. 1410. Ohio Building Code.
      
Chap. 1416. Residential Code of Ohio.
   TITLE FOUR - Building Administration
      
Chap. 1430. Building Department.
      
Chap. 1434. Board of Building Code Appeals.
      
Chap. 1438. Licensing of Contractors.
      
Chap. 1442. Permits and Fees.
   TITLE SIX - Miscellaneous Building Regulations
      
Chap. 1464. Moving of Buildings.
      
Chap. 1468. Unsafe Buildings.
      
Chap. 1470. Demolition.
      
Chap. 1476. Flood Damage Reduction.
      
Chap. 1480. Dish-Type Satellite Antennas.
      
Chap. 1484. Short-Term Rental Properties.
 
   TITLE EIGHT - Housing
      
Chap. 1490. Exterior Maintenance Code.
TITLE TWO - Building Standards
      
Chap. 1410. Ohio Building Code.
      
Chap. 1416. Residential Code of Ohio.
CHAPTER 1410: OHIO BUILDING CODE
Section
1410.01 Ohio Building Code edition adopted
1410.02 Purpose
1410.03 Application
1410.04 Compliance; violations
1410.05 Preparation and certification of plans
1410.06 Enforcement
1410.07 File and distribution copies
1410.08 Conflict of laws
 
1410.99 Penalty; equitable remedies
§ 1410.01 OHIO BUILDING CODE EDITION ADOPTED.
   (a)   Pursuant to R.C. § 731.231, there is hereby adopted by and for the
city the Ohio Building Code (OBC), being particularly the current edition
thereof, as adopted by the Ohio Board of Building Standards, Department of
Industrial Relations, save and except such portions thereof as may be
hereinafter amended or deleted.
   (b)   The edition of the Ohio Mechanical Code (OMC), the current edition of
the Ohio Plumbing Code (OPC), and the current edition of the National Electric
Code (NFPA 70), the current edition of the International Energy Code, as
adopted by the Board of Building Standards, Department of Industrial Relations,
are hereby adopted by reference, save and except such portions thereof as may
be hereinafter amended or deleted.
(Ord. 47-98, passed 3-9-1998; Ord. 63-2002, passed 3-11-2002; Ord. 58-05,
passed 4-25-2005; Ord. 97-2012, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 99-2018, passed 6-11-
2018; Ord. 125-2020, passed 12-21-2020)
§ 1410.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the OBC, as adopted in §
1410.01, is to:
   (a)   Provide uniform minimum standards and requirements for the erection,
construction, repair, alteration and maintenance of buildings, including
construction of industrialized units, such standards relating to the
conservation of energy, safety and sanitation of buildings for their intended
use and occupancy;
   (b)   Formulate such standards and requirements, so far as is practical, in
terms of performance objectives, so as to make adequate performance for the use
intended the test of acceptability;
   (c)   Permit, to the fullest extent feasible, the use of materials and
technical methods, devices and improvements, including the use of
industrialized units, which tend to reduce the cost of construction and
erection without affecting minimum requirements for the health, safety and
security of the occupants or users of buildings or industrialized units and
without preferential treatment of types or classes of materials or products or
methods of construction; and
   (d)   Encourage, so far as may be practical, the standardization of
construction practices, methods, equipment, material and techniques, including
methods employed to produce industrialized units.
Statutory reference:
   Intent and purpose of the Ohio Building Code, see O.A.C. 4101:1-1-01, §
101.3
§ 1410.03 APPLICATION.
   The OBC applies to all buildings except as follows:
   (a)   Single-family, two-family and three-family dwelling houses which are
not constructed of industrialized units, except for the energy conservation
provisions required in Chapter 13, Energy Efficiency of the OBC, O.A.C. Chapter
4101:1-13 (see R.C. §§ 3781.06 and 3781.10);
   (b)   Buildings owned by and used for a function of the United States
government;
   (c)   Existing buildings where their location, parts, equipment and other
items do not constitute a serious hazard, unless otherwise regulated by the
provisions of Chapter 34, Existing Buildings and Structures of the OBC, O.A.C.
Chapter 4101:1-34;
   (d)   Buildings constructed in accordance with plans which have been
approved prior to the effective date of the OBC;
   (e)   Buildings or structures which are incident to the use for agricultural
purposes of the land on which said buildings or structures are located,
provided such buildings or structures are not used in the business of retail
trade. For the purposes of this section, a building or structure is not
considered used in the business of retail trade if 50% or more of the gross
income received from sales of products in the building or structure by the
owner or operator is from sales of products produced or raised in a normal crop
year on farms owned or operated by the seller (see R.C. §§ 3781.06 and
3781.061);
   (f)   Agricultural labor camps as defined in R.C. § 3733.41;
   (g)   Single-family, two-family and three-family detached dwelling houses
for which applications have been submitted to the Ohio Director of Human
Services pursuant to R.C. § 5104.03 for the purposes of operating type A family
day-care homes as defined in R.C. § 5104.01; and
   (h)   Buildings or structures which are designed, constructed and maintained
in accordance with federal standards and regulations and are used primarily for
federal and state military purposes where the U.S. Secretary of Defense,
pursuant to 10 U.S.C. §§ 18233(A)(1) and 18237, has:
      (1)   Acquired, by purchase, lease or transfer, and constructs, expands,
rehabilitates or corrects and equips, such buildings or structures as he or she
determines to be necessary to carry out the purposes of Chapter 1803 of the
U.S.C.;
      (2)   Contributed to the State of Ohio such amounts for the acquisition,
construction, expansion, rehabilitation and conversion by the State of Ohio of
such additional buildings or structures as he or she determines to be required
because of the failure of existing facilities to meet the purposes of Chapter
1803 of the U.S.C.; or
      (3)   Contributed to the State of Ohio such amounts for the construction,
alteration or rehabilitation of arms storage rooms as he or she determines to
be required to meet a change in U.S. Department of Defense standards relating
to the safekeeping of arms.
Statutory reference:
   Exceptions to scope of the Ohio Building Code, see O.A.C. 4101:1-1-01, §
101.2
§ 1410.04 COMPLIANCE; VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   No owner or any other person shall construct, erect, build or equip
any building or structure to which the OBC is applicable, or make any addition
thereto or alteration thereof, except in the case of repairs or maintenance
that does not affect the construction, sanitation, safety or any other vital
feature of such building or structure, without complying with this chapter,
R.C. Chapters 3781 and 3791 or the OBC, or fail to comply with any lawful order
issued pursuant thereto.
   (b)   No architect, builder, engineer, plumber, carpenter, mason,
contractor, subcontractor, foreman or employee shall violate or assist in
violating any of the provisions of this chapter, R.C. Chapters 3781 and 3791 or
the OBC, or fail to comply with any lawful order issued pursuant thereto.
   (c)   No owner or any other person shall proceed with the construction,
erection, alteration or equipment of any building or structure to which the OBC
is applicable without complying with this chapter and the plan and
specification submission and processing requirements of the municipality and/or
the OBC and until plans or drawings, specifications and data have been approved
or the industrialized unit has been inspected at the point of origin.
Statutory reference:
   Failure to obey order prohibited, see R.C. § 3791.02
   General prohibition - fine, see R.C. § 3791.03
   Prohibited acts generally, see R.C. § 3791.01
   Submission of plan - approvals - prohibition - fine, see R.C. § 3791.04
§ 1410.05 PREPARATION AND CERTIFICATION OF PLANS.
   Required plans, when submitted for inspection as required in the OBC, shall
be prepared by a registered architect or engineer who shall attest to the fact
that such plans have been drawn in accordance with such Code.
(Prior Code, § 1410.06) (Ord. 135-79, passed 10-8-1979)
§ 1410.06 ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   When the municipality finds that work or equipment is contrary to this
chapter, approved plans therefor or the OBC, notice in writing shall be sent to
the owner of the building involved or his or her agent. The notice shall state
where and in what respect the work or equipment does not conform to such lawful
requirements and shall specify a reasonable period of time in which to conform.
   (b)   Prior to enforcement of R.C. Chapters 3781 and 3791, or any rules
adopted pursuant thereto, including the OBC, as adopted in §
1410.01, by any remedy, civil or criminal, the municipality shall issue an
adjudication order within the meaning of R.C. §§ 119.06 to 119.13 or a stop
work order as provided in O.A.C. Rule 4101:1-1-01, § 109.
   (c)   Every adjudication order shall cite the law or rules directly involved
and shall specify what appliances, site preparations, additions or alterations
to structures, plans, materials, assemblages or procedures are necessary for
the same to comply with Ohio R.C. Chapters 3781 and 3791 and/or any rules
adopted pursuant thereto, including the provisions of the OBC adopted in §
1410.01.
   (d)   The order shall include notice to the party of the procedure for
appeal and right to a hearing if requested within 30 days of the mailing of the
notice. The notice shall also inform the party that at the hearing he or she
may be represented by counsel, present his or her arguments or contentions
orally or in writing, and present evidence and examine witnesses appearing for
or against him or her.
   (e)   Upon the issuance of any order provided for herein or in O.A.C. Rule
4101:1-1-01, the person receiving such order shall cease work upon the site
preparations or structure to be constructed, or, in the case of an
industrialized unit, the installation of the unit, or shall cease using the
appliance, materials, assemblages or manufactured product identified in the
order until such time as the appeal provided for in accordance with the
provisions of R.C. § 3781.19, and all appeals from such hearing, have been
completed, or the order herein has been released.
   (f)   Failure to cease work after receipt of a stop work order as provided
in O.A.C. Rule 4101:1-1-01 is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 1410.07)
Statutory reference:
   Inspections, observation of violations, unsafe conditions, or serious
hazards, see O.A.C. 4101:1-1-01 § 108.6
   Orders, Violations, and Unsafe Buildings, see O.A.C. Rule 4101:1-1-01, § 109
§ 1410.07 FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.
   At least one copy of the OBC, as adopted in §
1410.01, is on file with the Clerk of Council for inspection by the public. At
least one copy of such Code is also on file in the County Law Library. In
addition, the Clerk of Council shall keep copies of such Code available for
distribution to the public, at cost.
(Prior Code, § 1410.08)
§ 1410.08 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   (a)   Whenever a provision of the OBC, as adopted in §
1410.01, conflicts with a provision of the Ohio Fire Code or any other order,
standard or rule of the Ohio Department of Commerce, Division of State Fire
Marshal, the provision of the OBC shall control, except that rules adopted and
orders issued by the Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3743 prevail in the
event of a conflict.
   (b)   Whenever a provision of the OBC, as adopted in §
1410.01, conflicts with a provision of any other standard technical code
adopted by the municipality, other than as provided in division (a) of this
section, or any ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of Council, the
stricter standard shall prevail.
   (c)   When a special provision is made in a use group classification of the
OBC and is inconsistent with a general provision of the OBC relating to
buildings generally, the special provision governs, unless it appears that the
provisions are cumulative.
(Prior Code, § 1410.09)
Statutory reference:
   Conflict of laws, see O.A.C. § 4101:1-1-01, § 102
   Ohio Fire Code, see O.A.C. Chapter 1301:7-7
   Rules of board of building standards supersede, exception, see R.C. §
3781.11(B))
§ 1410.99 PENALTY; EQUITABLE REMEDIES.
   (a)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter, including any provision of the OBC adopted in §
1410.01, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not
more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both, for each offense.
Unless otherwise provided, a separate offense shall be deemed committed each
day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
   (b)   The application of the penalty provided in division (a) of this
section shall not be deemed to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited
conditions, or the application of any other equitable remedy, including
abatement of the nuisance referred to in §
1410.06(f).
CHAPTER 1416: RESIDENTIAL CODE OF OHIO
Section
1416.01 Residential Code of Ohio edition adopted
§ 1416.01 RESIDENTIAL CODE OF OHIO EDITION ADOPTED.
   (a)   Pursuant to R.C. § 731.231, there is hereby adopted, for the purpose
of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration,
removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of
nonindustrial one-, two- and three-family dwellings and appurtenant structures,
including permits and penalties, the current edition of the Residential Code of
Ohio, as adopted by the Ohio Board of Building Standards, Department of
Industrial Relations, save and except such portions thereof as may be
hereinafter amended or deleted.
   (b)   At least one copy of the 2019 Residential Code of Ohio, as adopted in
division (a), shall be on file at the Avon Lake Public Library for inspection
by the public. One copy shall also be on file in the County Law Library. In
addition, copies of the 2019 Residential Code of Ohio shall be available for
purchase, at cost, from the Building Department.
(Ord. 150-95, passed 9-25-1995; Ord. 273-00, passed 12-18-2000; Ord. 226-04,
passed 10-25-2004; Ord. 126-2020, passed 12-21-2020)
Statutory reference:
   Residential Code of Ohio, see O.A.C. Ch. 4101:8-1 et seq.
TITLE FOUR - Building Administration
      
Chap. 1430. Building Department.
      
Chap. 1434. Board of Building Code Appeals.
      
Chap. 1438. Licensing of Contractors.
      
Chap. 1442. Permits and Fees.
CHAPTER 1430: BUILDING DEPARTMENT
Section
1430.01 Establishment
1430.02 Appointment of Chief Building Official and personnel; compensation
1430.03 Qualifications and duties of Chief Building Official
1430.04 Authority of Building Inspector
1430.05 Assistant inspectors
1430.06 Jurisdiction of Department
§ 1430.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby established a Building Department.
§ 1430.02 APPOINTMENT OF CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL AND PERSONNEL; COMPENSATION.
   The appointment of the Chief Building Official, the head of the Building
Department and such other employees as are necessary for its proper
administration, shall be made by the Mayor and approved by Council. The
salaries of such employees shall be fixed by Council.
(Ord. 1233, passed 11-24-1958)
§ 1430.03 QUALIFICATIONS AND DUTIES OF CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   (a)   Generally. The Building Department shall be under the direction of an
Ohio registered architect, or an Ohio registered engineer, or a Superintendent
of Construction, who shall have had at least ten years paid experience in
building construction and have been in responsible charge of the design or
construction of buildings. He or she shall also be generally informed on the
quality and strength of building materials and the proper application thereof.
   (b)   General responsibilities.
      (1)   Under general supervision of the Chief Building Official, the
Building Inspector shall inspect all construction plans and projects to ensure
compliance with all state and city codes, specifications and procedures.
      (2)   The Building Inspector shall investigate complaints involving code
violations. He or she shall maintain files and records as required.
      (3)   The Building Inspector shall attend meetings and perform other
related inspections, jobs and duties as required by the Chief Building
Official.
   (c)   Additional qualifications and the duties. Additional qualifications
and the duties of the Building Inspector shall be as set forth in the job
description of the city.
(Ord. 1233, passed 11-24-1958; Ord. 47-08, passed 3-31-2008; Ord. 22-140,
passed 9-26-2022)
§ 1430.04 AUTHORITY OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   The Building Inspector shall have full power to interpret any question
arising under the provisions of this Building Code relative to the manner of
construction or material to be used in the erection, alteration or repair of
any building.
(Ord. 1233, passed 11-24-1958)
§ 1430.05 ASSISTANT INSPECTORS.
   Any duty or act required of or authorized to be done by the Building
Inspector may be performed by his or her assistant, subject to revision by the
Building Inspector.
(Ord. 1233, passed 11-24-1958)
§ 1430.06 JURISDICTION OF DEPARTMENT.
   The Building Department shall assume complete jurisdictional regulation of
all building construction, including public buildings and commercial and
industrial structures. The regulatory control shall include the examination of
design drawings for permit applications, the collection of permit fees and the
physical inspection of all building construction within the city.
(Ord. 1223, passed 10-27-1958)
CHAPTER 1434: BOARD OF BUILDING CODE APPEALS
Section
1434.01 Establishment
1434.02 Powers
1434.03 Meetings and records
1434.04 Procedure
1434.05 Appeals and hearings
1434.06 Time, fee and notice of appeal
1434.07 Action on appeals, hearings and reviews
1434.08 Decisions
1434.09 Variations and modifications
1434.10 Compliance by Building Inspector with decision of Board
§ 1434.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby established a Board of Building Code Appeals (commercial
property), which Board shall consist of the members of the Zoning Board of
Appeals (residential property).
(Ord. 1233, passed 11-24-1958)
§ 1434.02 POWERS.
   The Board of Building Code Appeals shall have the power, subject to the
limitations and in the manner set forth in this Building Code, to:
   (a)   Affirm or reverse, in whole or in part, or modify, any decision of the
Building Inspector interpreting this Building Code;
   (b)   Vary the application of any provision of this Building Code to any
particular case, when, in its opinion, enforcement thereof would do manifest
injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and the purpose of this Building
Code or the public interest;
   (c)   Determine if any material or method of construction may be used, even
though not specifically authorized by this Building Code, and specify the
manner in which such material or method shall be used;
   (d)   Determine any requirement for the strength or stability of an existing
or proposed building or structure, or for the safety or health of the occupants
thereof, not specifically covered by this Building Code, or not readily
interpretable from this Building Code;
   (e)   Determine whether or not any proposed rule of the Building Inspector
supplements or aids in the interpretation of the requirements of this Building
Code and is consistent therewith, and affirm, amend, modify or nullify any such
proposed rule;
   (f)   Establish rules, regulations, conditions and qualifications for the
registration, licensing or certification of qualification of any person
performing work or providing services under this Building Code; and
   (g)   Report and recommend to Council any amendment, deletion or addition to
this Building Code.
(Ord. 1233, passed 11-24-1958)
§ 1434.03 MEETINGS AND RECORDS.
   Meetings of the Board of Building Code Appeals shall be held at the call of
the Chairperson and at such other times as the Board may determine. All
hearings before the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep
minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every
question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall
also keep records of its examinations and other official actions. Such minutes
and records shall be public records.
(Ord. 1233, passed 11-24-1958)
§ 1434.04 PROCEDURE.
   The Board of Building Code Appeals shall establish rules and regulations for
its own procedure not inconsistent with this Building Code.
   The Board members shall annually, by majority vote, select one of the
members to serve as Chairperson, who shall hold office for a term of one year
or until his or her successor is elected and qualified.
(Ord. 1233, passed 11-24-1958)
§ 1434.05 APPEALS AND HEARINGS.
   Any person, any municipal officer or official or any public body aggrieved
by an action of the Building Inspector may take an appeal to the Board of
Building Code Appeals. The Building Inspector, any municipal officer or
official, any public body or any member of the Board may request a hearing by
the Board on any subject over which the Board has jurisdiction or power, as set
forth in this Building Code, or may request the Board to review or interpret
any provision of this Building Code.
(Ord. 1233, passed 11-24-1958)
§ 1434.06 TIME, FEE AND NOTICE OF APPEAL.
   An appeal from any decision of the Building Inspector may be taken within 30
days from the date of the decision from which the appeal is taken by depositing
a fee as set forth in Chapter 208 of the Administration Code - the General Fee
Schedule - and filing with the Building Inspector and with the Board of
Building Code Appeals a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds therefor. The
deposit shall be forfeited if the appeal is denied, but shall be returned if
the appeal is granted. The Building Inspector shall forthwith transmit to the
Board the papers upon which the action appealed from was taken.
(Ord. 1233, passed 11-24-1958; Ord. 72-71, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 1434.07 ACTION ON APPEALS, HEARINGS AND REVIEWS.
   (a)   Notice. The Board of Building Code Appeals shall hold a public hearing
on each appeal and shall give such notice to the Building Inspector and other
interested parties as the Board directs and shall give such notice to the
public by posting, publication or otherwise as the Board deems appropriate. At
the hearing, any party may appear in person or by his or her agent or attorney.
   (b)   Evidence and inspection. In passing upon appeals, the Board may
require submission of evidence or proof to substantiate claims, and may require
such additional data and tests which, in the opinion of the Board, are needed
for adequate consideration of the appeal. Any member of the Board or any person
authorized by the Board may at any time enter, inspect and examine any plans,
building or structure for the purpose of carrying out the duties of the Board.
(Ord. 1233, passed 11-24-1958)
§ 1434.08 DECISIONS.
   The Board of Building Code Appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision
without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Every decision of the Board shall be
in writing and shall indicate the vote upon the decision. Every decision shall
be promptly filed in the office of the Building Inspector and shall be open to
public inspection. A certified copy shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the
appellant or other interested party and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in
the office of the Building Inspector for two weeks after filing.
(Ord. 1233, passed 11-24-1958)
§ 1434.09 VARIATIONS AND MODIFICATIONS.
   The Board of Building Code Appeals, after public hearing, may vary the
application of any provision of this Building Code to any particular case when,
in its opinion, enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice or would be
contrary to the spirit and purpose of this Building Code or the public
interest, or when, in its opinion, the interpretation of the Building Inspector
should be modified or reversed. A decision of the Board to vary the application
of any provision of this Building Code or to modify an order of the Building
Inspector shall specify in what manner such variation or modification is made,
the conditions upon which it is made and the reasons therefor.
(Ord. 1233, passed 11-24-1958)
§ 1434.10 COMPLIANCE BY BUILDING INSPECTOR WITH DECISION OF BOARD.
   If a decision of the Board of Building Code Appeals reverses or modifies a
refusal, order or disallowance of the Building Inspector, or varies the
application of any provision of this Building Code, the Building Inspector
shall take action immediately in accordance with such decision.
(Ord. 1233, passed 11-24-1958)
CHAPTER 1438: LICENSING OF CONTRACTORS
Section
1438.01 Contractor defined
1438.02 Certificates of registration and qualification required
1438.03 Exception for home owners
1438.04 Permits
1438.05 Suspension or revocation of certificates
1438.06 Registration fees
1438.07 Appeals
1438.08 Certificate of insurance and bond
1438.09 Registration requirement
1438.10 Registration by Chief Building Official
1438.11 Revocation of registration
1438.14 Notice of revocation
1438.99 Penalty
§ 1438.01 CONTRACTOR DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTRACTOR.
      (1)   Any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, association or
other organization, or any combination thereof, who or which, by himself,
herself or itself, or by or through others, constructs, alters, repairs, adds
to, subtracts from, reconstructs or remodels any building, structure or
appurtenance thereto, or who or which undertakes, offers to undertake, purports
to have the capacity to undertake or submits a bid to undertake any of the
foregoing activities.
      (2)   In addition to general contractors, the term includes
subcontractors and specialty contractors whose operations as such are the
performance of construction work requiring special skill, or whose principal
contracting business involves the use of specialized building trades or crafts,
such as, but not limited to, plumbers, excavators, carpenters, masons, concrete
finishers, tinners, sewer installers, heating equipment installers, sign
erectors, roofers, dry wall applicators, lathers, plasterers and/or building
movers. CONTRACTOR does not include painters, laborers hired on an hourly
basis, floor finishers, insulators and tile applicators.
      (3)   Persons or entities who are involved in demolition of buildings in
whole or in part in accordance with Chapter 1470, are subject to the
requirements stated therein.
(Ord. 49-76, passed 4-12-1976; Ord. 39-2010, passed 3-22-2010; Ord. 25-113,
passed 7-14-2025)
§ 1438.02 CERTIFICATES OF REGISTRATION AND QUALIFICATION REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business or act in the capacity of a
contractor except pursuant to a certificate of registration and qualification
issued by the city, unless such person is particularly exempted by other
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 17-59, passed 3-9-1959)
§ 1438.03 EXCEPTION FOR HOME OWNERS.
   No provision of this chapter or regulation adopted by authority of this
chapter shall be interpreted to require that the owner of a single- or two-
family dwelling be licensed or registered or hold a certificate of registration
and qualification to personally perform work upon his or her premises. However,
this exception shall not apply to any person holding himself or herself out to
the public as a building contractor, builder or one engaged in any of the
building trades for profit. All such work shall be performed by the owner with
the assistance of only nonpaid gratuitous help, and the work shall be done in
conformity with this chapter and the rules and regulations promulgated under
this chapter, and no work shall be done unless all permits, inspections and
approvals required by this chapter and all other applicable municipal
ordinances are obtained.
(Prior Code, § 1438.04) (Ord. 17-59, passed 3-9-1959)
§ 1438.04 PERMITS.
   No permit required by this Building Code shall be issued for work to be
undertaken by contract except to a registered and qualified contractor.
(Prior Code, § 1438.05) (Ord. 17-59, passed 3-9-1959)
§ 1438.05 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATES.
   The Building Inspector shall suspend or revoke any certificate of
registration and qualification issued under this chapter for any of the
following reasons:
   (a)   Misrepresentation of a material fact by the applicant in obtaining a
certificate of registration and qualification;
   (b)   Use of a certificate of registration and qualification in obtaining a
permit for another;
   (c)   Faulty or defective workmanship;
   (d)   Departure from or disregard of plans and specifications filed with the
application for a permit; or
   (e)   The noncompliance with or a violation of any of the provisions or
regulations of the Building or Zoning Code or rules and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
(Prior Code, § 1438.06) (Ord. 124-63, passed 11-25-1963)
§ 1438.06 REGISTRATION FEES.
   The fee to be charged for the issuance of each certificate of registration
and qualification for a general contractor and for every other specific
contractor shall be as set forth in Chapter 208 of the Administration Code -
the General Fee Schedule. Each such certificate shall expire on December 31 of
each year. A registered general contractor may, under this registration,
perform work in connection with any or all trades. Any other registered
contractor shall perform only such work as is customarily done by the trade for
which he or she has registered. The contractor registration fee set forth in
the General Fee Schedule shall be doubled for any contractor working in the
city without a certificate of registration.
(Prior Code, § 1438.07) (Ord. 147-2013, passed 11-25-2013)
§ 1438.07 APPEALS.
   Any revocation, suspension or refusal to issue or renew a license or a
certificate of registration and qualification, or any other action or
determination by any administrative officer under this chapter, may be appealed
to the Board of Building Code Appeals as provided in
Chapter 1434.
(Prior Code, § 1438.08) (Ord. 17-59, passed 3-9-1959)
§ 1438.08 CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE AND BOND.
   (a)   In order to be registered with the city, every contractor must
maintain the following insurance:
      (1)   Commercial general liability insurance on an occurrence basis in a
combined single limit of not less than $500,000 per occurrence;
      (2)   If the contractor has employees, employer’s liability insurance
with a limit of not less than $500,000 per occurrence;
      (3)   Automobile liability insurance with a limit of not less than
$500,000 per occurrence;
      (4)   If the contractor will perform work in the public right-of-way, an
umbrella liability insurance policy with a limit of not less than $1,000,000;
and
      (5)   Workers compensation insurance in the amount required by law.
   (b)   Every policy of insurance required by divisions (a)(1) through (a)(4)
of this section shall be issued by a solvent insurance carrier licensed to
engage in the business of insurance in Ohio and shall designate the city as an
additional insured. The commercial general liability insurance policy must
contain a provision that the policy may not be cancelled, terminated or
materially changed except upon at least 30 days prior written notice to the
city.
   (c)   Every application for a certificate of registration and qualification
shall be accompanied by certificates evidencing that the insurance policies
required by divisions (a) and (b) of this section are in effect.
   (d)   Every application for a certificate of registration and qualification
shall be accompanied by a contractor’s bond in the amount of $15,000 on the
city’s approved form and executed by the applicant and a solvent surety company
licensed to engage in the business of insurance in Ohio.
(Prior Code, § 1438.09) (Ord. 50-2018, passed 4-9-2018)
§ 1438.09 REGISTRATION REQUIREMENT.
   (a)   No person, corporation, partnership, firm or other business
association shall, acting in the capacity of a contractor, engage in heating,
ventilating and/or air conditioning work, hydronics work, electrical work or
plumbing work, without first registering for each trade with the Chief Building
Official.
   (b)   CONTRACTOR, for the purpose of this section, means any person,
corporation, partnership, firm or other business association who performs any
work specified above for consideration evidenced by an oral or written
agreement. “Contractor,” for purposes of this section, shall also mean any
person, firm, corporation or other business association which negotiates a
contract either written or oral for any work specified above, but does not
perform physical labor to complete the work as set forth in the contract.
(Prior Code, § 1438.10) (Ord. 147-2013, passed 11-25-2013)
§ 1438.10 REGISTRATION BY CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   (a)   The Chief Building Official shall maintain a list of registered
contractors by trade. The Chief Building Official shall record the name of any
contractor, being an individual or a business entity, on the list of registered
contractors upon providing the Chief Building Official with the following:
      (1)   A valid and unexpired Ohio Construction Industry Licensing Board
(OCILB) license issued for the year and the trade for which registration is
sought, pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4740. This license requirement applies to all
residential and commercial work constructed by residential and commercial
contractors covered by the current versions of the Ohio Building Code and the
Residential Code of Ohio;
      (2)   Contractor’s liability insurance (see §
1438.08(a)(1));
      (3)   A completed “request for registration/renewal of registration” form
as prescribed by the Chief Building Official;
      (4)   A contractors surety bond in the amount of $15,000 on the city’s
approved form, executed by a solvent surety company licensed to engage in the
business of insurance in Ohio, and the applicant, shall also accompany every
application; and
      (5)   A fee of $100 for the registration.
      Where work for which registration is required is started prior to
registration, the required registration fee shall be doubled.
   (b)   Upon adding the contractor’s name to the list of registered
contractors, the Chief Building Official shall issue the registrant a
certificate of registration as evidence of compliance with the above
requirements.
   (c)   Said certificate of registration shall be valid for the calendar year
in which issued and subject to renewal on January 1 of each year thereafter.
   (d)   Where an individual has assigned a state-issued license to a business
entity pursuant to R.C. § 4740.07, the Chief Building Official shall issue the
certificate of registration in both the name of the individual and the business
entity. Any work conducted by a registered business entity or individual is
deemed to be conducted under the personal supervision of the individual named
in the certificate of registration and all violations of any terms of this
Building Code are deemed to have been committed by the individual named in the
certificate of registration.
   (e)   Contractors, both individuals and business entities, registered
pursuant to this section shall warrant or be presumed to have warranted that
all work to be performed and all materials to be supplied by contractor are in
compliance with all applicable ordinances of the city unless the customer has
actual knowledge of any deficiencies or noncompliance at the time the contract
is entered into.
(Prior Code, § 1438.11) (Ord. 147-2013, passed 11-25-2013)
§ 1438.11 REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION.
   The Chief Building Official may revoke any registration or refuse renewal
thereof issued under the provisions of this chapter for good cause shown. Good
cause includes, but is not limited to, the following:
   (a)   Misrepresentation of a material fact by the applicant in obtaining the
registration or renewal thereof;
   (b)   The use of the registration by the registrant in obtaining a permit
for work to be performed by a contractor or builder other than the registrant;
   (c)   Violation of or noncompliance with any provision of any applicable
code or ordinance of the city in the performance of any work done pursuant to a
registration issued hereunder;
   (d)   Failure to abate a violation or noncompliance with any provision of
any applicable code or ordinance of the city within the time specified in the
written notice of such violation or noncompliance;
   (e)   Upon a determination by the Chief Building Official that the applicant
or registrant has engaged in a course of conduct calculated to induce owners
and/or tenants of property or their authorized agents, to enter into a
contractual relationship for labor and/or materials through misrepresentation
of labor costs or that the materials used complied with all applicable
ordinances of the city in which such misrepresentation was made. For the
purposes of this division (e), COURSE OF CONDUCT is defined as two or more
separate instances of misrepresentation occurring during any 12-month period;
and
   (f)   Revocation, suspension or expiration of a license issued pursuant to
R.C. Chapter 4740.
(Prior Code, § 1438.12) (Ord. 147-2013, passed 11-25-2013)
§ 1438.12 NOTICE OF REVOCATION.
   In the event any registration issued under this chapter is revoked, the
applicant shall be notified of the revocation in writing and such notice shall
be sent by certified mail to the registrant at the address of the registrant as
set forth in the application for registration. The registrant shall have ten
days after receipt of such notice to appeal such revocation. Such appeal shall
be perfected by filing a written notice of the appeal with the Public Safety
Director. Thereupon, the registrant shall have not less than ten days’ notice
of the date and place of the hearing. The appeal shall be heard by the Board of
Building Code of Appeals, which Board shall have the power after such hearing
to either affirm or overrule the decision of the Chief Building Official. The
Board shall cause notice of its decision to be sent by certified mail to the
registrant at the address of the registrant as set forth in the application
within 30 days of the date of hearing.
(Prior Code, § 1438.13) (Ord. 147-2013, passed 11-25-2013)
§ 1438.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than $500 or
imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both, for each offense. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(Ord. 94-74, passed 6-10-1974)
CHAPTER 1442: PERMITS AND FEES
Section
1442.01 Application to Building Department
1442.02 Fees
1442.03 Work started without a permit
1442.04 Time limit for residential permits
1442.05 Certificate of use and occupancy
1442.06 Board of Building Standards Assessment Fund
1442.07 Final inspection; certificate of completion
 
1442.99 Penalty
§ 1442.01 APPLICATION TO BUILDING DEPARTMENT.
   (a)   In every case where the regulatory provisions of either this Building
Code or the state apply to work to be done, an application for a building
permit shall be filed with the Building Department, accompanied with detailed
plans therefor satisfactory to the Department. A permit for the doing of the
work covered by such plans shall be obtained before any work is undertaken.
   (b)   (1)   No permit shall be issued for any structure requiring sanitary
facilities, unless such structure has available to it an adequate sanitary or
combined sewer to receive the sanitary waste from the building.
      (2)   A grading permit, based upon the applicant’s approved grading plan,
issued by the Public Works Department for a fee as provided in
Chapter 208, shall be secured prior to the issuance of a permit for the
construction of a dwelling.
      (3)   Upon receipt of the grading plan, the Public Works Department will
review the plan and make a determination as to the location of drains and/or
swales as may be required to properly drain the property in question.
      (4)   Grades will also be set to establish the depth below grade of first
and basement floors and the finish grade at the dwelling.
   (c)   A building permit shall be obtained from the Building Inspector before
proceeding with excavations or any of the following classes of work:
      (1)   New construction;
      (2)   Additions or alterations;
      (3)   Moving or demolition;
      (4)   Plumbing;
      (5)   Heating and ventilating;
      (6)   Electrical; or
      (7)   Signs and billboards.
(Ord. 128-80, passed 9-22-1980; Ord. 228-04, passed 10-25-2004; Ord. 43-2014,
passed 4-14-2014)
§ 1442.02 FEES.
   Fees for building permits required by §
1442.01 shall be as provided in Chapter 208 of the Administration Code - the
General Fee Schedule, except as provided in §
1442.03 of this chapter.
(Ord. 197-90, passed 10-8-1990)
§ 1442.03 WORK STARTED WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   Whenever work for which a permit is required is started prior to obtaining
such permit, the fee required for the permit shall be doubled, but the payment
of such double fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the
requirements of this Building and Housing Code.
(Ord. 197-90, passed 10-8-1990)
§ 1442.04 TIME LIMIT FOR RESIDENTIAL PERMITS.
   Any permit issued for residential building, addition, alteration or
remodeling shall be valid for a period of 12 months from the date of issue. If
the project is not completed within the 12 months, the applicant may make
application in writing to the Chief Building Official explaining the reason the
work was not completed and requesting an extension of not more than six months
to complete the project. If approved, the project must be completed within the
allotted time. If denied, the project must be completed within 45 days.
   No person shall cause any work to be performed without an unexpired permit
as described herein.
(Ord. 16-91, passed 2-11-1991)
§ 1442.05 CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY.
   (a)   (1)   A certificate of use and occupancy, issued by the Building
Inspector, is required prior to the occupancy and/or use of a building
hereafter erected, a building or structure hereafter altered so as to affect
the front, side or rear yards or the useable square footage thereof or a change
in the use of a premises. No land, building or structure, or part thereof,
hereafter erected or altered in its use or structure shall be occupied and/or
used until a final inspection has been made and all violations found during
such inspection have been corrected and reinspected, and the Building Inspector
has issued a certificate of use and occupancy stating that such land, building
or structure, or part thereof, and the proposed use thereof, are found to be in
conformity with this Building Code, the Planning and Zoning Code and other
applicable rules and ordinances.
      (2)   Within three working days after notification that a building,
structure or premises, or part thereof, is ready for occupancy and/or use, the
Building Inspector shall cause to be made a final inspection thereof and issue
a certificate of use and occupancy if the land, building or structure, or part
thereof, and the proposed use thereof, are found to be in conformity with all
applicable codes and ordinances.
      (3)   Upon request from the responsible party to the Public Works
Department, any inspection of required swales and finish grades will be made
prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
      (4)   If a finish grade cannot be maintained at the time of final
inspection for occupancy because of frozen ground or other weather conditions,
a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a reasonable amount of
time, providing a notarized signed statement by the general contractor and the
party desiring to occupy the structure, attesting to the fact that they are
aware that prosecution by the city may be forthcoming if the final grading is
not complete prior to the expiration of the temporary certificate of occupancy.
   (b)   Such certificate of use and occupancy shall be issued only after all
applicable municipal fees are paid. Any occupancy and/or use prior to the
issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy shall be deemed to be a
violation of this section.
   (c)   Any lot or land in the city required to have sidewalks installed
pursuant to
Chapter 1010 of this code of ordinances, or to have sidewalks installed or
repaired as provided in §
660.05 of this code of ordinances, shall have such sidewalks installed or
repaired in conformity with the specifications of the Public Works Department
and shall be inspected by the same prior to the issuance of a certificate of
use and occupancy.
   (d)   Any lot or land in the city on which sewers, drains and/or pavement
have been placed shall have such sewers, drains and/or pavement installed in
conformity with specifications required by the Public Works Department and/or
the Department of Municipal Utilities, inspections of same made by the
appropriate department and all associated municipal fees paid prior to the
issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy.
   (e)   Any and all damage caused to any adjoining property by a general
contractor, subcontractor or owner, and/or agents, servants and/or employees
thereof, shall be restored and/or repaired to the satisfaction of the Building
Inspector prior to the issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy.
(Ord. 88-92, passed 6-22-1992; Ord. 228-04, passed 10-25-2004; Ord. 43-2014,
passed 4-14-2014)
§ 1442.06 BOARD OF BUILDING STANDARDS ASSESSMENT FUND.
   (a)   There is hereby established the Board of Building Standards Assessment
Fund.
   (b)   All moneys collected by the Building Department pursuant to S.B. 359
shall be paid to the office of the Finance Director for deposit in the Board of
Building Standards Assessment Fund, along with the prescribed monthly report
form developed in conjunction with the Ohio Building Officials Association.
   (c)   All entries to the newly established Fund shall encompass fees
collected pursuant to S.B. 359, effective on and retroactive to July 5, 1993.
   (d)   (1)   Any lot or land in the city on which sewers, drains and/or
pavement have been placed shall have such sewers, drains and/or pavement
installed in conformity with specifications required by the Public Works
Department and/or the Department of Municipal Utilities, inspections of same
made by the appropriate department and all associated municipal fees paid prior
to the issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy.
      (2)   There shall be no regrading of existing property that has
previously been inspected and accepted for proper grading, until a permit is
secured from the Public Works Department for a fee as specified in Chapter 208.
      (3)   Upon receipt of the proper application for a regrading permit, the
Public Works Department will review the proposed regrading plan and make a
determination as to its sufficiency regarding finish grades and the location of
any drains or swales.
(Ord. 107-93, passed 8-24-1993; Ord. 228-04, passed 10-25-2004; Ord. 43-2014,
passed 4-14-2014)
§ 1442.07 FINAL INSPECTION; CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION.
   No alteration or improvement for which a certificate of completion is
required by the Residential Code of Ohio for One-, Two-, and Three-Family
Dwellings (O.A.C. Chapter 4101:8-1) may be used or occupied unless and until
the improvement has been inspected and approved by the Building Department and
the certificate of completion issued.
(Ord. 49-2018, passed 4-9-2018)
§ 1442.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter, for which no penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the third degree and shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not
more than 60 days, or both, for each offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
   (b)   Whoever violates §
1442.04 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and shall be fined not
more than $250 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, for each offense. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 94-74, passed 6-10-1974; Ord. 16-91, passed 2-11-1991)
TITLE SIX - Miscellaneous Building Regulations
      
Chap. 1464. Moving of Buildings.
      
Chap. 1468. Unsafe Buildings.
      
Chap. 1470. Demolition.
      
Chap. 1476. Flood Damage Reduction.
      
Chap. 1480. Dish-Type Satellite Antennas.
      
Chap. 1484. Short-Term Rental Properties.
CHAPTER 1464: MOVING OF BUILDINGS
Section
1464.01 Definition of building
1464.02 Permit required
1464.03 Permit application and fee
1464.04 Deposit for expenses and damages
1464.05 Liability insurance
1464.06 Duties of Building Inspector
1464.07 Duties of permittee
1464.08 Enforcement by Building Inspector
1464.09 Posting of notice
1464.10 Compliance with Zoning Code
 
1464.99 Penalty
§ 1464.01 DEFINITION OF BUILDING.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING. A structure designed, built or occupied as a shelter or other
enclosure for any person, animal or property and used for residential,
business, mercantile, storage, commercial, industrial, institutional, assembly,
educational or recreational purposes, excluding motor vehicles licensed as such
by the appropriate governmental authority. Any structure, the outside
dimensions of which are all less than ten feet in width, ten feet in length and
14 feet in height (including the moving facility), shall not be considered a
building.
(Ord. 33-68, passed 3-11-1968)
§ 1464.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall move any building over, along or across any highway, street
or alley, or across private property lines in the city without first obtaining
a permit from the Building Inspector.
(Ord. 33-68, passed 3-11-1968)
§ 1464.03 PERMIT APPLICATION AND FEE.
   A person seeking the issuance of a permit under this chapter shall file an
application for such a permit with the Building Inspector, as follows.
   (a)   Form. The application for the moving of a building within, through or
from the city shall be made on forms provided by the Building Inspector and
shall be filed in the office of the Building Inspector.
   (b)   Contents. The application shall set forth:
      (1)   A description of the building proposed to be moved, giving the
street number, construction materials, exterior dimensions and height, number
of rooms, condition of the exterior and interior and sufficient structural
information so that the Building Inspector may determine that the building,
when moved, will comply with the Building Code;
      (2)   A description of the lot from which the building is to be removed,
if located in the city;
      (3)   A description of the lot, if located within the city, to which it
is proposed that such building be moved, giving the lot, block and tract
number;
      (4)   A plot plan showing the proposed location of the building when
moved, if the building is to be moved to a location within the city;
      (5)   The highways, streets and alleys over, along or across which the
building is proposed to be moved;
      (6)   The proposed moving date and hours;
      (7)   Photographs of all four elevations of the building; and
      (8)   Any additional information which the Building Inspector finds
necessary for a thorough inspection of the building and a fair determination of
whether or not a permit should be issued.
   (c)   Accompanying papers.
      (1)   Tax certificate. The owner of the building to be moved, if such
building prior to moving is located within the city, shall file with the
application sufficient evidence that the building and lot from which it is to
be removed are free of encumbrances and that all current taxes and any city
current charges or assessments against the same are paid in full.
      (2)   Certificate of ownership or entitlement. The applicant, if other
than the owner, shall file with the application a written statement or bill of
sale signed by the owner, or other sufficient evidence that he or she is
entitled to move the building.
      (3)   Utility consents. Where utility companies supplying services to the
city will be affected, the applicant shall file with his or her application
suitable letters of clearance of such utility companies consenting to the
removal. It is hereby determined that the following utilities will be affected,
except when the removal is limited to a relocation on the same or an abutting
lot and no portion of any city street will be entered upon:
         A.   Electric (The Illuminating Company);
         B.   Telephone (The Lorain Telephone Company);
         C.   Gas (The Columbia Gas of Ohio Company);
         C.   Railroads (The Norfolk & Western Railroad Company; only where the
moving route crosses tracks); and
         D.   Water and sewer (City of Avon Lake).
(Ord. 33-68, passed 3-11-1968)
§ 1464.04 DEPOSIT FOR EXPENSES AND DAMAGES.
   The applicant shall deposit with the city a $1,000 cash or certified check
deposit to indemnify the city against expenses or damages incurred itself or by
its residents and property owners as a result of the building moving operation.
Such deposit shall be held for 60 days after the completion of the moving,
which is deemed to be when the building is placed on the foundation. At the
expiration of such 60 days, if no such expenses or damages are claimed, or
having been claimed, have been satisfactorily adjusted by the applicant, such
deposit will be returned to the applicant. If claims of damages are still being
made at the end of such period, the city may, at its option:
   (a)   Apply so much of the deposit as may be necessary to satisfy such claim
and refund the balance;
   (b)   Retain, subject to a decision of a court or of the parties involved,
an amount necessary to satisfy such claim and refund the balance; or
   (c)   If the report of a claim has been acknowledged by the insurance
company providing coverage for the applicant, then the deposit may be refunded.
(Ord. 33-68, passed 3-11-1968)
§ 1464.05 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   An application under this chapter shall be accompanied by a liability
insurance policy or adequate certificate thereof, issued by an insurance
company authorized to do business in the state and approved as to form by the
Law Director, in limits for bodily injury or loss of life of $300,000 per
person, $500,000 per accident, and property damage liability of $100,000 per
accident. Such insurance shall serve as an indemnity for any damage which the
city may sustain by reason of damage or injury to any highway, street, alley,
sidewalk, fire hydrant, traffic control signal or other property of the city
which may be caused by or be incidental to the removal of any building over,
along or across any street in the city, and to indemnify and save the city
harmless from any claim for damages to persons or private property or legal
expense as a result thereof, and to satisfy any claims by private individuals
arising out of, caused by, or incidental to, the moving of any building over,
along or across any street in the city. Such insurance coverage shall also
include protection in the event of explosion, collapse or damage to underground
utilities, and shall include a 30-day minimum notice of cancellation provision.
§ 1464.06 DUTIES OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   (a)   Inspection. The Building Inspector shall inspect the building and the
applicant’s equipment to determine whether the standards for the issuance of a
permit are met.
   (b)   Standards for issuance. The Building Inspector shall refuse to issue a
permit if he or she finds that:
      (1)   Any requirement of this Building Code or the Zoning Code will not
be met by such building in its proposed location;
      (2)   Any application requirement or any fee or deposit requirement has
not been complied with;
      (3)   The building is of such physical dimensions and/or condition as to
preclude movement without endangering persons or property in the city;
      (4)   The building is in such a state of deterioration or disrepair or is
otherwise so structurally unsafe that it could not be moved without endangering
persons and property in the city;
      (5)   The building is structurally unsafe or unfit for the purpose for
which it is to be moved, if the removal location is in the city;
      (6)   The applicant’s equipment is unsafe and persons and property would
be endangered by its use; and
      (7)   For any other reason, persons or property in the city would be
endangered by the moving of the building.
   (c)   Issuance. The Building Inspector shall issue a permit for moving of
such building if all requirements of this chapter are met.
   (d)   Fees and deposits.
      (1)   Deposit. The Building Inspector shall deposit all fees, deposits,
bonds and insurance policies or certificates with the Finance Director.
      (2)   Return upon nonissuance. Upon his or her refusal to issue a permit,
the Building Inspector shall return to the applicant all deposits, bonds,
insurance policies and permit fees. Inspection fees filed with the application
or thereafter charged and paid shall not be returned.
      (3)   Return upon allowance for expense. After the building has been
moved, the Building Inspector shall furnish the Director with a written
statement of all expenses incurred in moving and replacement, together with a
statement of all damage caused to or inflicted upon property belonging to the
city. The Director shall authorize the Building Inspector to return to the
applicant the expense and damage deposit after the Director deducts the sum
sufficient to pay for damage to property of the city by reason of the removal
of the building. Permit fees deposited with the application shall not be
returned. Moneys may be retained to satisfy claims of private individuals in
accordance with § .
   (e)   Designate streets for removal. The Building Inspector shall procure
from the applicant a list of designated streets over which the building is to
be moved. The Building Inspector shall have the list approved by the Police
Chief and the Fire Chief, and shall reproduce the list upon the permit in
writing. In making a determination, the Police Department and the Fire
Department shall act to ensure maximum safety to persons and property in the
city and to minimize congestion and traffic hazards on public streets.
(Ord. 33-68, passed 3-11-1968)
§ 1464.07 DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.
   Every permittee under this chapter shall:
   (a)   Use designated streets. Move a building only over streets designated
for such use in the written permit;
   (b)   Notify of revised moving time. Notify the Building Inspector, in
writing, of any and all changes in moving date and hours as proposed in the
application, 48 hours prior to moving;
   (c)   Notify of damage. Notify the Building Inspector, in writing, of any
and all damage, within 24 hours after the damage or injury has occurred;
   (d)   Street occupancy period. Allow no building to be left standing on the
improved or unimproved portion of any street overnight or for more than two
hours during the daytime, unless an extension is granted by both the Police
Chief and the Fire Chief. Such an extension for overnight shall not be granted
except in the case of an extreme emergency.
   (e)   Comply with governing law. Comply with this Building Code, the Fire
Prevention Code, the Planning and Zoning Code and all other applicable
ordinances and laws upon relocating a building in the city;
   (f)   Pay expense of officer. Pay the expense of a traffic officer and a
Fire Department officer ordered by the Building Inspector to accompany the
movement of the building to protect the public from injury and damage;
   (g)   Clear old premises. Within 48 hours after moving the building, remove
all rubbish and materials and fill all excavations to the existing grade at the
original building site, if located within the city, so that the premises are
left in a safe and sanitary condition;
   (h)   Remove service connection. See that sewer lines are plugged to the
satisfaction of the Sewer Department and that the water is shut off and the
meter returned to the city. The permittee shall notify the gas and electric
service companies to remove their services; and
   (i)   Protect foundation. Move the house onto its new foundation and
backfill within 60 days after moving the building to the new location,
providing adequate safety measures in the interim.
(Ord. 33-68, passed 3-11-1968)
§ 1464.08 ENFORCEMENT BY BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   (a)   Enforcing officer. The Building Inspector shall enforce and carry out
the requirements of this chapter.
   (b)   Permittee liable for expense above deposit. The permittee shall be
liable for any expense, damages or costs in excess of deposited amounts or
securities and the Law Director shall prosecute an action against the permittee
in a court of competent jurisdiction for the recovery of such excessive
amounts.
   (c)   Original premises left unsafe. The city may proceed to do the work
necessary for leaving the original premises in a safe and sanitary condition
where the permittee does not comply with the requirements of this chapter, and
the cost thereof shall be charged against the deposit required by §
1464.04.
(Ord. 33-68, passed 3-11-1968)
§ 1464.09 POSTING OF NOTICE.
   Whenever the building is to be moved to a place within the city, the
Building Inspector shall require posting of notice.
(Ord. 94-74, passed 6-10-1974)
§ 1464.10 COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING CODE.
   Where appropriate, the provisions of §
1216.04 of the Planning and Zoning Code shall be complied with in those
instances where the type of building being moved falls within the definition of
the types of buildings described in such chapter, and such building, when
moved, will be located within the city.
(Ord. 94-74, passed 6-10-1974)
§ 1464.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not
more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both, for each offense.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
CHAPTER 1468: UNSAFE BUILDINGS
Section
1468.01 Declaration of necessity
1468.02 Dangerous buildings defined
1468.03 Standards for repair, vacation or demolition
1468.04 Duties of Building Inspector
1468.05 Demolition Board of Appeal
1468.06 Notice
1468.07 Administrative liability
1468.08 Remedies not limited
1468.09 County land reutilization corporation
1468.10 Demolition process
 
1468.99 Penalty
§ 1468.01 DECLARATION OF NECESSITY.
   It is hereby found and determined that there exist within the city blighted,
deteriorating and dangerous buildings that constitute a serious and growing
menace to public health, safety and welfare and that the existence of such
buildings:
   (a)   Contributes substantially and increasingly to the spread of blight,
disease and crime, and to losses by fire and accident, necessitating excessive
and disproportionate expenditures of public funds for the preservation of the
public health and safety, for crime prevention, correction, prosecution and
punishment, for the treatment of juvenile delinquency, for the maintenance of
adequate police, fire and accident protection, and for the public services and
facilities;
   (b)   Constitutes an economic and social liability; and
   (c)   Substantially impairs and denigrates the sound growth of the community
and housing accommodations in the city.
(Ord. 32-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1468.02 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS DEFINED.
   All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects
shall be deemed DANGEROUS BUILDINGS:
   (a)   Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members, list,
lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center
of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base;
   (b)   Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33% or more of damage
or deterioration of the supporting member or members, or 50% of damage or
deterioration of the non-supporting enclosing or outside walls or covering;
   (c)   Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs
or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be
reasonably safe for the purpose used;
   (d)   Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to
have become dangerous;
   (e)   Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe,
unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to
decent living that they are likely to cause sickness or disease;
   (f)   Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate
to protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare of human beings who
lived or may live therein;
   (g)   Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or other
emergency;
   (h)   Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may
fall and injure members of the public or property; and
   (i)   Those which, because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary or
dangerous to people of the city.
(Ord. 32-2013, passed 3-25-2013; Ord. 80-2017, passed 5-22-2017)
§ 1468.03 STANDARDS FOR REPAIR, VACATION OR DEMOLITION.
   The following standards shall be followed in ordering repair, vacation or
demolition:
   (a)   If the dangerous building can reasonably be repaired so that it will
no longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, it shall be ordered
repaired;
   (b)   If the dangerous building is in such condition as to make it dangerous
to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the occupants, it shall be
ordered vacated;
   (c)   In any case where a dangerous building cannot be repaired so that it
will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, it shall be
demolished; and
   (d)   If the dangerous building was ordered to be repaired, but it is not
repaired within the time permitted by this chapter, it shall be demolished.
(Ord. 32-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1468.04 DUTIES OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   The Building Inspector shall:
   (a)   Inspect any building, wall or structure about which complaints are
filed by any person, to determine whether a building, wall or structure is or
may be existing in violation of this chapter;
   (b)   Inspect any building, wall or structure reported (as herein provided
for) by the Fire or Police Departments of the city as potentially existing in
violation of the terms of this chapter;
   (c)   Notify the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent and all other
persons having an interest in such building pursuant to §
1468.06 (such notice being hereinafter referred to as the “action notice”), as
shown by the land records of the Recorder of Lorain County or tax records of
the Auditor of Lorain County, of any building found by him or her to be a
dangerous building within the standards set forth in §
1468.02 that:
      (1)   The owner must vacate, repair or demolish such building in
accordance with the terms of the notice and this chapter;
      (2)   The occupant or lessee must vacate such building or have it
repaired in accordance with the notice and remain in possession; and
      (3)   The mortgagee, agent or other person having an interest in such
building as shown by the land records of the Recorder of Lorain County or the
tax records of the Auditor of Lorain County may at his or her own risk repair,
vacate or demolish such building or have such work or act done.
   Any person notified under this division (c) to repair, vacate or demolish
any building shall be given 30 days from the date the action notice is given to
do or have done, the work or act required by the action notice.
   (d)   Set forth in the action notice a description of the building or
structure deemed unsafe, a statement of the particulars which make the building
or structure a dangerous building, and an order requiring the same to be put in
such condition as to comply with the terms of this chapter within 30 days from
the date of notice and pursuant to §
1468.06; and
   (e)   Place a notice on all dangerous buildings stating the following: “This
building has been found to be a dangerous building by the Avon Lake Building
Inspector. This notice is to remain on this building until it is repaired,
vacated or demolished in accordance with the notice which has been given the
owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee or agent of this building, and all other
persons having an interest in such building as shown by the land records of the
Recorder of Lorain County or tax records of the Auditor of Lorain County. It is
unlawful to remove this notice until such notice is complied with.”
      The inspections required by this section may include destructive and non-
destructive testing, provided that destructive testing shall be used only to
the extent reasonably necessary.
(Ord. 32-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1468.05 DEMOLITION BOARD OF APPEAL.
   (a)   There is hereby established a Demolition Board of Appeal (the “Board”)
which shall be comprised of the Municipal Engineer, the Chief of the Fire
Department and the Code Administrator. The Municipal Engineer shall be the
Chairperson of the Board. In the event any such officer is unable to attend, a
designee from his or her department may act on his or her behalf. Two members
shall constitute a quorum of the Board and all actions taken by the Board must
be by a majority of the members.
   (b)   The owners or parties in interest may make immediate application in
writing or in person to the Building Inspector for a building permit to
undertake the repair or replacement of the dangerous building or structure. The
Building Inspector, upon being furnished by the owners or parties in interest
with the complete plans and specifications covering the repairs or
replacements, in conformity with the ordinances of the city, shall, upon
approval of the plans and specifications, cause a building permit to be issued
to the owners or parties in interest. The Building Inspector may grant more
than 30 days to the owners or parties in interest in which to safely secure and
make generally safe the building or structure so that plans for repairs and/or
replacements may be created and submitted to the Building Inspector to secure a
permit and proceed with work as approved to correct the building code
violations.
   (c)   The owners or parties in interest may, within 14 days after the action
notice is given pursuant to §
1468.04(c), appeal such action notice by making a demand in writing to the
Municipal Engineer for a hearing before the Board on the questions of whether
in fact a dangerous building exists as defined by §
1468.02, and/or whether more time than permitted in the action notice should be
granted to the owners or parties in interest to abate the dangerous building.
   (d)   A hearing requested pursuant to division (c) of this section shall be
held within 14 days from the receipt of the written demand, and at least five
days’ notice of the hearing shall be given to the owners or parties in
interest. The obligation to take the actions required by the action notice
shall be delayed until the Board renders its decision or until the appeal is
dismissed. The hearing shall be conducted by the Board as set forth herein. If
the decision of the Building Inspector is appealed, the Board must determine
that a dangerous building exists, as defined by §
1468.02, before enforcement of the abatement is executed. The Board may affirm,
amend or modify the action notice or extend the time for compliance by the
owners or parties in interest with parts of the abatement by such date or dates
as the Board may determine.
   (e)   In a hearing shall permit the owners or parties in interest to appear
and be heard in person, or an attorney, and present the position, arguments and
contentions of the owners or parties in interest; offer and examine witnesses
and present evidence in support; cross-examine witnesses purporting to refute
the position of the owners or parties in interest, arguments and contentions;
offer evidence to refute evidence and testimony offered in opposition to the
position, arguments and contentions of the owners or parties in interest; and
proffer any such evidence into the record. All testimony during the hearing
shall be given under oath or affirmation, which may be administered by any
member of the Board.
   (f)   The Board may subpoena witnesses and require the production of records
in accordance with
Chapter 268 of this code of ordinances.
   (g)   The Board shall make written findings of fact from the testimony
offered as to whether or not the building in question is a dangerous building
within the terms of §
1468.02. The owners or parties in interest shall be promptly notified of the
decision of the Board in the manner provided for in §
1468.06. The decision of the Board shall be final and conclusive, unless the
owners or parties in interest shall timely file, after notice of the aforesaid
decision is effectuated, an action in or appeal to a court of competent
jurisdiction pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2506; otherwise the same shall become
final and conclusive at the termination of such action or appeal proceeding as
determined by such court.
   (h)   The Board shall issue an order based upon findings of fact made
pursuant to division (e) of this section. If the Board finds that the building
in question is a dangerous building within the provisions of §
1468.02, then such order shall require the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee,
agent and all other persons having an interest in such building as shown by the
land records of the Recorder of Lorain County or the tax records of the Auditor
of Lorain County, to repair, vacate or demolish such building.
   (i)   If an appeal to the Board was not made and the owner, occupant,
mortgagee, lessor or lessee or other interested party fails to comply with the
action notice within 30 days (or such longer period of time as may have been
granted therein) from the date the action notice was given, or the appeal
dismissed, or if a hearing before the Board was held and the owner, occupant,
mortgagee, lessor or lessee fails to comply with the order of the Board within
the time specified therein, then the Building Inspector shall cause such
building or structure to be repaired, vacated or demolished as such
circumstances may warrant, under the standards provided for in §
1468.02, and shall, with the assistance of the Law Director, cause the costs of
such repair, vacation or demolition to be charged against the land on which the
building existed as a municipal lien, or cause such costs to be added to the
tax duplicate as an assessment or to be levied as a special tax against the
land upon which the building stands or did stand, or to be recovered in a suit
at law against the owner. In cases where such procedure is desirable and any
delay thereby caused will not be dangerous to the health, morals, safety or
general welfare of the people of the city, the Building Inspector may request
the Law Director to take legal action to force the owner to make all necessary
repairs or demolish the building.
(Ord. 32-2013, passed 3-25-2013; Ord. 68-2015, passed 6-8-2015)
§ 1468.06 NOTICE.
   All notices or orders provided for herein shall be delivered in the
following manner:
   (a)   By posting such order or notice on the premises; and
   (b)   By personal delivery; or
   (c)   By certified or express mail of such order or notice to the last known
tax mailing address of the owner; or
   (d)   By commercial carrier service at the last known tax mailing address of
the owner which utilizes any form of delivery requiring a signed receipt; or
   (e)   Publishing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city or the
county a notice of the issuance of the order relating to the premises and
directing the owner to contact the Building Inspector in regard to such order.
      Notice shall be sent to the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee and all
other persons having an interest in such building as shown by the land records
of the Recorder of Lorain County or tax records of the Auditor of Lorain County
to the last known address of each, or, if no such address exists in the land
records of the Recorder of Lorain County or tax records of the Auditor of
Lorain County, notice shall be published at least once a week for two weeks.
Such posting, mailing or publication prescribed above shall be deemed adequate
service. The date of effectuation of notice shall be the date of posting,
mailing or the last date of publication, whichever method of notice is used and
occurs latest.
(Ord. 32-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1468.07 ADMINISTRATIVE LIABILITY.
   No officer, agent or employee of the city shall be rendered personally
liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any
act required or permitted in the discharge of his or her duties under this
chapter. Council may authorize the Law Director to defend any suit brought
against any officer, agent or employee of the city as a result of any act
required or permitted in the discharge of his or her duties under this chapter.
(Ord. 32-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1468.08 REMEDIES NOT LIMITED.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to limit in any way the use of any
or all other remedies available at law or in equity available to the city, its
officers and employees, to remove existing nuisance or prevent nuisances, or
summarily eliminate immediate hazards to the public health or safety or
criminal activity on premises regardless of whether or not proceedings for
demolition of such premises has or has not been commenced under any provision
of this chapter.
(Ord. 32-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1468.09 COUNTY LAND REUTILIZATION CORPORATION.
   The city may enter into an agreement with a County Land Reutilization
Corporation, authorizing the County Land Reutilization Corporation to act as
the agent of the city in connection with removing, repairing, or securing
insecure, unsafe, structurally defective, abandoned, deserted or open and
vacant buildings or other structures, making emergency corrections of hazardous
conditions, or abating any nuisance, including high weeds, overgrown brush, and
trash and debris from vacant lots.
(Ord. 32-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
§ 1468.10 DEMOLITION PROCESS.
   All demolitions shall comply with Chapter 1470 of the Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. 25-113, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 1468.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   The owner of any dangerous building or structure who shall fail to
comply with any notice or order to repair, vacate or demolish such building or
structure given by any person authorized by this chapter to give such notice or
order, shall be guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined not more than $200 for each offense. Each and every day
an owner fails to comply beyond the date fixed for compliance shall constitute
a separate offense.
   (b)   The occupant or lessee in possession who fails to comply with any
notice to vacate and who fails to repair or vacate such building or structure,
as the case may be, in accordance with any notice given as provided for in this
chapter, shall be guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined not more than $200 for each offense. Each and every day
an owner or lessee in possession fails to comply with any notice to vacate or
to repair such building shall constitute a separate offense.
   (c)   Any person removing the notice provided for in §
1468.04(e) shall be guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
shall be fined not more than $200 for each offense.
(Prior Code, § 1468.10) (Ord. 32-2013, passed 3-25-2013)
CHAPTER 1470: DEMOLITION
Section
1470.01 Purpose and intent
1470.02 Definitions and usage
1470.03 General
1470.04 Permit required; application process
1470.05 Insurance and bond
1470.06 Other permits, authorizations and certificates
1470.07 Demolition phase
 
1470.98 Enforcement
1470.99 Penalty
§ 1470.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (a)   The provisions of this chapter are intended to ensure that the
demolition or destruction of buildings located within the city are performed in
a manner that protects the health, safety, and well-being of the citizens of
the city and their environment.
   (b)   Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all work in
connection with the intentional demolition or destruction of all or less than
all of any buildings or structures located within the city except an accessory
building that is less than 15 feet in height, less than 225 square feet of
area, and not serviced by any utility.
(Ord. 25-112, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 1470.02 DEFINITIONS AND USAGE.
   Unless otherwise specified, terms used herein shall use and apply the
definitions ascribed to such terms pursuant to Chapters 1246, 1410, and 1608 of
the Codified Ordinances.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. As defined in R.C. § 3781.06.
   APPLICANT. The owner or agent for the owner of a structure who has filed an
application for the demolition of a structure as required by this chapter.
   APPROVED FILL MATERIAL. Shall include the following items: crushed concrete,
clay, shale, gravel and/or sand. Additional materials may be accepted upon the
submission to the city and review by the City Engineer. The following items may
not be used: asphalt-based material, concrete and soils other than clay.
   BUILDING and STRUCTURE. Are to be construed interchangeably and consistent
with the definitions ascribed elsewhere in these Codified Ordinances.
   DEMOLITION CONTRACTOR. A person or entity which demolishes or removes a
building or structure for a fixed sum, price, fee, percentage or other
compensation and for which a permit is required pursuant to this chapter.
   NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDING. As defined in R.C. § 3781.06.
   RE-SEED. To cover the ground with an appropriate seed mixture, starter
fertilizer, cover material (straw, hydroseed, peat moss, seed starter/mulch).
   RESIDENTIAL BUILDING. As defined in R.C. § 3781.06.
(Ord. 25-112, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 1470.03 GENERAL.
   (a)   Other laws. The provisions of this chapter are in addition to, and not
intended to supplant or nullify, any of the generally applicable local, state,
or federal rules, regulations, or ordinances regarding performing work within
the city or the protection of persons or the environment at or near the
location of such demolition or destruction.
   (b)   Submission of the application and additional information necessary to
obtain a permit shall expressly acknowledge the role of the Building Department
and its authority to investigate and inspect the demolition site at all
reasonable hours while work is being performed thereon to ensure compliance
with the documents submitted to and approved by the city upon issuance of the
permit.
   (c)   No structure to which this chapter pertains shall be wholly or
partially demolished unless a permit has been issued in accordance with this
chapter. All demolitions shall comply with applicable requirements of the Ohio
Building Code, the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency, the State Fire
Marshal, and the City Environmental Consultant.
(Ord. 25-112, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 1470.04 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION PROCESS.
   (a)   No permit shall be issued to the applicant until all information
required by this section is submitted to the city, approved by the Building
Department, and the applicant has paid the fee required by §
208.01(b)(1). All permits shall be valid for 90 days.
   (b)   Application. The party applying for a demolition permit shall submit
their application via OpenGov.com for review by the city. The application must
be complete with all required information at the time of submittal for review.
Any application missing required information will be rejected and a permit will
not be issued. Applicants can submit a new application for consideration. The
application shall include, but is not limited to, requests for the following
information:
      (1)   Address of the structure to be demolished.
      (2)   The contact information for the owner of the structure, including
name, address, telephone number(s), email address(es), and if the owner is a
non-resident of Avon Lake, the owner's agent will be immediately available in
the event of an emergency to provide access to the property where the
demolition is to occur.
      (3)   The contact information for the applicant, if other than the owner,
including name, address, telephone number(s), email address(es), and if the
applicant is a business entity, the contact information for the person in
charge of the demolition process and authorizing the application to be
submitted.
      (4)   If the structure is subject to any pending or unexpired judicial,
governmental, or administrative action, order, or proceeding, complete
information about such proceeding, including the nature of the proceeding, the
tribunal where such proceeding is pending or completed, and the most recent
order(s) or agreement(s) affecting the structure or property upon which it
sits.
      (5)   The estimated date for commencement of demolition, and the
estimated date of completion of demolition.
      (6)   Nature, location, and proof of termination of all utility
connections to the structure.
      (7)   Complete contact information for all persons or entities expected
to engage in any portion of the demolition work.
      (8)   Identification of all residential areas likely to be impacted by
the demolition or destruction through noise, traffic, vibration, or air quality
concerns.
      (9)   Identification of all hazardous, flammable material used or stored
on site during demolition and pursuant to (Ohio Administrative Code Rule 1301:
7-7-33 Fire safety) during construction and demolition.
      (10)   The extent of removal of the building footings/foundations,
specifications on back-fill materials, ground elevations/topography after
completion, means of preventing water accumulation, adjacent property
protection, utility capping/disconnection information, etc. If footings/
foundations are not to be removed, the specific reason(s) for such non-removal.
      (11)   Proof of insurance or insurance commitment in the amounts
specified in this chapter.
   (c)   Review. Within ten business days of receipt of the application by the
city, the city shall have a conference with the applicant to discuss additional
information required for issuance of the permit. Additional requirements may
consist of one or more of the following:
      (1)   Site map. A scaled site map containing detailed information
concerning the location, construction, description, and condition of the
structure to be demolished, the means of ingress and egress to the property and
structure being demolished, the location of structures adjacent to the
structure to be demolished, details of pedestrian/barriers as well as
dimensions of interior property lines and/or streets. Fire Department access
shall be maintained as per the City Fire Chief. Site map should also indicate
the public safety meeting point and first aid locations if applicable.
      (2)   Method of demolition to be used: If explosives are used, as defined
in OAC 1301.7-7-56, the plans shall include the type of explosives to be used,
amount, storage plan, security plan for explosives and detonators, list of
certified personnel to install and carry out the implosion, all of which must
be approved by the City Fire Marshal prior to the demolition permit being
issued.
      (3)   Building/service/fire protection details: Information necessary for
protection of the public and adjacent properties, including:
         A.   Locations of portable fire extinguishers, maintaining required
means of egress in the building during demolition.
         B.   Plans for pedestrian or vehicular protection;
         C.   Security plan to safeguard access to the structure once
demolition begins; and
         D.   Emergency response plan.
      (4)   Hazardous materials plan: Identification of all hazardous materials
present in the structure shall be provided along with a plan for abatement of
such hazardous materials and cleanup of the demolition site in accordance with
federal and state law and regulations.
      (5)   Air quality monitoring plan pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3745.
      (6)   Dust mitigation plan in accordance with federal and state law.
      (7)   Noise and vibration mitigation plan.
      (8)   Baseline soil sampling plan.
      (9)   Air dispersion modeling and risk assessment.
      (10)   Phase 1 environmental assessment.
      (11)   Pest mitigation and elimination plan. A certificate issued by a
pest control operator certifying that the property to be demolished is free and
clear of food products pests and/or rodent infestation or will be exterminated
prior to demolition.
      (12)   Site cleanup plan, including specification of the intended
disposition of rubble and building materials, including the identities of
persons or entities responsible for removing the rubble and building materials
and location where such materials will be taken for disposition. The applicant
shall clean up the locations outside of the demolition site to the level of the
collected surficial soil sample pre-demolition. This sample shall be collected
from the upper six inches.
      (13)   Restoration plan concerning the final grade or subsequent
structures to be erected upon the site once demolition and cleanup have
concluded.
(Ord. 25-112, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 1470.05 INSURANCE AND BOND.
   (a)   Insurance requirements.
      (1)   Prior to the demolition contractor commencing any work or services
with regards to the project, the coverage available shall not be less than:
         A.   One million dollars each occurrence, $2,000,000 general aggregate
(subject to a per project general aggregate provision applicable to the
project);
         B.   One million dollars products/completed operations aggregate;
         C.   One million dollars personal and advertising injury limits;
         D.   Worker's compensation and employers' liability insurance: As
required by law; providing coverage of not less than $1,000,000 for bodily
injury caused by accident and $1,000,000 for bodily injury by disease;
         E.   Business auto liability insurance: Written in the amount of not
less than $1,000,000 combined single limit; and
         F.   Five million dollars umbrella limit.
      (2)   Such insurance shall cover liability arising from premises,
operations, independent contractors, product-completed operations, personal and
advertising injury, and liability assumed under an insured contract (including
the tort liability of another assumed in a business contract). There shall be
no endorsement or modification of the commercial general liability form arising
from explosion, collapse, underground property damage or work performed by
subcontractors. All coverage shall be placed with an insurance company duly
admitted in the State of Ohio and shall be reasonably acceptable to contractor.
All insurance demolition contractor carriers must be "A" rated. Coverage shall
be afforded to the additional insureds whether or not a claim is in litigation.
The City of Avon Lake shall be listed as additional insured.
      (3)   Each certificate of insurance shall provide that the insurer must
give the City of Avon Lake written notice of cancellation and termination of
the contractor's coverage. The demolition contractor shall supply the City of
Avon Lake with a new and replacement certificate of insurance and additional
insured endorsement as proof of renewal and said original policy. Said new and
replacement endorsements shall be similarly endorsed in favor of contractor and
owner as set forth above.
      (4)   Additionally, and prior to commencement of the work, the demolition
contractor shall provide the City of Avon Lake with a certificate of insurance
showing liability insurance coverage for any subcontractor and any employees,
agents, or sub-subcontractors of the demolition contractor for any general
liability, workers' compensation, employer's liability and automobile liability
and umbrella liability. In the event any of these policies are terminated,
certificates of insurance showing replacement coverage shall be provided to
contractor. Coverage and limits shall be no less than those required of the
demolition contractor.
      (5)   Waiver of subrogation: The demolition contractor shall obtain from
each of its insurers a waiver of subrogation on commercial general liability in
favor of the City of Avon Lake with respect to losses arising out of or in
connection with the work.
   (b)   Bonding requirements. A performance bond in an amount equal to the
anticipated cost of the demolition shall be issued to the city prior to the
issuance of the permit.
   (c)   The city reserves the right to modify the amounts of insurance
required herein based upon the size, scope, and type of demolition being
conducted.
(Ord. 25-112, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 1470.06 OTHER PERMITS, AUTHORIZATIONS AND CERTIFICATES.
   A copy of each permit, application, authorization, or certification
otherwise required by state or federal law, including but not limited to
documents from the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency, State Fire Marshal,
and OSHA, must be furnished to the Building Department. Failure to provide
copies of all documents obtained from other governmental entities may result in
refusal to issue or revocation of demolition permits.
(Ord. 25-112, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 1470.07 DEMOLITION PHASE.
   (a)   Upon issuance of the permit, work shall begin immediately and shall
continue without undue delay in full compliance with the information submitted
to the city and approved by the Building Department.
   (b)   Building Department personnel may visit the site of the structure to
be demolished at any time and upon reasonable notice to the person or entity
identified as the applicant to ensure that the demolition is occurring in
compliance with the documents submitted to the city as part of the permit
approval process.
   (c)   If required, the applicant or person in charge of the demolition
process shall provide air and water quality reports to the city within 48 hours
following completion of the demolition or any significant portion thereof.
   (d)   No demolition work involving the release of dust into the air, sound
or vibration traveling outside of the property lines upon which the structure
to be demolished is located shall be performed except between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m. daily, excluding legal holidays, Sundays and inclement
weather days. The Mayor may approve exceptions to these specified times only
upon written request from the applicant and a demonstrated need to vary from
the set hours.
   (e)   Standards.
      (1)   All utility services shall be disconnected and equipment removed by
the utility companies. (Contractor to notify utility companies).
      (2)   All rubbish, debris, lumber, glass or other materials from a razed
or demolished building shall be removed upon completion of demolition.
      (3)   Unless new, approved construction is to begin immediately upon
demolition completion, cavity left after removal of structure should be filled
with approved fill material to a level two feet below existing ground level.
      (4)   From two feet below existing ground level to existing ground level,
the cavity shall be filled with clean fill material and compacted to provide
for proper drainage after settlement.
      (5)   Topsoil shall be evenly spread over entire site to a depth of
approximately four inches and graded to conform to adjacent properties.
      (6)   Area shall be re-seeded using a mixture of 50/50 rye/bluegrass at a
rate of five pounds per 1,000 square feet and raked to incorporate seed into
soil.
      (7)   Basements, swimming pools, vault spaces, and cesspools:
         A.   Liners should be cut out and removed.
         B.   Floors shall be broken up for proper drainage.
         C.   Walls shall be reduced to two feet below existing ground level.
         D.   Sanitary and storm sewers and drains and inlet pipes shall be
plugged at the outlet or discharge point with concrete.
      (8)   Underground storage tanks shall be completely removed and disposed
of in accordance with federal and state requirements. Soil surrounding storage
tank shall be tested for presence of hazardous materials after removal of the
tank and tested by the city's environmental consultant prior to filling the
cavity with noncombustible materials before covered with topsoil and re-seeded.
      (9)   Any person demolishing a building or part thereof shall erect
barricades as specified by the Building Department and shall provide lights at
the barricades between sunset and sunrise.
(Ord. 25-112, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 1470.98 ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail
to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has
violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the Building
Department, through the City's Law Department, may petition for a preliminary
or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would
create further violations, or compelling the person to perform abatement or
remediation of the violation.
   (b)   In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter is considered a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and
is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at
the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
(Ord. 25-112, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 1470.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $150
for each offense. Each day's continuance of a violation shall be considered a
separate offense and may result in bond forfeiture if not corrected within 30
days.
   (b)   Failure to follow the demolition plan submitted to and approved by the
city shall be considered a violation of this chapter and may, in addition to
any fines or other penalties, result in revocation or suspension of the permit
and bond forfeiture.
   (c)   The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other
remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local laws, and it is
within the discretion of the city to seek cumulative remedies. authority on
behalf of the city to administer and enforce the provisions of this code.
(Ord. 25-112, passed 7-14-2025)
CHAPTER 1476: FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION
Section
1476.01 Statutory authorization
1476.02 Findings of fact
1476.03 Statement of purpose
1476.04 Methods of reducing flood loss
1476.05 Lands to which these regulations apply
1476.06 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
1476.07 Abrogation and greater restrictions
1476.08 Interpretation
1476.09 Warning and disclaimer of liability
1476.10 Definitions
1476.11 Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
1476.12 Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
1476.13 Floodplain development permits
1476.14 Application required
1476.15 Review and approval of a floodplain development permit application
1476.16 Inspections
1476.17 Post-construction certifications required
1476.18 Revoking a floodplain development permit
1476.19 Exemption from filing a development permit
1476.20 State and federal development
1476.21 Map maintenance activities
1476.22 Data use and flood map interpretation
1476.23 Use of preliminary flood insurance rate map and/or flood insurance
study data
1476.24 Substantial damage determinations
1476.25 Use regulations
1476.26 Water and wastewater systems
1476.27 Subdivisions and other new developments
1476.28 Residential structures
1476.29 Nonresidential structures
1476.30 Accessory structures
1476.31 Recreational vehicles
1476.32 Gas or liquid storage tanks
1476.33 Assurance of flood-carrying capacity
1476.34 Development standards for coastal high hazard areas
1476.35 Appeals Board established
1476.36 Powers and duties
1476.37 Appeals
1476.38 Variances
1476.39 Procedure at hearings
1476.40 Appeal to the court
1476.41 Compliance required
1476.42 Notice of violation
1476.99 Penalty
§ 1476.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   Article XVIII, § 3, of the Ohio Constitution grants municipalities the legal
authority to adopt land use and control measures for promoting the health,
safety and general welfare of its citizens. Therefore, the Council of City of
Avon Lake, State of Ohio, does ordain as follows.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   The city has special flood hazard areas that are subject to periodic
inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base.
Additionally, structures that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or
otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. In
order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes
hereinafter set forth, these regulations are adopted.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of these regulations to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare, and to:
   (a)   Protect human life and health;
   (b)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (c)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (d)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (e)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
   (f)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the proper use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to protect property and
minimize future flood blight areas;
   (g)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions;
   (h)   Minimize the impact of development on adjacent properties within and
near flood prone areas;
   (i)   Ensure that the flood storage and conveyance functions of the
floodplain are maintained;
   (j)   Minimize the impact of development on the natural, beneficial values
of the floodplain;
   (k)   Prevent floodplain uses that are either hazardous or environmentally
incompatible; and
   (l)   Meet community participation requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.04 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSS.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, these regulations include methods and
provisions for:
   (a)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
flood heights or velocities;
   (b)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (c)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
   (d)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, excavating and other
development which may increase flood damage; and
   (e)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers, which
will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.05 LANDS TO WHICH THESE REGULATIONS APPLY.
   These regulations shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within
the jurisdiction of the city as identified in §
1476.06, including any additional areas of special flood hazard annexed by
city.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.06 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   (a)   For the purposes of these regulations, the following studies and/or
maps are adopted:
      (1)   Flood Insurance Rate Map and Flood Insurance Study for Lorain
County, Ohio, and Incorporated Areas both effective March 9, 2021;
      (2)   Other studies and/or maps, which may be relied upon for
establishment of the flood protection elevation, delineation of the 100-year
floodplain, floodways or delineation of other areas of special flood hazard;
and
      (3)   Any hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis authored by a
registered professional engineer in the State of Ohio which has been approved
by the city as required by §
1476.27, Subdivisions and Other New Developments.
   (b)   Any revisions to the aforementioned maps and/or studies are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations. Such maps
and/or studies are on file at 150 Avon Beldon Road, Avon Lake, Ohio 44012.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.07 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   These regulations are not intended to repeal any existing ordinances
including subdivision regulations, zoning or building codes. In the event of a
conflict between these regulations and any other ordinance, the more
restrictive shall be followed. These regulations are not intended to repeal,
abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions.
However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed
restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.08 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of these regulations, all provisions
shall be:
   (a)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (b)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (c)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes. Where a provision of these regulations may be in conflict with
a state or federal law, such state or federal law shall take precedence over
these regulations.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.09 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by these regulations is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. These regulations do
not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. These regulations
shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee
thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damage that
results from reliance on these regulations or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.10 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure on the same lot with, and of a nature
customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure.
   APPEAL. A request for review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of these regulations or a request for a
variance.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. The base flood may also be referred to as the 1% chance annual
flood or 100-year flood.
   BASE (100-YEAR) FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The water surface elevation of the
base flood in relation to a specified datum, usually the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, and
usually expressed in feet mean sea level (MSL). In Zone AO areas, the base
flood elevation is the lowest adjacent natural grade elevation plus the depth
number (from one to three feet).
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BREAKAWAY WALL. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion
of the building or supporting foundation system.
   COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA. An area of special flood hazard extending from
offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast, and
any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic
sources. A COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA is identified on a community’s FIRM by the
designation of Zone VE.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   ENCLOSURE BELOW THE LOWEST FLOOR. See LOWEST FLOOR.
   EXECUTIVE ORDER 11988 (FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT). Issued by President Carter in
1977, this order requires that no federally assisted activities be conducted in
or have the potential to affect identified special flood hazard areas, unless
there is no practicable alternative.
   FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA). The agency with the overall
responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program.
   FILL. A deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). Usually the initial map, produced by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, or U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development, for a community depicting approximate special flood hazard areas.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development has delineated the areas of special flood hazard.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RISK ZONES. Zone designations on FHBMs and FIRMs that
indicate the magnitude of the flood hazard in specific areas of a community.
Following are the zone definitions:
      (1)   ZONE A. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood
in any given year; base flood elevations are not determined.
      (2)   ZONES A1-30 and ZONE AE. Special flood hazard areas inundated by
the 100-year flood in any given year; base flood elevations are determined.
      (3)   ZONE AO. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood
in any given year; with flood depths of one to three feet (usually sheet flow
on sloping terrain); average depths are determined.
      (4)   ZONE AH. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood
in any given year; flood depths of one to three feet (usually areas of
ponding); base flood elevations are determined.
      (5)   ZONE A99. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood to be protected from the 100-year flood by a federal flood protection
system under construction; no base flood elevations are determined.
      (6)   ZONE B and ZONE X (SHADED). Areas of 500-year flood; areas subject
to the 100-year flood with average depths of less than one foot or with
contributing drainage area less than one square mile; and areas protected by
levees from the base flood.
      (7)   ZONE C and ZONE X (UNSHADED). Areas determined to be outside the
500-year floodplain.
      (8)   ZONE V. Coastal special flood hazard area subject to a 100-year
flood from velocity hazard (wave action); base flood elevations are not
determined.
      (9)   ZONE VE and V1-30. Coastal special flood hazard area subject to a
100-year from velocity hazard (wave action); base flood elevations are
determined.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official report in which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development has provided flood profiles, floodway boundaries (sometimes shown
on flood boundary and floodway maps), and the water surface elevations of the
base flood.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures, and their contents.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The base flood elevation plus one and one-
half feet of freeboard. In areas where no base flood elevations exist from any
authoritative source, the FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION can be historical flood
elevations, or base flood elevations determined and/or approved by the
Floodplain Administrator.
   FLOODWAY.
      (1)   A FLOODWAY is the channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that have been reserved in order to pass the base flood
discharge. A FLOODWAY is typically determined through a hydraulic and
hydrologic engineering analysis such that the cumulative increase in the water
surface elevation of the base flood discharge is no more than a designated
height. In no case shall the designated height be more than one foot at any
point within the community.
      (2)   The FLOODWAY is an extremely hazardous area, and is usually
characterized by any of the following: Moderate to high velocity flood waters,
high potential for debris and projectile impacts, and moderate to high erosion
forces.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level
for the purposes of floodplain management. FREEBOARD tends to compensate for
the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than
the height calculated for a selected size flood and flood way conditions, such
as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams, and the
hydrologic effect of urbanization in a watershed.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places ( a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listings on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district; or
      (3)   Individually listed on the State of Ohio’s inventory of historic
places maintained by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office; or
      (4)   Individually listed on the inventory of historic places maintained
by city’s historic preservation program, which program is certified by the Ohio
Historic Preservation Office.
   HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC ENGINEERING ANALYSIS. An analysis performed by a
professional engineer, registered in the State of Ohio, in accordance with
standard engineering practices as accepted by FEMA, used to determine flood
elevations and/or floodway boundaries.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). A letter of map change is an official FEMA
determination, by letter, to amend or revise effective flood insurance rate
maps, flood boundary and floodway maps, and flood insurance studies. LOMCs are
broken down into the following categories:
      (1)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). A revision based on technical data
showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood
hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and
establishes that a specific property is not located in a special flood hazard
area.
      (2)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). A revision based on technical data
that, usually due to human-made changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood
elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. One
common type of LOMR, a LOMR-F, is a determination concerning whether a
structure or parcel has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation
and is, therefore, excluded from the special flood hazard area.
      (3)   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A comment by FEMA
regarding a proposed project that would, upon construction, affect the
hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in
the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective base flood
elevations, or the special flood hazard area. A CLOMR does not amend or revise
effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and floodway maps, or flood
insurance studies.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement) of a structure. This definition excludes an ENCLOSURE BELOW THE
LOWEST FLOOR which is an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely
for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, provided that such enclosure is built in accordance with the
applicable design requirements specified in these regulations for enclosures
below the lowest floor.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle. For the purposes of
these regulations, a MANUFACTURED HOME includes manufactured homes and mobile
homes as defined in R.C. Chapter 4781.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. As specified in the O.A.C. 4781-12-01(K), a
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK means any tract of land upon which three or more
manufactured homes, used for habitation are parked, either free of charge or
for revenue purposes, and includes any roadway, building, structure, vehicle or
enclosure used or intended for use as part of the facilities of the park. A
tract of land that is subdivided and the individual lots are not for rent or
rented but are for sale or sold for the purpose of installation of manufactured
homes on the lots, is not a manufactured home park, even though three or more
manufactured homes are parked thereon, if the roadways are dedicated to the
local government authority. MANUFACTURED HOME PARK does not include any tract
of land used solely for the storage or display for sale of manufactured homes.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community’s flood insurance rate map are
referenced.
   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The NFIP is a federal program
enabling property owners in participating communities to purchase insurance
protection against losses from flooding. This insurance is designed to provide
an insurance alternative to disaster assistance to meet the escalating costs of
repairing damage to buildings and their contents caused by floods.
Participation in the NFIP is based on an agreement between local communities
and the federal government that states if a community will adopt and enforce
floodplain management regulations to reduce future flood risks to all
development in special flood hazard areas, the federal government will make
flood insurance available within the community as a financial protection
against flood loss.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION.
      (1)   Structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or
after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted by city and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
      (2)   For the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for
which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of
an initial FIRM November 2, 1977 or after December 31, 1974, whichever is
later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   PERSON. Includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation,
partnership, association, or any other entity, including state and local
governments and agencies. An agency is further defined in R.C. § 111.15(A)(2)
as any governmental entity of the state and includes, but is not limited to,
any board, department, division, commission, bureau, society, council,
institution, state college or university, community college district, technical
college district, or state community college. AGENCY does not include the
General Assembly, the controlling board, the Adjutant General’s Department, or
any court.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ARCHITECT. A person registered to engage in the
practice of architecture pursuant to R.C. §§ 4703.01 to 4703.19.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. A person registered as a professional
engineer pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4733.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL SURVEYOR. A person registered as a professional
surveyor pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4733.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. Also known as AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD, it
is the land in the floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in
any given year. SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS are designated by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency on flood insurance rate maps, flood insurance
studies, flood boundary and floodway maps and flood hazard boundary maps as
Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30, A99, or V, VE. SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS may also
refer to areas that are flood prone and designated from other federal, state or
local sources of data including, but not limited to, historical flood
information reflecting high water marks, previous flood inundation areas, and
flood prone soils associated with a watercourse.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. The date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The
ACTUAL START means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of a building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, manufactured home, or gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.
      (1)   Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to the “before damaged” condition would equal or exceed
50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
      (2)   Substantial damage also means flood related damage sustained by a
structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost
of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the
improvement. This term includes structures, which have incurred “substantial
damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the
alteration would not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
“historic structure”.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the standards of these regulations.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with these regulations.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.11 DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Public Works Director is hereby appointed to administer and implement
these regulations and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.12 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but are not limited to:
   (a)   Evaluate applications for permits to develop in special flood hazard
areas;
   (b)   Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide flood hazard and flood
protection elevation information;
   (c)   Issue permits to develop in special flood hazard areas when the
provisions of these regulations have been met or refuse to issue the same in
the event of noncompliance;
   (d)   Inspect buildings and lands to determine whether any violations of
these regulations have been committed;
   (e)   Make and permanently keep all records for public inspection necessary
for the administration of these regulations including flood insurance rate
maps, letters of map amendment and revision, records of issuance and denial of
permits to develop in special flood hazard areas, determinations of whether
development is in or out of special flood hazard areas for the purpose of
issuing floodplain development permits, elevation certificates, floodproofing
certificates, VE-Zone construction certifications, variances, and records of
enforcement actions taken for violations of these regulations;
   (f)   Enforce the provisions of these regulations;
   (g)   Provide information, testimony or other evidence as needed during
variance hearings;
   (h)   Coordinate map maintenance activities and FEMA follow-up; and
   (i)   Conduct substantial damage determinations to determine whether
existing structures, damaged from any source and in special flood hazard areas
identified by FEMA, must meet the development standards of these regulations.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.13 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to begin construction or other
development activity including, but not limited to, filling, grading,
construction, alteration, remodeling or expanding any structure; or alteration
of any watercourse wholly within, partially within or in contact with any
identified special flood hazard area, as established in §
1476.06, until a floodplain development permit is obtained from the Floodplain
Administrator. Such floodplain development permit shall show that the proposed
development activity is in conformity with the provisions of these regulations.
No such permit shall be issued by the Floodplain Administrator until the
requirements of these regulations have been met.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.14 APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   An application for a floodplain development permit shall be required for all
development activities located wholly within, partially within, or in contact
with an identified special flood hazard area. Such application shall be made by
the owner of the property or his or her authorized agent, herein referred to as
the applicant, prior to the actual commencement of such construction on a form
furnished for that purpose. Where it is unclear whether a development site is
in a special flood hazard area, the Floodplain Administrator may require an
application for a floodplain development permit to determine the development’s
location. Such applications shall include, but not be limited to:
   (a)   Site plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and
topography of the area in question, the location of existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location
of the foregoing;
   (b)   Elevation of the existing, natural ground where structures are
proposed;
   (c)   Elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed
structures;
   (d)   Such other material and information as may be requested by the
Floodplain Administrator to determine conformance with and provide enforcement
of these regulations;
   (e)   Technical analyses conducted by the appropriate design professional
registered in the State of Ohio and submitted with an application for a
floodplain development permit when applicable:
      (1)   Floodproofing certification for nonresidential floodproofed
structure as required in §
1476.29;
      (2)   Certification that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a
structure not meeting the design requirements of §
1476.28(e) are designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces;
      (3)   Description of any watercourse alteration or relocation that the
flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished, and
maintenance assurances as required in §
1476.33(c);
      (4)   A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis demonstrating that the
cumulative effect of proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one foot in special flood hazard areas
where the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided base flood
elevations, but no floodway as required by §
1476.33(b);
      (5)   A hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis showing impact of
any development on flood heights in an identified floodway as required by §
1476.33(a);
      (6)   Generation of base flood elevation(s) for subdivision and other new
developments as required by §
1476.27;
      (7)   Certification of structural design and methods of construction for
VE Zone construction as required by §
1476.34(a); and
      (8)   Certification of breakaway wall design, when applicable, as
provided in §
1476.34(b).
   (f)   A floodplain development permit application fee is to be set per
Chapter 208 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.15 REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF A FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (a)   Review.
      (1)   After receipt of a complete application, the Floodplain
Administrator shall review the application to ensure that the standards of
these regulations have been met. No floodplain development permit application
shall be reviewed until all information required in §
1476.14 has been received by the Floodplain Administrator.
      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator shall review all floodplain
development permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have been
received from those federal, state, or local governmental agencies from which
prior approval is required. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining
such permits as required including permits issued by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers under § 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, 33 U.S.C. § 403 and § 404
of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1344, and the Ohio Environmental Protection
Agency under § 401 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1341.
   (b)   Approval. Within 30 days after the receipt of a complete application,
the Floodplain Administrator shall either approve or disapprove the
application. If the Floodplain Administrator is satisfied that the development
proposed in the floodplain development application conforms to the requirements
of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue the permit. All
floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon the commencement of
work within 180 days. A floodplain development permit shall expire 180 days
after issuance unless the permitted activity has been substantially begun and
is thereafter pursued to completion.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.16 INSPECTIONS.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall make periodic inspections at appropriate
times throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance with
permit conditions.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.17 POST-CONSTRUCTION CERTIFICATIONS REQUIRED.
   The following as-built certifications are required after a floodplain
development permit has been issued:
   (a)   For new or substantially improved residential structures, or
nonresidential structures that have been elevated, the applicant shall have a
Federal Emergency Management Agency Elevation Certificate completed by a
registered professional surveyor to record as-built elevation data. For
elevated structures in Zone A and Zone AO areas without a base flood elevation,
the elevation certificate may be completed by the property owner or owner’s
representative;
   (b)   For all development activities subject to the standards of §
1476.21(a), a letter of map revision; and
   (c)   For new or substantially improved nonresidential structures that have
been floodproofed in lieu of elevation, where allowed, the applicant shall
supply a completed floodproofing certificate for nonresidential structures
completed by a registered professional engineer or architect together with
associated documentation.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.18 REVOKING A FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit shall be revocable, if among other things,
the actual development activity does not conform to the terms of the
application and permit granted thereon. In the event of the revocation of a
permit, an appeal may be taken to the Appeals Board in accordance with §§
1476.35 through
1476.40.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.19 EXEMPTION FROM FILING A DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   An application for a floodplain development permit shall not be required for
maintenance work such as roofing, painting, and basement sealing, or for small
nonstructural development activities (except for filling and grading) valued at
less than $2,500.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.20 STATE AND FEDERAL DEVELOPMENT.
   (a)   Development that is funded, financed, undertaken or preempted by state
agencies shall comply with minimum NFIP criteria.
   (b)   Before awarding funding or financing or granting a license, permit or
other authorization for a development that is or is to be located within a 100-
year floodplain, a state agency shall require the applicant to demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the agency that the development will comply with minimum
NFIP criteria and any applicable local floodplain management resolution or
ordinance as required by R.C. § 1521.13. This includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Development activities in an existing or proposed manufactured home
park that are under the authority of the Ohio Department of Commerce and
subject to the flood damage reduction provisions of the O.A.C. § 4781-12;
      (2)   Major utility facilities permitted by the Ohio Power Siting Board
under R.C. Chapter 4906; and
      (3)   Hazardous waste disposal facilities permitted by the Hazardous
Waste Siting Board under R.C. Chapter 3734.
   (c)   (1)   Development activities undertaken by a federal agency and which
are subject to Federal Executive Order 11988 - Floodplain Management.
      (2)   Each federal agency has a responsibility to evaluate the potential
effects of any actions it may take in a floodplain; to ensure that its planning
programs and budget request reflect consideration of flood hazards and
floodplain management; and to prescribe procedures to implement the policies
and requirements of EO 11988.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.21 MAP MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES.
   To meet National Flood Insurance Program minimum requirements to have flood
data reviewed and approved by FEMA, and to ensure that Avon Lake’s flood maps,
studies and other data identified in §
1476.06 accurately represent flooding conditions so appropriate floodplain
management criteria are based on current data, the following map maintenance
activities are identified.
   (a)   Requirement to submit new technical data.
      (1)   For all development proposals that impact floodway delineations or
base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that technical data
reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA within six months of the date such
information becomes available. These development proposals include:
         A.   Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood
elevations or alter floodway boundaries;
         B.   Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed structures
where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special flood hazard
area;
         C.   Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or
elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts; and
         D.   Subdivision or other new development proposals requiring the
establishment of base flood elevations in accordance with §
1476.27.
      (2)   It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data,
required in accordance with division (a) of this section, prepared in a format
required for a conditional letter of map revision or letter of map revision,
and submitted to FEMA. Submittal and processing fees for these map revisions
shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator shall require a conditional letter of
map revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for:
         A.   Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the base flood
elevation; and
         B   Proposed development which increases the base flood elevation by
more than one foot in riverine areas where FEMA has provided base flood
elevations but no floodway.
      (4)   Floodplain development permits issued by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining a letter of map
revision from FEMA for any development proposal subject to division (a)(1) of
this section.
   (b)   Right to submit new technical data. The Floodplain Administrator may
request changes to any of the information shown on an effective map that does
not impact floodplain or floodway delineations or base flood elevations, such
as labeling or planimetric details. Such a submission shall include appropriate
supporting documentation made in writing by the Mayor of the city, and may be
submitted at any time.
   (c)   Annexation/detachment. Upon occurrence, the Floodplain Administrator
shall notify FEMA in writing whenever the boundaries of the city have been
modified by annexation or the community has assumed authority over an area, or
no longer has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations
for a particular area. In order that the City of Avon Lake Flood Insurance Rate
Map accurately represent the city boundaries, include within such notification
a copy of a map of the city suitable for reproduction, clearly showing the new
corporate limits or the new area for which the city has assumed or relinquished
floodplain management regulatory authority.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.22 DATA USE AND FLOOD MAP INTERPRETATION.
   The following guidelines shall apply to the use and interpretation of maps
and other data showing areas of special flood hazard.
   (a)   In areas where FEMA has not identified special flood hazard areas, or
in FEMA identified special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and
floodway data have not been identified, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review and reasonably utilize any other flood hazard data available from a
federal, state, or other source.
   (b)   Base flood elevations and floodway boundaries produced on FEMA flood
maps and studies shall take precedence over base flood elevations and floodway
boundaries by any other source that reflect a reduced floodway width and/or
lower base flood elevations. Other sources of data, showing increased base
flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FEMA flood maps
and studies, shall be reasonably used by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (c)   The Floodplain Administrator shall make interpretations, where needed,
as to the exact location of the flood boundaries and areas of special flood
hazard. A person contesting the determination of the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in §§
1476.35 through
1476.40.
   (d)   Where an existing or proposed structure or other development is
affected by multiple flood zones, by multiple base flood elevations, or both,
the development activity must comply with the provisions of this chapter
applicable to the most restrictive flood zone and the highest base flood
elevation affecting any part of the existing or proposed structure; or for
other developments, affecting any part of the area of the development.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.23 USE OF PRELIMINARY FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP AND/OR FLOOD INSURANCE
STUDY DATA.
   (a)   Zone A.
      (1)   Within Zone A areas designated on an effective FIRM, data from the
preliminary FIRM and/or FIS shall reasonably utilize as best available data.
      (2)   When all appeals have been resolved and a notice of final flood
elevation determination has been provided in a letter of final determination
(LFD), BFE and floodway data from the preliminary FIRM and/or FIS shall be used
for regulating development.
   (b)   Zones AE, A1-30, AH, AO, VE, and V1-30.
      (1)   BFE and floodway data from a preliminary FIS or FIRM restudy are
not required to be used in lieu of BFE and floodway data contained in an
existing effective FIS and FIRM. However:
         A.   Where BFEs increase in a restudied area, communities have the
responsibility to ensure that new or substantially improved structures are
protected. Communities are encouraged to reasonably utilize preliminary FIS or
FIRM data in instances where BFEs increase and floodways are revised to ensure
that the health, safety, and property of their citizens are protected; and
         B.   Where BFEs decrease, preliminary FIS or FIRM data should not be
used to regulate floodplain development until the LFD has been issued or until
all appeals have been resolved.
      (2)   If a preliminary FIRM or FIS has designated floodways where none
had previously existed, communities should reasonably utilize this data in lieu
of applying the encroachment performance standard of § 1476.33(b) since the
data in the draft or preliminary FIS represents the best data available.
   (c)   Zones B, C and X. Use of BFE and floodway data from a preliminary FIRM
or FIS are not required for areas designated as Zone B, C, or X on the
effective FIRM which are being revised to Zone AE, A1-30, AH, AO, VE, or V1-30.
Communities are encouraged to reasonably utilize preliminary FIS or FIRM data
to ensure that the health, safety and property of their citizens are protected.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.24 SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE DETERMINATIONS.
   (a)   Damages to structures may result from a variety of causes including
flood, tornado, wind, heavy snow, fire and the like. After such a damage event,
the Floodplain Administrator shall:
      (1)   Determine whether damaged structures are located in special flood
hazard areas;
      (2)   Conduct substantial damage determinations for damaged structures
located in special flood hazard areas; and
      (3)   Require owners of substantially damaged structures to obtain a
floodplain development permit prior to repair, rehabilitation or
reconstruction.
   (b)   Additionally, the Floodplain Administrator may implement other
measures to assist with the substantial damage determination and subsequent
repair process. These measures include issuing press releases, public service
announcements and other public information materials related to the floodplain
development permits and repair of damaged structures; coordinating with other
federal, state and local agencies to assist with substantial damage
determinations; providing owners of damaged structures materials and other
information related to the proper repair of damaged structures in special flood
hazard areas; and assist owners of substantially damaged structures with
increased cost of compliance insurance claims.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.25 USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   The use and development standards in §§
1476.25 to
1476.34 apply to development wholly within, partially within, or in contact
with any special flood hazard area as established in §§
1476.06,
1476.22(a) or
1476.23(a).
   (b)   Permitted uses: all uses not otherwise prohibited in this section or
any other applicable land use regulation adopted by Avon Lake are allowed
provided they meet the provisions of these regulations.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.26 WATER AND WASTEWATER SYSTEMS.
   The following standards apply to all water supply, sanitary sewerage and
waste disposal systems in the absence of any more restrictive standard provided
under the Ohio Revised Code or applicable state rules:
   (a)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems;
   (b)   New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and
   (c)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
or contamination from them during flooding.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.27 SUBDIVISIONS AND OTHER NEW DEVELOPMENTS.
   (a)   All subdivision proposals and all other proposed new development shall
be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and are subject to all
applicable standards in these regulations.
   (b)   All subdivision proposals and all other proposed new development shall
have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
   (c)   All subdivision proposals and all other proposed new development shall
have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
   (d)   In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data
are not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering analysis that generates base flood elevations for all subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments containing at least 50 lots or five
acres, whichever is less.
   (e)   The applicant shall meet the requirement to submit technical data to
FEMA in §
1476.21(a)(1)D. when a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis is completed that
generates base flood elevations as required by division (d) of this section.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.28 RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.
   The requirements of this section apply to new construction of residential
structures and to substantial improvements of residential structures in Zones
A, A1-30, AE, AO and AH, when designated on the community’s effective FIRM, and
when designated on a preliminary or final FIRM issued by FEMA under the
circumstances provided in §
1476.23.
   (a)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Where a
structure, including its foundation members, is elevated on fill to or above
the base flood elevation, the requirements for anchoring and construction
materials resistant to flood damage are satisfied.
   (b)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with methods and materials resistant to flood damage.
   (c)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or elevated to prevent water
from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
   (d)   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to or above the flood protection elevation.
   (e)   New construction and substantial improvements, including manufactured
homes, that do not have basements and that are elevated to the flood protection
elevation using pilings, columns, posts, or solid foundation perimeter walls
with openings to allow the automatic equalization of hydrostatic pressure may
have an enclosure below the lowest floor provided the enclosure meets the
following standards:
      (1)   Be used only for the parking of vehicles, building access, or
storage;
      (2)   Be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls
by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters; or
      (3)   Have a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total
net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area,
and the bottom of all such openings being no higher than one-foot above grade.
The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
   (f)   Manufactured homes shall be affixed to a permanent foundation and
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
   (g)   Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination
that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure, shall be exempt
from the development standards of this section.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.29 NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.
   The requirements of this section apply to new construction and to
substantial improvements of nonresidential structures in Zones A, A1-30, AE, AO
and AH, when designated on the community’s effective FIRM, and when designated
on a preliminary or final FIRM issued by FEMA under the circumstances provided
in §
1476.23.
   (a)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall meet the requirements of §
1476.28(a) through (c) and (e) through (g).
   (b)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to or above the level of the flood
protection elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall meet all the following standards:
      (1)   Be dry floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water to the level of the flood
protection elevation;
      (2)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
      (3)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect,
through the use of a Federal Emergency Management Agency Floodproofing
Certificate, that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
division (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.30 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
   Structures that are 600 square feet or less which are used for parking and
storage only are exempt from elevation or dry floodproofing standards within
Zones A, A1-30, AE, AO, and AH designated on the community’s FIRM. Such
structures must meet the following standards:
   (a)   They shall not be used for human habitation;
   (b)   They shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;
   (c)   They shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
   (d)   They shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
   (e)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be
elevated or floodproofed to or above the level of the flood protection
elevation; and
   (f)   They shall meet the opening requirements of §
1476.28(e)(3).
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.31 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   Recreational vehicles on sites within Zones A, A1-A30, AE, AO, or AH must
meet at least one of the following standards:
   (a)   They shall not be located on sites in special flood hazard areas for
more than 180 days;
   (b)   They must be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
   (c)   They must be placed on the site pursuant to a floodplain development
permit issued under §§
1476.13 and
1476.14 and meet all standards of §
1476.28.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.32 GAS OR LIQUID STORAGE TANKS.
   (a)   Within Zone A, A1-A30, AE, AO or AH, new or substantially improved
above ground gas or liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation
or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads.
   (b)   In Zones V or VE, new or substantially improved above ground gas or
liquid storage tanks shall be elevated with the bottom of the lowest horizontal
supporting member above BFE on the landward side of buildings.
   (c)   In Zones V or VE, new or substantially improved underground gas or
liquid storage tanks must be installed below the lowest eroded ground
elevation.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.33 ASSURANCE OF FLOOD-CARRYING CAPACITY.
   Pursuant to the purpose and methods of reducing flood damage stated in these
regulations, the following additional standards are adopted to assure that the
reduction of the flood carrying capacity of watercourses is minimized.
   (a)   Development in floodways.
      (1)   In floodway areas, development shall cause no increase in flood
levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Prior to issuance of
a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and
hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer,
demonstrating that the proposed development would not result in any increase in
the base flood elevation; or
      (2)   Development in floodway areas causing increases in the base flood
elevation may be permitted provided all of the following are completed by the
applicant:
         A.   Meet the requirements to submit technical data in §
1476.21(a);
         B.   An evaluation of alternatives, which would not result in
increased base flood elevations and an explanation why these alternatives are
not feasible;
         C.   Certification that no structures are located in areas that would
be impacted by the increased base flood elevation;
         D.   Documentation of individual legal notices to all impacted
property owners within and outside the community, explaining the impact of the
proposed action on their property; and
         E.   Concurrence of the Mayor of the city and the chief executive
officer of any other communities impacted by the proposed actions.
   (b)   Development in riverine areas with base flood elevations but no
floodways.
      (1)   In riverine special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA where
base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been designated,
the cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point. Prior to issuance of a floodplain
development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer, demonstrating that
this standard has been met; or
      (2)   Development in riverine special flood hazard areas identified by
FEMA where base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been
designated causing more than one foot increase in the base flood elevation may
be permitted provided all the following are completed by the applicant:
         A.   An evaluation of alternatives which would result in an increase
of one foot or less of the base flood elevation and an explanation why these
alternatives are not feasible; and
         B.   Division (a)(2)A. and (a)(2)C. through (a)(2)E. of this section.
   (c)   Alterations of a watercourse. For the purpose of these regulations, a
watercourse is altered when any change occurs within its banks. The extent of
the banks shall be established by a field determination of the “bankfull
stage”. The field determination of “bankfull stage” shall be based on methods
presented in Chapter 7 of the USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RM-
245, Stream Channel Reference Sites: An Illustrated Guide to Field Technique or
other applicable publication available from a federal, state or other
authoritative source. For all proposed developments that alter a watercourse,
the following standards apply.
      (1)   The bankfull flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse shall not be diminished. Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a description of the
extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development, and certification by a registered professional engineer
that the bankfull flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be
diminished.
      (2)   Adjacent communities, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the
Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of Water, must be notified prior
to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. Evidence of such notification
must be submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
      (3)   The applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary
maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood carrying capacity will not be diminished. The Floodplain
Administrator may require the permit holder to enter into an agreement with the
city specifying the maintenance responsibilities. If an agreement is required,
it shall be made a condition of the floodplain development permit.
      (4)   The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit technical data
in §
1476.21(a)(1)C. when an alteration of a watercourse results in the relocation
or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.34 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREAS.
   The requirements of this section apply to development in coastal high hazard
areas designated Zone V or VE on the community’s effective FIRM (and when
designated on a preliminary or final FIRM issued by FEMA under the
circumstances provided in §
1476.23).
   (a)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated on
pilings or columns that may be armored as necessary to withstand Lake Erie ice
forces so that:
      (1)   The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member supporting
the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated to or above the
flood protection elevation, and
      (2)   The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto is
anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due to the effects
of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components.
         A.   Water loading values shall be those associated with the base
flood.
         B.   Wind loading values shall be those defined according to American
Society of Civil Engineers 7-13 Minimum Design Loads and Associated Criteria
for Buildings and Other Structures, or current version adopted by Ohio Board of
Building Standards.
         C.   A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or
review the structural design, specifications and plans for the construction,
and shall certify that the design and methods of construction to be used are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of
division (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section.
   (b)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall have the space
below the lowest floor either free of obstruction or constructed with non-
supporting breakaway walls, open wood latticework, or insect screening intended
to collapse without causing collapse, displacement, or other structural damage
to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
      (1)   For the purpose of division (b) of this section, a breakaway wall
shall have a design safe loading resistance of not less than ten and no more
than 20 pounds per square foot.
      (2)   Use of breakaway walls which exceed a design safe loading
resistance of 20 pounds per square foot (either by design or where so required
by local or state codes) may be permitted only if a registered professional
engineer or architect certifies that the designs proposed meet all the
following conditions:
         A.   Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than
that which would occur during the base flood; and
         B.   The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation
system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other structural
damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all
building components (structural and non-structural). Water loading values shall
be those associated with the base flood. Wind loading values shall be those
defined according to American Society of Civil Engineers 7-16 Minimum Design
Loads and Associated Criteria for Buildings and Other Structures, or equivalent
standard.
      (3)   All space enclosed by breakaway walls, open wood latticework, or
insect screening below the lowest floor shall be used solely for parking of
vehicles, building access, or storage.
   (c)   The use of fill or redistributed existing fill, placed after the
initial identification of Zones V, VE or V1-30 on the community’s FIRM, for
structural support of buildings is prohibited.
   (d)   Alteration of sand dunes that will increase potential flood damage is
prohibited.
   (e)   Placement or substantial improvement of manufactured homes must comply
with divisions (a) through (e) of this section.
   (f)   Recreational vehicles must either:
      (1)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
      (2)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
      (3)   Comply with divisions (a) through (e) of this section.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.35 APPEALS BOARD ESTABLISHED.
   (a)   The Council shall establish a Board of Appeals appointed to serve as
the Appeals Board. The members of such Board shall consist of the members of
the Zoning Board of Appeals for these regulations as established by the Avon
Lake Zoning Code, §
1212.02(d). The members shall serve five year terms after which time they shall
be reappointed or replaced by the Council and the Mayor of the city. Each
member shall serve until his or her successor is appointed.
   (b)   A Chairperson shall be elected by the members of the Appeals Board.
Meetings of the Appeals Board shall be held as needed and shall be held at the
call of the Chairperson, or in his or her absence, the Acting Chairperson. All
meetings of the Appeals Board shall be open to the public except that the Board
may deliberate in executive sessions as part of quasi-judicial hearings in
accordance with law. The Appeals Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings
showing the vote of each member upon each question and shall keep records of
all official actions. Records of the Appeals Board shall be kept and filed in
Public Works Department at 150 Avon Beldon Road, Avon Lake, OH 44012.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.36 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (a)   The Appeals Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by
the Floodplain Administrator in the administration or enforcement of these
regulations.
   (b)   Authorize variances in accordance with §
1476.38.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.37 APPEALS.
   (a)   Any person affected by any notice and order, or other official action
of the Floodplain Administrator may request and shall be granted a hearing on
the matter before the Appeals Board provided that such person shall file,
within 30 days of the date of such notice and order, or other official action,
a brief statement of the grounds for such hearing or for the mitigation of any
item appearing on any order of the Floodplain Administrator’s decision. Such
appeal shall be in writing, signed by the applicant and be filed with the
Floodplain Administrator. Upon receipt of the appeal, the Floodplain
Administrator shall transmit said notice and all pertinent information on which
the Floodplain Administrator’s decision was made to the Appeals Board.
   (b)   Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Appeals Board shall fix a
reasonable time for the appeal, give notice in writing to parties in interest,
and decide the appeal within a reasonable time after it is submitted.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.38 VARIANCES.
   Any person believing that the use and development standards of these
regulations would result in unnecessary hardship may file an application for a
variance. The Appeals Board shall have the power to authorize, in specific
cases, such variances from the standards of these regulations, not inconsistent
with federal regulations, as will not be contrary to the public interest where,
owning to special conditions of the lot or parcel, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of these regulations would result in unnecessary hardship.
   (a)   Application for a variance.
      (1)   Any owner, or agent thereof, of property for which a variance is
sought shall make an application for a variance by filing it with the
Floodplain Administrator, who upon receipt of the variance shall transmit it to
the Appeals Board.
      (2)   Such application at a minimum shall contain the following
information: name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; legal
description of the property; parcel map; description of the existing use;
description of the proposed use; location of the floodplain; description of the
variance sought; and reason for the variance request.
      (3)   All applications for a variance shall be accompanied by a variance
application fee set in the Schedule of Fees adopted by City Council and listed
in
Chapter 208 of this code of ordinances.
   (b)   Notice for public hearing. The Appeals Board shall schedule and hold a
public hearing within 30 days after the receipt of an application for a
variance from the Floodplain Administrator. Prior to the hearing, a notice of
such hearing shall be given in one or more newspapers of general circulation in
the community at least ten days before the date of the hearing.
   (c)   Public hearing.
      (1)   At such hearing, the applicant shall present such statements and
evidence as the Appeals Board requires. In considering such variance
applications, the Appeals Board shall consider and make findings of fact on all
evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of
these regulations and the following factors:
         A.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
         B.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         C.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         D.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community;
         E.   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
that are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
         F.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
         G.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         H.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
         I.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         J.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
         K.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         A.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         B.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the property.
Increased cost or inconvenience of meeting the requirements of these
regulations does not constitute an exceptional hardship to the applicant;
         C.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights beyond that which is allowed in these regulations;
additional threats to public safety; extraordinary public expense, nuisances,
fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws;
         D.   A determination that the structure or other development is
protected by methods to minimize flood damages; or
         E.   A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
      (3)   Upon consideration of the above factors and the purposes of these
regulations, the Appeals Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances, as it deems necessary to further the purposes of these regulations.
   (d)   Other conditions for variances.
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      (2)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, providing items in divisions (c)(1)A. to (c)(1)K.
of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond
one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
      (3)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and the cost of flood insurance will
be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.39 PROCEDURE AT HEARINGS.
   (a)   All testimony shall be given under oath.
   (b)   A complete record of the proceedings shall be kept, except
confidential deliberations of the Board, but including all documents presented
and a verbatim record of the testimony of all witnesses.
   (c)   The applicant shall proceed first to present evidence and testimony in
support of the appeal or variance.
   (d)   The Administrator may present evidence or testimony in opposition to
the appeal or variance.
   (e)   All witnesses shall be subject to cross-examination by the adverse
party or their counsel.
   (f)   Evidence that is not admitted may be proffered and shall become part
of the record for appeal.
   (g)   The Board shall issue subpoenas upon written request for the
attendance of witnesses. A reasonable deposit to cover the cost of issuance and
service shall be collected in advance.
   (h)   The Board shall prepare conclusions of fact supporting its decision.
The decision may be announced at the conclusion of the hearing and thereafter
issued in writing or the decision may be issued in writing within a reasonable
time after the hearing.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.40 APPEAL TO THE COURT.
   Those aggrieved by the decision of the Appeals Board may appeal such
decision to the Lorain County Court of Common Pleas, pursuant to R.C. Chapter
2506.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.41 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (a)   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, repaired, extended, converted, enlarged or altered without full
compliance with the terms of these regulations and all other applicable
regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of these regulations,
unless specifically exempted from filing for a development permit as stated in
§
1476.19.
   (b)   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit shall be a violation
of these regulations and shall be punishable in accordance with §
1476.99.
   (c)   Floodplain development permits issued on the basis of plans and
applications approved by the Floodplain Administrator authorize only the use
and arrangement, set forth in such approved plans and applications or
amendments thereto. Use, arrangement, or construction contrary to that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and punishable in
accordance with §
1476.99.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.42 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Whenever the Floodplain Administrator determines that there has been a
violation of any provision of these regulations, he or she shall give notice of
such violation to the person responsible therefore and order compliance with
these regulations as hereinafter provided. Such notice and order shall:
   (a)   Be put in writing on an appropriate form;
   (b)   Include a list of violations, referring to the section or sections of
these regulations that have been violated, and order remedial action, which, if
taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of these regulations;
   (c)   Specify a reasonable time for performance;
   (d)   Advise the owner, operator or occupant of the right to appeal; and
   (e)   Be served on the owner, occupant, or agent in person. However, this
notice and order shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner,
occupant, or agent if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to
the person’s last known mailing address, residence, or place of business, and/
or a copy is posted in a conspicuous place in or on the dwelling affected.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 1476.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of the provisions of these regulations or failure to comply with
any of its requirements shall be deemed to be a strict liability offense and
shall constitute a first degree misdemeanor. Any person who violates these
regulations or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon
conviction thereof be fined or imprisoned as provided by the laws of the city.
Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. The city shall
prosecute any violation of these regulations in accordance with the penalties
stated herein.
(Ord. 21-33, passed 2-22-2021)
CHAPTER 1480: DISH-TYPE SATELLITE ANTENNAS
Section
1480.01 Permit required
1480.02 Permit application; plans; notice to adjacent property owners
1480.03 Location; yards
1480.04 Construction; support structures
1480.05 Size
1480.06 Height
1480.07 Fences; landscaping
1480.08 Appeals
1480.09 Permit fee
1480.10 Exceptions
 
1480.99 Penalty
§ 1480.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall erect a dish-type earth station antenna in the city without
first securing a permit therefor in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 163-84, passed 11-26-1984)
§ 1480.02 PERMIT APPLICATION; PLANS; NOTICE TO ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNERS.
   (a)   The owner, part-owner, occupant or renter, which latter two applicants
shall have written consent to erect such an antenna from the owners of any lot,
premises or parcel of land within the city so occupied or rented, who desires
to construct or erect a dish-type satellite earth station antenna at such
location shall apply to the Building Inspector for the permit required in §
1480.01.
   (b)   The Building Inspector shall issue such permit, provided that the
applicant submits a written application upon forms provided by the Building
Department along with a plot plan of the lot, premises or parcel of land
showing the exact location of the proposed earth station antenna; the location
of all buildings on the subject lot; a description of the kind of earth station
dish antenna proposed; and three complete sets of construction plans,
specifications and elevations of the proposed location with sufficient details
to show the method of assembly and construction. Each set of plans and
specifications shall show the complete name and address of the subject property
owner and the complete name and address of the person who prepared the plans
and specifications. The application shall indicate the owner of the subject
property, the occupant of the subject premises and the contractor or other
person who is proposed to construct or erect the proposed satellite dish earth
station antenna, who shall be a duly licensed contractor in accordance with the
ordinances and regulations of the city. All construction plans shall be
certified in writing by a professional engineer.
   (c)   The Department shall notify all adjoining property owners of the
proposed earth station antenna site of the application for a permit to erect a
satellite dish earth station antenna not less than ten days before issuing such
permit by certified mail, return receipt requested.
(Ord. 163-84, passed 11-26-1984)
§ 1480.03 LOCATION; YARDS.
   (a)   All earth station antennas to be erected as provided in this chapter
shall be located only in the rear yard and not closer than 20 feet from any lot
line to the center of the dish. No variance shall be granted under any
circumstances from the terms of this division (a).
   (b)   No earth station antenna shall be erected on the roof top of any type
of building or residence house.
   (c)   No earth station antenna shall be linked to any receivers which are
not located on the same lot or premises as the earth station antenna.
(Ord. 163-84, passed 11-26-1984)
§ 1480.04 CONSTRUCTION; SUPPORT STRUCTURES.
   (a)   Only metal support structures of galvanized construction, or equal
quality thereto, shall be permitted as support for any earth station antenna.
   (b)   Either a concrete base or caissons, depending on soil conditions,
shall be employed in line with grade.
   (c)   The structure shall be designed to withstand a wind force of up to 85
miles per hour in a manner conforming with good engineering practices.
   (d)   Any driving motor shall be limited to 110V maximum power design and be
encased in protective guards.
   (e)   All underground electrical wiring shall be encased in rigid conduit
with an 18-inch cover.
   (f)   The earth station antenna shall be bonded to an eight-foot grounding
rod.
   (g)   If guy lines are used, they shall be confined within the fenced area
required in §
1480.07.
   (h)   All submitted plans must meet with engineering practices and
standards.
(Ord. 163-84, passed 11-26-1984)
§ 1480.05 SIZE.
   The maximum diameter of any earth station antenna shall not exceed 12 feet.
No variance from this section shall be granted under any circumstances for a
residential premises site.
(Ord. 163-84, passed 11-26-1984)
§ 1480.06 HEIGHT.
   The maximum height of any earth station antenna structure shall not exceed
15 feet from the natural grade level.
(Ord. 163-84, passed 11-26-1984)
§ 1480.07 FENCES; LANDSCAPING.
   A vision impairing fence, a minimum of six feet in height, shall be erected
around the base of the structure so as to protect the safety, welfare and
rights of all property owners. The fence shall have an appropriate and
reasonable evergreen landscaping around it. The planting shall be completed
before final approval by the Building Inspector.
(Ord. 163-84, passed 11-26-1984)
§ 1480.08 APPEALS.
   Appeals from any decision of the Building Inspector may be processed to the
Zoning Board of Appeals as provided in §
1214.11 of the Planning and Zoning Code, except as may be otherwise provided in
this chapter.
(Ord. 163-84, passed 11-26-1984)
§ 1480.09 PERMIT FEE.
   The fee for the filing of an application for a permit to construct a
satellite dish earth station antenna shall be as set forth in Chapter 208 of
the Administration Code - the General Fee Schedule, payable upon the filing of
such application.
(Ord. 163-84, passed 11-26-1984)
§ 1480.10 EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   The requirements of this section shall not apply to satellite dishes
18 inches or less in diameter, provided that a permit for installation is
obtained from the Building Department and the installation meets the standards
set by the manufacturer.
   (b)   The satellite dishes identified in division (a) of this section shall
in no instance be located in the front yard or the front facing of the
applicable building.
   (c)   The satellite dishes identified in divisions (a) and (b) of this
section shall be subject to permit fees as set forth in §
1480.09.
(Ord. 235-94, passed 12-19-1994)
§ 1480.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and shall be fined not
more than $250 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both.
(Ord. 163-84, passed 11-26-1984)
CHAPTER 1484: SHORT-TERM RENTAL PROPERTIES
Section
1484.01   Purpose
1484.02   Short-term rental registration certificate
1484.03   Limitations on short-term rental properties
1484.04   Fees
1484.05   Owner responsibilities
1484.06   Inspections
1484.07   Revocation or lapse
1484.08   Change of ownership or control
1484.09   Hosting platforms
1484.10   Hearing and appeals
1484.11   Enforcement
1484.12   Notice of violations
1484.13   Definitions
 
1484.99   Penalty
§ 1484.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to regulate the peace, health,
safety, and wellness of the public, including the owners, transient guests, and
neighboring property owners or occupants of any short-term rental property; to
ensure the continued vibrancy, character, and charm of the City of Avon Lake as
a community; to protect and preserve the quality, character, and tranquility of
residential neighborhoods; to protect property values, and to preserve the
availability of affordable housing stock for permanent residents of the City of
Avon Lake.
(Ord. 25-161, passed 11-24-2025)
§ 1484.02 SHORT-TERM RENTAL REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE.
   (a)   Required. The city created a short-term rental property registration
system for the City of Avon Lake that requires an owner of short-term rental
property to register with the city on an annual basis each and every individual
short-term rental property in the city.
      (1)   Beginning on the effective date of this chapter, every short-term
rental property must be issued a short-term rental registration certificate
before being used, advertised, promoted, offered, listed with a hosting
platform, or otherwise made available for use as short-term rental property. It
shall be prima- facie evidence of use as a short-term rental property if a
transient guest is found to be occupying a residential premises or the
residential premises is advertised on a hosting platform.
      (2)   All short-term rental property must be in full compliance at all
times with all applicable provisions of the Codified Ordinances of the City of
Avon Lake.
   (b)   Each short-term rental property must display the short-term rental
registration certificate at a conspicuous place inside the property.
      (1)   No owner of a short-term rental property shall allow a short-term
rental property to be used, advertised, promoted, offered, listed or made
available for use to transient guests if the short-term rental registration
certificate has been suspended, revoked, or denied, nor shall an owner display
a short-term rental registration certificate that has expired or been
suspended, revoked, denied, altered, or defaced.
      (2)   No person shall make a short-term rental property available for use
by transient guests if such short-term rental property is in violation of any
applicable provision of the City of Avon Lake's health code, building code,
zoning regulations, or any covenant, condition, or restriction enacted in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 5312, if applicable.
   (c)   Issuance.
      (1)   The application for a short-term rental registration certificate
required by this chapter shall be made by an owner by supplying the information
required on the application supplied by the administration and agreeing to
comply with all requirements of this chapter. Applications may be submitted at
any time, subject to the limitations and restrictions set forth in §
1484.03.
      (2)   A short-term rental registration certificate shall not be issued to
an owner unless the owner or an authorized representative can arrive at and
access the short-term rental property within one hour whenever such property is
being used by a transient guest.
      (3)   Upon submission of the application (or renewal application), the
administration shall schedule a life safety inspection, in accordance with §
1484.06, of the residential premises prior to issuing or renewing a short-term
rental registration certificate.
      (4)   No short-term rental registration certificate shall be issued or
renewed until the administration completes a life safety inspection of the
residential premises and determines that the residential premises complies with
all applicable health, building, and safety codes and the requirements of this
chapter.
      (5)   After the life safety inspection is completed and the residential
premises is found to be in full compliance with all applicable building,
health, and safety codes, the administration shall issue or renew a short-term
rental registration certificate for such residential premises which shall
contain the following information:
         A.   The name, email address, and telephone number of the owner or
authorized representative responsible for maintenance of the short-term rental
property and ensuring compliance with this chapter;
         B.   The address of the short-term rental property;
         C.   The expiration date of the short-term rental registration
certificate; and
         D.   The maximum occupancy of the short-term rental property.
      (6)   Upon obtaining a short-term rental registration certificate, the
owner shall comply with the provisions of this chapter.
   (d)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of this chapter, any short-term
rental occupancy certificate that expires, is revoked, or becomes invalid for
any reason is not assignable nor renewable and shall require a new application
for use as a short-term rental property for all purposes under this chapter.
   (e)   Limitations on assignment. Except as otherwise provided in §
1484.08, a short-term rental registration certificate may not be sold,
transferred, or assigned to any property other than the short-term rental
property for which it was issued.
   (f)   Term. A short-term rental registration certificate issued pursuant to
this chapter shall be valid for 12 months from the date the short-term rental
registration certificate is issued or until revoked in accordance with §
1484.02(d).
(Ord. 25-161, passed 11-24-2025)
§ 1484.03 LIMITATIONS ON SHORT-TERM RENTAL PROPERTIES.
   (a)   Beginning on the effective date of this chapter, there shall be no
more than one short-term rental property per 1,000 feet, measured at the
property lines or six parcels, whichever is greater.
      (1)   Division (a) of this section shall not apply to invalidate or
cancel any otherwise lawfully existing short-term rental property that was in
existence prior to the effective date of this section provided that such
properties comply with all other applicable provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Until such time as the density of short-term rental properties
falls below the restrictions set forth in this section, no new applications for
short-term rental certificates will be processed for properties which would
otherwise violate this section.
   (b)   Subject to limitations found elsewhere in this chapter, renewal
applications shall continue to be accepted and short-term rental registration
certificates issued in accordance with §
1484.02 provided that the application for a renewal short-term rental
certificate is submitted to the administration before the expiration of the
existing short-term rental registration certificate.
   (c)   No short-term rental property which had a short-term rental
registration certificate revoked under §§
1484.02(d)(3) through (d)(6) shall be eligible for issuance of a short-term
rental registration certificate for a period of two years from the date of
revocation unless a change in ownership or control of the residential premises
has occurred, as determined by the administration in its reasonable discretion.
(Ord. 25-161, passed 11-24-2025)
§ 1484.04 FEES.
   All fees set forth in this chapter shall be approved and adopted by City
Council in accordance with the City's Charter and the Codified Ordinances. The
effective date of any changes to such fees shall be in accordance with
Chapter II, Section 9 of the Charter unless a different date is set forth in
the adopting ordinance.
(Ord. 25-161, passed 11-24-2025)
§ 1484.05 OWNER RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (a)   In addition to general requirements that all short-term rental
property be in full compliance with all applicable laws, statutes, regulations,
and ordinances, the following additional responsibilities are applicable to an
owner of short-term rental property:
      (1)   The owner of every short-term rental property shall be responsible
for the maintenance thereof in good repair and in a safe and sanitary condition
in compliance with the applicable requirements of Part Fourteen of the Codified
Ordinances and the requirements established by the city administratively.
      (2)   The owner shall prepare and maintain a parking plan to designate
off-street parking for the use of all vehicles associated with the short-term
rental property in accordance with
Chapter 1234 of the Codified Ordinances.
      (3)   The owner or authorized representative shall be required to be
physically present in person at the short-term rental property within 60
minutes of any notification by a member of law enforcement, the fire
department, or emergency assistance of any kind relating to a call for service
to the short-term rental property.
      (4)   The owner shall provide proof of procurement and maintenance of
general liability and premises liability insurance for the short-term rental
property as may be periodically requested by the administration, which
insurance(s) shall meet all of the following requirements:
         A.   Provide coverage of not less than $1,000,000 and issued in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 3902.
         B.   Provide notice of cancellation of insurance to the administration
at least ten days prior to cancellation.
      (5)   Failure to maintain insurance required by this section shall result
in a revocation of the short-term rental registration certificate.
   (b)   Records.
      (1)   The owner or authorized representative shall maintain a registry of
transient guests for a period of at least three years from the date such
transient guests occupied the short-term rental property which shall include
the following:
         A.   The name and address of the persons who entered into the rental
agreement for use of the short-term rental property;
         B.   The date(s) each such transient guest had use or occupancy of the
short-term rental property;
         C.   The number of persons scheduled to stay for the night of the
rental period; and
         D.   The rate charged per each rental period.
      (2)   The owner or authorized representative shall provide the records
required by this section upon request by a member of law enforcement, the
administration, or in accordance with any lawful order issued by a court or
tribunal having jurisdiction thereof.
      (3)   The owner or authorized representative shall be deemed to comply
with this provision if such records are kept and maintained by a hosting
platform which is identified and disclosed to the city on the initial
application or any renewal application.
   (c)   No owner shall lease a short-term rental property to a transient guest
if the transient guest's use of the short-term rental property would violate
R.C. § 2950.034.
(Ord. 25-161, passed 11-24-2025)
§ 1484.06 INSPECTIONS.
   (a)   License issuance and renewal inspections:
      (1)   Prior to issuing or renewing a short-term rental registration
certificate, or in the event of the transfer and assignment of a valid a short-
term rental registration certificate, the administration shall conduct a life
safety inspection of the residential premises within 14 days from the date the
application is received by the city (or in the event a waiting list is
maintained by the administration pursuant to §
1484.01(b), within 14 days of when the owner is notified by the administration
that the new application is being considered).
      (2)   Within 14 days of completing a life safety inspection, an
inspection report shall be issued to the owner of the short-term rental
property.
      (3)   The administration shall maintain a copy of the life safety
inspection report for each short-term rental property for a period of three
years. Copies of all reports of life safety inspections shall be made available
to the public in accordance with R.C. § 149.43.
   (b)   Violations enumerated in the inspection report shall be abated by the
owner of the short-term rental property within 30 days from the date of the
inspection report. A reinspection shall be required to verify that the
violations have been corrected. The owner of the short-term rental property
shall contact the administration to schedule the required reinspection, which
shall occur within 45 days from the date the inspection report is issued. A re
inspection fee set in accordance with § 1484.04 shall be paid at the time a
reinspection is scheduled.
   (c)   Failure to correct any violations contained within the inspection
report within 30 days from the date of the inspection report shall constitute a
violation of this chapter and may result in the revocation of a short-term
rental registration certificate and/or penalties or other legal action in
accordance with § 1484.99.
   (d)   Failure to permit a reinspection of the short-term rental property
within 45 days of the date of the inspection report shall constitute a
violation of this chapter and may result in the revocation of the short-term
rental registration certificate and/or penalties or other legal action in
accordance with §
1484.99.
   (e)   Upon display of the proper credentials, any member of the
administration, law enforcement, fire department, emergency assistance. or
public health official shall be permitted to inspect the short-term rental
property to ensure compliance with this chapter.
      (1)   In the event access to short-term rental property is refused, an
officer or employee of the entity requesting to inspect the short-term rental
property may, with the assistance of the Law Director, obtain an administrative
warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction in order to gain access to the
property.
      (2)   In the event an administrative warrant cannot be obtained, then the
inspection shall include only those items which can be inspected by lawful
means. This chapter shall not be construed to require an owner, authorized
representative, or occupant to consent to a warrantless inspection of private
property.
      (3)   A repeated failure to permit inspection may be cause for revocation
of the short-term rental registration certificate.
(Ord. 25-161, passed 11-24-2025)
§ 1484.07 REVOCATION OR LAPSE.
   The Administration shall revoke a short-term rental registration certificate
for any of the following:
   (a)   The owner provides any material misrepresentation of fact on the
application;
   (b)   The short-term rental registration certificate is not timely renewed;
   (c)   Noncompliance with the requirements of this chapter;
   (d)   Failure to correct any deficiency identified in the inspection report
within 30 days of the date the inspection report is issued;
   (e)   Failure to collect and remit taxes required by
Chapter 886 of the Codified Ordinances;
   (f)   Upon a determination by a court of competent jurisdiction that the
short-term rental property has become a nuisance pursuant to
Chapter 662 of the Codified Ordinances or other controlling Ohio law.
(Ord. 25-161, passed 11-24-2025)
§ 1484.08 CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL.
   (a)   Any person selling or otherwise relinquishing ownership or control of
a short-term rental property, including an authorized representative or owner,
shall notify the administration of the proposed effective date of the change in
ownership or control.
   (b)   In order to transfer and assign a valid short-term rental registration
certificate, the owner and holder of the short-term rental registration
certificate shall notify the administration of the change in ownership and
control. The notice required by this section shall be in writing and shall
include the following:
      (1)   The name, address, email address, and telephone number of the new
authorized representative or owner;
      (2)   The name, address, email address and telephone number of the
previous authorized representative or owner;
      (3)   The person or entity maintaining the records required to be
maintained by §
1484.05(e).
      (4)   The effective date of such change in ownership or control.
   (c)   Within 14 days of acquiring the short-term rental property (as
evidenced by the new owner receiving recorded legal title to same), the new
owner shall complete an application for purposes of the new owner acknowledging
the rights, duties and obligations of an owner under this chapter, including
permitting the administration to conduct a life safety inspection in accordance
with §
1484.06. The new owner shall be required to pay a reinspection fee in
accordance with the Codified Ordinances of the city.
   (d)   A failure to notify the administration in accordance with this section
within 14 calendar days of any change of ownership or control (as evidenced by
the new owner receiving recorded legal title to same) will result in a
violation of this chapter and a revocation of the short-term rental
registration certificate and/or penalties or other legal action in accordance
with §
1484.99.
(Ord. 25-161, passed 11-24-2025)
§ 1484.09 HOSTING PLATFORMS.
   (a)   Listing, advertising, or promoting. No hosting platform shall list,
advertise, promote, or accept reservations for any short-term rental property
within the City of Avon Lake that does not have a short-term rental
registration certificate. Upon notification by the administration that the
short-term rental registration certificate has expired or been revoked, the
hosting platform shall remove or deactivate that short-term rental property
from all listings, advertisements, or promotions of any kind within three
business days.
   (b)   Records required. To the extent the hosting platforms collects the
information required to be kept and maintained by an owner or authorized
representative in accordance pursuant to §
1484.05(b), it shall maintain such information for a period of three years for
all short-term rental properties that are leased to transient guests through
such hosting platform, and shall provide such records upon request in
accordance with §
1484.05(b).
   (c)   Taxation. All hosting platforms are subject to taxation in accordance
with Chapter 886 of the Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. 25-161, passed 11-24-2025)
§ 1484.10 HEARING AND APPEALS.
   Subject to §
1484.03, any person who has been denied, or refused a short-term rental
registration certificate, or whose short-term rental registration certificate
has been revoked pursuant to §
1484.01(d) may appeal such decision to the Lorain County Court of Common Pleas
as provided in R.C. § 2506.01.
(Ord. 25-161, passed 11-24-2025)
§ 1484.11 ENFORCEMENT.
   No person shall violate any provision of this chapter or any rule or
regulation promulgated thereunder or fail to comply therewith or with any
written notice or written order issued thereunder by the Administration.
(Ord. 25-161, passed 11-24-2025)
§ 1484.12 NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   Upon discovery of a violation of this chapter, the administration
shall issue a written notice of the violation to the owner.
   (b)   The notice required in this section shall be delivered by one or more
of the following methods:
      (1)   Certified mail delivery (return receipt requested), which shall be
deemed effective as of the date of receipt identified on the return receipt or
as noted by the U.S. Postal Service;
      (2)   Courier service, which shall be deemed effective as of the date of
receipt as identified by the courier service;
      (3)   Hand or personal delivery, which shall be effective when delivered
to an adult at the owner's address;
      (4)   Facsimile delivery, which shall be is effective when the facsimile
transmission has been transmitted to the facsimile number provided for that
purpose and the administration has received confirmation of the facsimile
transmission;
      (5)   Electronic mail delivery is effective when the electronic mail has
been sent to the owner's electronic mail address without notice of rejection of
message.
   (c)   It is not a defense to any subsequent enforcement action that the
notice provided by the Administration was not actually delivered to the owner
provided that one of the methods of delivery set forth in §
1484.13(b) was attempted in good faith by the administration but was not
accomplished through no fault of the administration.
(Ord. 25-161, passed 11-24-2025)
§ 1484.13 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATION. The administrative body of the City of Avon Lake.
   APPLICATION. The submission of all information required by this chapter, and
payment of the required fees, for registering a residential premises as new
short-term rental property or to obtain a renewal short-term rental
certificate. For avoidance of doubt, a new short-term rental property shall be
considered a short-term rental property for which the owner of has failed to
maintain a valid or renewable short-term rental registration certificate.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE. Any individual, person, firm, partnership,
corporation or company, other than an owner, acting on behalf of an owner of a
short-term rental property responsible for ensuring compliance with all
provisions of this chapter and registered as the owner's authorized
representative with the administration.
      (1)   For purposes of this chapter, actions taken by an authorized
representative acting on behalf of the owner shall have the same legal force
and effect as if such acts were taken by the owner.
      (2)   No owner shall be absolved of individual liability solely on the
basis that acts were taken by an authorized representative and not the owner.
   HOSTING PLATFORM. Any person or entity in any form, format, or media that,
in exchange for a fee, assists, facilitates, or provides a means through which
an owner may offer residential premises as short-term rental property and
through which a transient guest can arrange use of a short-term rental
property, whether the payment for the use of the short-term rental property is
directly to the owner or to the hosting platform.
   INSPECTION REPORT. The report issued by the department containing the
results of the life safety inspection.
   LIFE SAFETY INSPECTION. inspection performed by the department prior to
issuing or renewing a short-term rental registration certificate, which may
include but is not limited to the following:
      (1)   Check for and test smoke detectors and carbon monoxide detectors;
      (2)   Check for removal of and receptacles for all refuse, garbage and
debris;
      (3)   Check for presence of accessible dry chemical fire extinguishers of
a minimum five- pound ABC class;
      (4)   Confirm that a map denoting emergency evacuation routes is posted
in a clearly conspicuous location.
      (5)   Determine maximum occupancy for overnight transient guests which
shall be limited to:
         A.   Two persons per residential premises plus;
         B.   Two persons per bedroom as designated in compliance with the
Residential Code of Ohio.
   OWNER. An individual, corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, or any other person or entity jointly or in combination) who has
legal title to a residential premises. For purpose of this chapter, an owner
includes anyone possessing a fee simple interest, vendee interest in a land
contract, an estate for life or for years, in the residential premises
including through a trust instrument or other conveyance of real property, or
otherwise entitled to have legal or equitable title to real property registered
in accordance with R.C. §§ 5309.05 or 5309.42.
   RENEWAL SHORT-TERM RENTAL CERTIFICATE. The short-term rental registration
certificate issued to a residential premises that was previously identified as
a short-term rental property if the application is approved prior to the date
of expiration identified on the short-term rental registration certificate.
   RESIDENTIAL PREMISES. Any building; or the part of a building consisting of
a self-contained, residential living space that is used or intended to be used
by one or more persons for overnight accommodations, including any adjacent or
attached structures, grounds, areas, and facilities for the use of such
persons. For purposes of this chapter, a residential premises shall include at
least one room containing a toilet, shower/tub, and sink, a separate area for
preparing and consuming food for the use of the persons using that specific
residential living space, and at least one means of ingress and egress outside
of the building or (in the case of a multi-family dwelling) into the common
area of that building containing the residential living space. For purposes of
this chapter, any residential premises capable of being rented out as separate
living spaces to unrelated persons shall each constitute a separate residential
premises and may not be combined under a single certificate.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL PROPERTY. Any residential premises being utilized or
otherwise made available to a transient guest within the city, if such
residential premises is used by or made available to a transient guest for a
period in excess of a combined period of 30 days in any calendar year. SHORT-
TERM RENTAL PROPERTY does not include any residential premises which is the
primary residence of the owner if such residential premises is not occupied or
made available to a transient guest in excess of a combined period of 30 days
in a calendar year. For purposes of this section, "made available" means each
date the short-term rental property is listed or advertised on a hosting
platform as being available for use or rent by transient guests.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE. The certificate issued with
respect to a short-term rental property evidencing compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
   TRANSIENT GUEST. Each person who, in exchange for money or other financial
compensation, leases, rents, or otherwise occupies residential premises for
fewer than 30 consecutive days.
(Ord. 25-161, passed 11-24-2025)
§ 1484.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Except as otherwise expressly provided for elsewhere under the
Codified Ordinances or the Ohio Revised Code, whoever violates any provision of
this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder or fails to
comply therewith or with any written notice or written order issued thereunder
shall be guilty of a first degree misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not less
than $500 or a maximum imprisonment term of six months or both. Each day that
such violation exists shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
Multiple violations can occur during a single guest stay and may be noticed and
heard in a single action.
   (b)   The imposition of any penalty as provided for in this chapter shall
not preclude the city from instituting an appropriate action or proceeding in a
court of proper jurisdiction to prevent an unlawful use of property, require
repair or maintenance, restrain, correct or abate a violation, prevent the
occupancy of a residential premises, declare a property a nuisance in
accordance with
Chapter 662 of the Codified Ordinances, revoke a short-term rental registration
certificate, or to require compliance with the provisions of this chapter or
other applicable laws, ordinances, rules or regulations.
(Ord. 25-161, passed 11-24-2025)
TITLE EIGHT - Housing
      
Chap. 1490. Exterior Maintenance Code.
CHAPTER 1490: EXTERIOR MAINTENANCE CODE
Section
1490.01 Short title
1490.02 Purposes; interpretation
1490.03 Definitions
1490.04 Applicability; intent; conflicts of laws
1490.05 Responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants
1490.06 Exterior maintenance
1490.07 Appearance of exterior of premises and structures
1490.08 Structural soundness and repair
1490.09 Reconstruction of walls and sidings
1490.10 Infestation
1490.11 Responsibility for compliance
1490.12 Enforcement; authority of Code Administrator; notice of violations;
corrections
1490.13 Interpretation; application of other laws
 
1490.99 Penalty
Editor’s note:
   This chapter, previously a codification of Ordinance 175-95, passed October
23, 1995, was repealed and re-enacted in its entirety by Ordinance 252-00,
passed November 27, 2000.
§ 1490.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Exterior Maintenance
Code for the City of Avon Lake” or just “the Exterior Maintenance Code”.
References throughout this chapter to “this code” mean this Exterior
Maintenance Code.
(Ord. 175-95, passed 10-26-1995; Ord. 252-00, passed 11-27-2000)
§ 1490.02 PURPOSES; INTERPRETATION.
   The purposes of this Exterior Maintenance Code are to protect the public
health, safety and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the
maintenance, appearance and conditions of all residential and nonresidential
premises; to fix certain responsibilities and duties upon owners and operators;
to authorize and establish procedures for the inspection of residential and
nonresidential premises; and to fix penalties for the violations of this code.
This code is hereby declared remedial and essential for the public interest and
it is intended that this code be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes
as stated herein.
(Ord. 175-95, passed 10-26-1995; Ord. 252-00, passed 11-27-2000)
§ 1490.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure on the same lot with and of a nature
customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal structure.
   BUILDING. A structure which is permanently affixed to the land, having one
or more floors and a roof, being bounded either by open spaces or lot lines,
and which is used as a shelter or enclosure for persons, animals and/or
property. This term shall be used synonymously with “structure”, unless
otherwise noted, and shall be construed as if followed by the words “parts or
parts thereof”.
   BUILDING CODE. The Building Code of the city, being Part Fourteen of this
code of ordinances.
   CODE ADMINISTRATOR. The individual designated to administer the Planning and
Zoning Code of the city. Duties of the Code Administrator are as stated in §
1212.05 of this code of ordinances.
   CORD OF FIREWOOD. A unit of quantity for cut fuel wood, equal to 128 cubic
feet in a stack measuring four feet by four feet by eight feet.
   DETERIORATION. The conditions or appearance of a building or part thereof,
characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting or
other evidence of physical decay, neglect or lack of maintenance.
   DEVELOPED AREA. A subdivided land mass where lots comprising 80% of the
linear feet fronting on a street, to a depth of 300 feet from the street right
of way, are occupied with a building or buildings.
   DEVELOPED STREET. A street where lots comprising 80% of the linear feet
fronting on such a street between any two intersecting streets are occupied
with a building or buildings.
   DRIVEWAY. A roadway-like path with a surface of concrete or asphalt for the
egress of vehicles from, and the ingress of vehicles to, a residence or
business (but which is not the parking areas of a business), and from and to
the right of way for which said residence or business is given an address.
Other material may be substituted for concrete or asphalt if approved by
express written permission of the Public Works Director. The minimum width of a
driveway shall be eight feet.
   DWELLING. A structure designed for occupancy as a residence by one or more
families, each living independently in a separate dwelling unit.
   DWELLING UNIT. Rooms providing complete living facilities for one family,
including equipment for cooking or provision for the same, and individual rooms
for living, sleeping and eating.
   EXPOSED TO PUBLIC VIEW. Any premises or any part thereof, or any building or
any part thereof, which may be viewed by the public, or any member thereof,
from a sidewalk, street, alleyway or open air parking lot, or from the area of
any adjoining or neighboring premises normally used as part of the habitable
portion of such premises.
   EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES. Those portions of a building which are exposed to
public view and the open space of any premises outside of any building erected
thereon.
   FIRE CHIEF. The Chief of the Fire Department of the city.
   FIRE HAZARD. Any thing or act which increases or may cause an increase of
the hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree than that customarily
recognized as normal by persons in the public service of preventing,
suppressing or extinguishing fire, or which may obstruct, delay or hinder or
may become the cause of obstruction, a delay or a hindrance to the prevention,
suppression or extinguishment of fire, or any other fire hazard defined in this
code of ordinances.
   FRONT YARD. As pertaining to corner lots, includes lots located on any
corner or abutting on two or more thoroughfares requiring a front yard setback
pursuant to applicable provisions of the Zoning Code. As it applies to other
lots, the front yard is that part of the yard which extends from the front of
the building to the city right-of-way, which right-of-way is that to which the
property is addressed.
   GARBAGE. Putrescible, animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   IMMEDIATE NEIGHBORHOOD. An area separated by no appreciable space and
specifically denoting a limited number of properties in a very close space
relationship to each other, such as properties located within the same block.
   INFESTATION. The presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests on the
premises which constitute a health hazard.
   MIXED OCCUPANCY. Any building containing one or more dwelling units or
rooming units and also having a portion thereof devoted to nondwelling units.
   NATURALLY WOODED AREA. An area of a yard which has been or is trying to be
returned to its natural state as part of a landscaping plan to be approved by
the Code Administrator.
   NUISANCE. Means and includes:
      (1)   Any public nuisance known in law or as provided by the statutes of
the state or the ordinances of the city;
      (2)   Any condition dangerous to human life or detrimental to the health
of persons on or near a premises where the condition exists and where the
condition is perilous by active and negligent operation thereof;
      (3)   Any unsanitary condition, or anything offensive to the senses or
dangerous to health, in violation of this Exterior Maintenance Code; and
      (4)   Fire hazards.
   OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a building,
structure, dwelling or premises, or part thereof, whether with or without the
knowledge and consent of the owner.
   OWNER. The owner or owners of the premises, including the holder of the
title thereto, subject to contract or purchase, a trustee, a vendee in
possession, a mortgagee or receiver in possession, a lessee or joint lessees of
the whole thereof, a tenant, an agent or any other person, firm, corporation or
fiduciary directly in control of the premises.
   PREMISES. A lot, plat, parcel of land or reclaimed land, including the
building or structures thereon.
   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE OFFICER. The Code Administrator of the city.
   PUTRESCIBLE. Objects that have the ability to decompose or rot.
   REFUSE. All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, street
cleaning, dead animals and solid market and industrial wastes.
   REGISTERED MAIL. Registered or certified mail.
   ROOMER. A person other than a member of the family, as defined in the Zoning
Code, who rents one or more rooms in the dwelling from the resident family.
   ROOMER UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit
other than a dwelling unit, which is rented or available for rent for sleeping
purposes, with or without cooking facilities.
   RUBBISH. Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, tin cans, yard clippings,
leaves, wood, glass, crockery and similar materials.
   SIDE YARD. That portion of any yard which is not included in a front yard
and which extends parallel from the back building line in relation to the
right-of-way upon which the property abuts and goes forward to the nearest
front building line to the abutting right-of-way.
   STORED. Left on premises and reserved for future, as opposed to present,
use, not to exceed 30 days.
   STRUCTURE. A combination of any material, whether fixed or portable, forming
a construction.
   UNLICENSED MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle, as defined in the Traffic Code,
for which a valid license plate can be, but has not been, issued and displayed
on such vehicle.
   VEHICLE. A device, including a motorized bicycle, in, upon or by which any
person or property may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway, except
motorized wheelchairs and devices moved by human power, such as bicycles. (For
the purposes of this chapter only, VEHICLE does not include “vehicular
recreational equipment,” as defined in the definition below.)
   VEHICULAR RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT. All campers, travel trailers, mobile or
motor homes, converted buses, boats, trailers, whether for the transportation
of portable tents, boats or other equipment or materials, and stock cars, none
of which may exceed 31 feet in length.
   WEATHERING. Deterioration, decay or damage caused by exposure to the
elements.
   YARD WASTE. Grass, leaves, branches, brush, organic natural matter and
organic vegetative matter, but does not include animal waste or food waste,
including meat and dairy products.
(Ord. 175-95, passed 10-26-1995; Ord. 252-00, passed 11-27-2000; Ord. 26-2011,
passed 4-11-2011; Ord. 43-2014, passed 4-14-2014)
§ 1490.04 APPLICABILITY; INTENT; CONFLICTS OF LAWS.
   (a)   Generally. Owners or operators of every residential and nonresidential
building in the city, and of the premises on which they are situated, used or
intended to be used for any use permitted by the Zoning Code, shall comply with
the provisions of this Exterior Maintenance Code, whether or not such building
has been constructed, altered or repaired before or after the enactment of this
Code and irrespective of any permits or licenses which have been issued for the
use or occupancy of the building, or for the installation or repair of
equipment, or for the initial and continued occupancy and use of all such
buildings. This code does not replace or modify standards otherwise established
for the construction, repair, alteration or use of the building, except as
provided in division (b) of this section. Where there is mixed occupancy, the
residential or nonresidential use therein shall be nevertheless regulated by
and subject to the provisions of this code.
   (b)   Conflict of laws. In any case where the provisions of this code impose
a higher standard than that which is set forth in any other ordinance of the
city or the laws of the state, the standard set forth herein shall prevail. If
the provisions of this code impose a lower standard, then the higher standard
set forth in any other ordinance or law shall prevail.
   (c)   Issuance and renewal of other permits and licenses. After the date of
enactment hereof, all licenses and permits shall be issued upon compliance with
this code as well as compliance with the ordinances under which such licenses
and permits are granted.
   (d)   Enforcement of and compliance with other ordinances. No license or
permit or other certification of compliance with this code shall constitute a
defense against any violation of any other ordinance of the city applicable to
any structure or premises, nor shall any provision herein relieve any owner,
operator or occupant from the duty of complying with any such other provision,
nor any official of the city from enforcing any such other provision.
   (e)   Exceptions. Owners of vacant property or lots are excused from
compliance with any provision of this code relating to landscaping, unless such
vacant property or lots are located on a developed street or in a developed
area.
(Ord. 175-95, passed 10-26-1995; Ord. 252-00, passed 11-27-2000)
§ 1490.05 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS, OPERATORS AND OCCUPANTS.
   (a)   Owners and operators shall have all the duties and responsibilities
prescribed in this Exterior Maintenance Code, and no owner or operator shall be
relieved from any such duty or responsibility, nor be entitled to defend
against any charge of violation thereof, by reason of the fact that the
occupant is also responsible therefor and in violation thereof.
   (b)   Unless expressly provided to the contrary in this code, the respective
obligations and responsibilities of the owner and operator on one hand, and the
occupant on the other, shall not be altered or affected by an agreement or
contract by and between any of the aforesaid, or between them and other
parties.
(Ord. 175-95, passed 10-26-1995; Ord. 252-00, passed 11-27-2000)
§ 1490.06 EXTERIOR MAINTENANCE.
   The premises and the exterior of all structures thereon shall be kept free
of all nuisances and any hazards to the safety of occupants, pedestrians and
other persons utilizing the premises, and free of unsanitary conditions. All
such nuisances and hazards and unsanitary conditions shall be promptly removed
and abated by the owner or operator. It shall be the duty of the owner or
operator to keep the premises free of all nuisances, unsanitary conditions and
hazards which include, but are not limited to, the following:
   (a)   Refuse. Including, but not limited to, an accumulation of brush,
rubbish, garbage, trash, refuse, broken glass, automobile parts, stumps and
roots which may create a health, accident or fire hazard, or which is a public
nuisance, or which constitutes a blighting or deteriorating influence on the
neighborhood;
   (b)   Natural growth. Dead trees and limbs or other natural growth which, by
reason of rotting, diseased or deteriorating conditions or damage, constitutes
a hazard to persons in the vicinity thereof as set forth in Chapter 1018 of
this code of ordinances;
   (c)   Overhangings. Loose and overhanging objects, both human-made and
natural, which, by reason of location above ground level, constitute a danger
of falling on persons in the vicinity thereof;
   (d)   Sources of infestations. Any premises that are permitted to become
infested with vermin or rodents are hereby declared to be a nuisance and
unlawful. No owner, occupant or person in charge or control of any premises
shall cause or knowingly permit such premises to become or to remain infested
with vermin or rodents;
   (e)   Foundation walls. Foundation walls shall be kept structurally sound,
free from defects and damage, and capable of bearing imposed loads safely;
   (f)   Chimneys and all flue and vent attachments thereto. Chimneys and all
flue and vent attachments thereto shall be maintained structurally sound, free
from defects and so maintained as to capably perform at all times the functions
for which they were designed, and the same shall be capable of withstanding, if
necessary, the action of flue gases;
   (g)   Firewood. Front yards shall be kept free, and storage shall be
prohibited, of all firewood, brush, logs or any other material intended to be
used in fireplaces or other permitted burning facilities. Storage of such
materials shall be permitted only in side or rear yards and under the following
conditions:
      (1)   The firewood shall be neatly stacked in an orderly manner a minimum
of four inches above the surrounding grade and no higher than six feet;
      (2)   It shall be cut firewood not to exceed 30 inches (length) per
piece;
      (3)   It shall be stored at least five feet from the property line;
      (4)   It shall be stored in such a manner as not to constitute a fire
hazard; and
      (5)   It shall comply with the requirement of O.A.C. 901:5-56.
   (h)   Compost piles. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed or
interpreted so as to prevent persons from creating or maintaining a compost
pile or piles for yard waste, provided that such pile or piles are not stored
in quantities or locations prohibited by any provision of this chapter or by
any ordinance of the city or law of the state. All compost piles:
      (1)   Shall not be visible from the public right-of-way;
      (2)   Shall not constitute a public nuisance or a nuisance to abutting
and adjoining properties by providing a breeding place or attraction for, or by
becoming infested with, vermin, rodents or insects, or emit a smell or odor
which annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities or which
endangers or injures real or personal property;
      (3)   Shall not create any health or fire hazard;
      (4)   Shall not be created or maintained in any front or side yard or
located closer than five feet from any side or rear lot line;
      (5)   Shall be permitted if the compost pile or piles are enclosed by a
barrier on all sides which shall not exceed four feet in height;
      (6)   Shall not be in excess of 1% of the square footage of the lot or 75
square feet, whichever is less;
      (7)   Shall not impede any natural watercourse or drainage from any
property; and
      (8)   May contain any organic yard waste or vegetable waste. Meat
products, dairy products, food oils and animal wastes are prohibited.
(Ord. 175-95, passed 10-26-1995; Ord. 252-00, passed 11-27-2000; Ord. 118-08,
passed 7-14-2008; Ord. 26-2011, passed 4-11-2011; Ord. 23-84, passed 5-9-2023)
§ 1490.07 APPEARANCE OF EXTERIOR OF PREMISES AND STRUCTURES.
   (a)   Residential. The exterior of the premises, the exterior of dwelling
structures and the condition of accessory structures shall be maintained so
that the appearance of the premises and all buildings thereon shall reflect a
level of maintenance in keeping with the residential standards of the immediate
neighborhood so that the appearance of the premises and structures shall not
constitute a blighting factor for adjoining property owners nor an element
leading to the progressive deterioration and downgrading of the immediate
neighborhood with the accompanying diminution of property values, including the
following.
      (1)   Storage of commercial and industrial materials and equipment. There
shall not be stored for more than 30 days equipment and materials relating to
commercial or industrial uses, unless permitted under the Zoning Code for the
premises.
      (2)   Landscaping. Premises shall be maintained. Lawns, hedges and bushes
shall be kept from becoming overgrown and unsightly (i.e., covering windows,
choking out other plants, untrimmed and the like) where exposed to public view
and where the same constitute a blighting factor depreciating adjoining
property and impairing the good residential character of the immediate
neighborhood. Grass shall not be let to grow higher than eight inches. For the
purposes of grass height only, compliance shall be within five days of notice
given by the Code Administrator. The height of grass does not apply to a
naturally wooded area.
      (3)   Signs. All signs permitted by reason of other regulations or as a
lawful nonconforming use shall be maintained in good repair, and printed
matter, pictures or illustrations contained thereon shall be completely
maintained or, when no longer in use, completely removed within six months.
      (4)   General maintenance. The exterior of every structure or accessory
structure, including fences, shall be maintained in good repair, and all
surfaces thereon shall be kept painted where necessary for the purpose of
preservation and appearance, or surface-coated with a protective coating or
treated to prevent rot and decay. The same shall be maintained free of broken
windows, crumbling stone or brick, peeling paint or other condition reflective
of deterioration or inadequate maintenance to the end that the property itself
may be preserved, safety and fire hazards eliminated and adjoining properties
and the immediate neighborhood protected from blighting influences.
      (5)   Storage of vehicles. All vehicles which are in a disabled condition
or which do not carry a current year’s license plate and registration where
required by law shall be stored in a completely enclosed, authorized or
permitted building on such lot or premises. As used in this section, “disabled”
means a condition in which the vehicle cannot be operated on public streets
under its own power in compliance with statutory or ordinance requirements.
      (6)   Street numbers. On every building to which a street number has been
assigned, such number shall be displayed in a size and location such that the
number will be readily observable and readable from the public right-of-way
which abuts the front yard, as defined in §
1490.03.
      (7)   Vehicle parking. All vehicles shall be properly parked in the
driveway, garage or right-of- way.
      (8)   Vehicular recreational equipment parking. There will be no parking
of vehicular recreational equipment in front or side yards, unless it is parked
on the driveway or in the garage. Vehicular recreational equipment may be
parked in the rear yard.
   (b)   Nonresidential. The exterior of the premises and the condition of
accessory structures shall be maintained so that the appearance of the premises
and all buildings thereon shall reflect a level of maintenance in keeping with
the standards of the immediate neighborhood so that the appearance of the
premises and structures shall not constitute a blighting factor for adjoining
property owners nor an element leading to the progressive deterioration and
downgrading of the immediate neighborhood with the accompanying diminution of
property values, including the following.
      (1)   Landscaping. Premises shall be maintained. Lawns, hedges and bushes
shall be kept from becoming overgrown and unsightly (i.e., covering windows,
choking out other plants, untrimmed and the like) where exposed to public view
and where the same constitute a blighting factor depreciating adjoining
property. Grass shall not be let to grow higher than eight inches. For the
purposes of grass height only, compliance shall be within five days of notice
given by the Code Administrator. The height of grass does not apply to a
naturally wooded area.
      (2)   Signs and billboards. All permanent signs and billboards exposed to
public view that are permitted by reason of other regulations or as a lawful
nonconforming use shall be maintained in good repair. Signs which have
weathered or faded, or those upon which the paint has peeled or cracked, shall,
with their supporting members, be removed forthwith or put into a good state of
repair. All nonoperative or broken electrical signs shall be repaired or shall,
with their supporting members, be removed forthwith.
      (3)   Store fronts. All store fronts shall be kept in good repair,
painted where required, and not constitute a safety hazard or nuisance. In the
event repairs to a store front become necessary, such repairs shall be made
with the same or similar materials used in the construction of the store front
in such a manner as to permanently repair the damaged area or areas. Any
cornice visible above a store front shall be kept painted, where required, and
in good repair.
      (4)   Awnings and marquees. Any awning or marquee and its accompanying
structural members which extend over any street, sidewalk or other portion of
any premises shall be maintained in good repair and shall not constitute a
nuisance or safety hazard. In the event such an awning or marquee is not
properly maintained in accordance with this division (b)(4), it shall, together
with its supporting members, be removed forthwith. In the event such awnings or
marquees are made of cloth, plastic or similar materials, such cloth and
plastic, where exposed to public view, shall be maintained in good condition
and shall not show evidence of weathering, discoloration, ripping, tearing or
other holes. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize an encroachment on
streets, sidewalks or other parts of the public domain.
      (5)   Storage of vehicles. All vehicles which are junk vehicles or which
do not carry a current year’s license plate and registration where required by
law shall be stored in a completely enclosed, authorized or permitted building
on a lot or premises, except as an otherwise permitted use in the district
where such a vehicle is located.
      (6)   Vehicle parking. All vehicles shall be properly parked in the
driveway, garage or right-of- way.
(Ord. 175-95, passed 10-26-1995; Ord. 252-00, passed 11-27-2000; Ord. 117-08,
passed 7-14-2009; Ord. 26-2011, passed 4-11-2011)
§ 1490.08 STRUCTURAL SOUNDNESS AND REPAIR.
   (a)   Residential. Every dwelling and accessory structure and every part
thereof shall be kept structurally sound and in a state of good repair to avoid
safety, health or fire hazards, including the following.
      (1)   Painting and other protective coating. All exposed surfaces
susceptible to decay shall be kept at all times painted or otherwise provided
with a protective coating sufficient to prevent deterioration and rot.
      (2)   Exterior walls, sidings and roofs. Exterior walls, sidings and
roofs shall be kept structurally sound, in good repair and free from unsafe
defects. Damaged materials shall be repaired or replaced. Places showing signs
of substantial rot, deterioration or excessive corrosion shall be restored and
protected.
   (b)   Nonresidential. The exterior of every structure or accessory
structure, including fences, signs and store fronts, shall be kept painted
where necessary for purposes of preservation and appearance, surface- coated
with a protective coating or treated to prevent rot and decay. All surfaces
shall be maintained free of broken windows, crumbling stone or brick, peeling
paint or other condition reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance
to the end that the property itself may be preserved, safety and fire hazards
eliminated, and adjoining properties and the immediate neighborhood protected
from blighting influences.
(Ord. 175-95, passed 10-26-1995; Ord. 252-00, passed 11-27-2000)
§ 1490.09 RECONSTRUCTION OF WALLS AND SIDINGS.
   All reconstruction of walls and sidings shall be of standard quality and
appearance commensurate with the character of the properties on the same block
and on both sides of the street on which the premises front, such that the
materials used will not be of a kind that, by their appearance under prevailing
appraisal practices and standards, will depreciate the value of neighboring and
adjoining premises as aforesaid.
(Ord. 175-95, passed 10-26-1995; Ord. 252-00, passed 11-27-2000)
§ 1490.10 INFESTATION.
   All parts of all premises shall be maintained so as to prevent infestation.
(Ord. 175-95, passed 10-26-1995; Ord. 252-00, passed 11-27-2000)
§ 1490.11 RESPONSIBILITY FOR COMPLIANCE.
   The owner, agent, operator, roomer, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property, and as recorded in the official records of
the state, county or city as holding title to the property, including the
guardian of the estate of such person, if ordered to take possession or manage
the real property by a court, shall be responsible for compliance with all
provisions of this chapter, except where the responsibility therefor is
specifically placed elsewhere.
(Ord. 175-95, passed 10-26-1995; Ord. 252-00, passed 11-27-2000)
§ 1490.12 ENFORCEMENT; AUTHORITY OF CODE ADMINISTRATOR; NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS;
CORRECTIONS.
   (a)   Property Maintenance Officer. The Code Administrator shall be the
Property Maintenance Officer and shall examine or cause to be examined any
property, building, structure or portion thereof reported to be in violation of
this chapter, and if the same is found to be in violation of this chapter, the
Code Administrator shall give to the owner of such property, building,
structure or portion thereof written notice of such violation.
   (b)   Contents of notice. The notice shall include:
      (1)   The address and/or a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification;
      (2)   A statement of the violation(s);
      (3)   A correction order allowing a reasonable amount of time that shall
be not less than 24 hours or more than six months* as determined by the Code
Administrator, for the actions, repairs and improvements required to bring the
property into compliance with the provisions of this chapter; and
      (4)   A statement that a citation will be issued for not complying with
the notice.
   *   The Code Administrator may, for good cause shown, extend the time period
for bringing the property into compliance for a period not to exceed one year
from the date of the issuance of the notice of violation.
   (c)   Service of notice. Notice may be served personally or by mail with
postage prepaid, addressed, to the last known address of the owner. Where it is
ascertained that the owner does not reside on the premises, the last known
address shall be the address of the owner as shown in the office of the Lorain
County Auditor. If the last known address of the owner cannot be ascertained,
the notice may be posted in a conspicuous manner on the property, building,
structure, or portion thereof. Date of service of the notice shall be
determined (where service is by mail) as the day following the day of mailing
for notices to addresses within the city and as of the fourth day after the day
of mailing for notices to addresses outside the city. Where the day of service
would fall upon a Sunday or other day when mail is not ordinarily delivered,
then the day of service shall be the next regular delivery day.
(Ord. 175-95, passed 10-26-1995; Ord. 252-00, passed 11-27-2000; Ord. 130-08,
passed 9-8-2008)
§ 1490.13 INTERPRETATION; APPLICATION OF OTHER LAWS.
   This chapter is to be read in conjunction with
Chapter 660 of this code of ordinances and the other provisions of this
Building and Housing Code.
(Ord. 175-95, passed 10-26-1995; Ord. 252-00, passed 11-27-2000)
§ 1490.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor for a first offense and shall be fined not more than $150. For a
second or subsequent offense, such person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
third degree and shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than
60 days, or both.
(Ord. 175-95, passed 10-26-1995; Ord. 252-00, passed 11-27-2000; Ord. 26-2011,
passed 4-11-2011)
PART SIXTEEN - FIRE PREVENTION CODE
      
Chap. 1608. Ohio Fire Code.
CHAPTER 1608: OHIO FIRE CODE
Section
1608.01 Current edition adopted
1608.02 Purpose and application
1608.03 Establishment and duties of the Bureau of Fire Prevention
1608.04 Inspections and right of entry
1608.05 Fire hydrants
1608.06 Order for abatement, remedy or removal
1608.07 Permits and fees
1608.08 Enforcement
1608.09 Compliance
1608.10 Conflict of laws
1608.11 Submission of records
1608.99 Penalty
§ 1608.01 CURRENT EDITION ADOPTED.
   (a)   Pursuant to R.C. § 731.231, the following code is hereby adopted by
and for the city:
   The most current edition of the Ohio Fire Code (OFC) as adopted by the State
of Ohio, Department of Commerce, Division of State Fire Marshal, and as
published in O.A.C. 1301:7, is incorporated as if fully rewritten.
   (b)   The Ohio Fire Code adopted by this section, shall hereafter be
referred to as the “Avon Lake Fire Code”.
(Ord. 176-95, passed 10-23-1995; Ord. 193-98, passed 10-26-1998; Ord. 8-04,
passed 1-12-2004; Ord. 66-08, passed 5-12-2008)
§ 1608.02 PURPOSE AND APPLICATION.
   (a)   The purpose of the Avon Lake Fire Code as adopted herein is to
prescribe minimum standards and regulations governing conditions hazardous to
life and property from fire or explosion.
   (b)   The Fire Code as adopted herein applies to the use of all lands and
properties within the City of Avon Lake.
(Ord. 66-08, passed 5-12-2008)
§ 1608.03 ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES OF THE BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION.
   (a)   The Bureau of Fire Prevention in the Avon Lake Fire Department is
hereby established, and shall be operated under the supervision of the Fire
Chief.
   (b)   The person in charge of the Bureau shall be an Fire Marshal in the
Avon Lake Fire Department and a State of Ohio Fire Safety Inspector. He or she
shall bear the title of Fire Marshal.
   (c)   No person shall serve as a Fire Safety Inspector unless he or she has
received a certificate issued by the State of Ohio evidencing his or her
satisfactory completion of a fire safety inspection training program. Upon such
completion and certification, the individual shall be a State of Ohio Fire
Safety Inspector.
   (d)   The Fire Chief may detail members of the Fire Department as Fire
Safety Inspectors to assist personnel in the Fire Prevention Bureau and such
members may, under the direction of the Fire Chief or Fire Prevention Officer,
enforce the Fire Code. Such members shall be State of Ohio Fire Safety
Inspectors.
   (e)   It is the duty of the Bureau of Fire Prevention to enforce the City of
Avon Lake Fire Code and all laws and ordinances of the city relating to fire
hazards, fire prevention and fire protection.
   (f)   Personnel assigned to the Fire Prevention Bureau shall perform such
other duties as herein required, and as may be assigned by the Fire Chief.
(Ord. 66-08, passed 5-12-2008; Ord. 83-2018, passed 5-14-2018)
§ 1608.04 INSPECTIONS AND RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Fire Chief and/or State of Ohio Fire Safety Inspectors are authorized to
enter in and upon any premises, building or structure within the corporate
limits of the city for the purpose of inspecting same to determine if any
condition exists that constitutes a fire hazard, or which is in violation of
the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city relating to fire hazards,
fire prevention, and fire protection. These authorized inspections shall be
made at reasonable times. In the event entry is denied to authorized personnel,
the Law Director is authorized to proceed before a court of proper jurisdiction
for an order to gain entry for inspection purposes.
(Ord. 66-08, passed 5-12-2008)
§ 1608.05 FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (a)   Spacing and location. Spacing and location of fire hydrants shall be
as follows:
      (1)   Placed at approximately 350-foot intervals;
      (2)   As close to an intersection as possible with the intermediate fire
hydrants properly spaced along the street to meet the distance requirement set
forth in division (a)(1) of this section; and
      (3)   Not farther than approximately 350 feet from any part of a
commercial, industrial, mercantile, educational, institutional, assembly, hotel
or motel occupancy use group, as well as multi- family dwellings, with the
exception of two- and three-family residences.
   (b)   General regulations.
      (1)   No fire hydrant supply line shall be less than six inches in
diameter.
      (2)   Where applicable, supply lines shall be looped, not dead-ended.
      (3)   All costs for the installation of fire mains, fire hydrants and
appurtenances are the responsibility of the property owner or developer.
      (4)   All costs associated with the repair and maintenance required for
hydrants on private property shall be the responsibility of the owner of such
property.
      (5)   All installations shall conform to standards and requirements of
the Fire Department and Avon Lake Regional Water.
   (c)   Specified distances. The distances specified in division (a)(1) and
(a)(3) above shall be measured along the routes of travel of fire apparatus, or
along the route that the fire hose would be laid and shall be as close to the
350-foot rule as practical as determined by the Fire Chief or his or her
representative.
(Ord. 66-08, passed 5-12-2008)
§ 1608.06 ORDER FOR ABATEMENT, REMEDY OR REMOVAL.
   When the Fire Chief or Fire Safety Inspector, upon examination or
inspection, finds conditions upon the premises, building or structure that
constitutes a violation of any laws or ordinances of the city relating to fire
prevention, or fire protection; or in his or her opinion constitutes a fire
hazard or a condition detrimental to the fire safety of the city, he or she
shall order the condition abated, remedied or removed. Such orders shall be in
writing directed to the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises, building or
structure, or to the person in control of the articles, materials, goods, wares
or merchandise, or to the owner thereof, as the circumstances may require. The
order shall state in clear and concise language the condition complained of,
and shall set forth steps to be taken to eliminate the hazardous condition(s)
and the time period within which said condition(s) shall be remedied. The time
period for compliance shall be related to the nature of the hazardous condition
(s).
(Ord. 66-08, passed 5-12-2008)
§ 1608.07 PERMITS AND FEES.
   All permits specified in the Avon Lake Fire Code, as adopted in §
1608.01 may be issued upon payment to the city, the fee set forth in
Chapter 208 (General Fee Schedule), provided that the permit application is
approved by the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
(Ord. 66-08, passed 5-12-2008)
§ 1608.08 ENFORCEMENT.
   Upon request of the Fire Chief or a State of Ohio Fire Safety Inspector, the
Law Director shall institute and prosecute any necessary action or proceeding
to enforce this chapter.
(Ord. 66-08, passed 5-12-2008)
§ 1608.09 COMPLIANCE.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly violate any provision of the Avon Lake Fire
Code as adopted herein or any order pursuant thereto.
   (b)   No person shall fail to comply with the fire prevention measures or
fire protection activities as prescribed in the Avon Lake Fire Code, or fail to
obtain a permit or license for the various uses or activities as required by
this code, or fail to comply with the city application and plan submission and
processing requirements including payment of designated fees.
(Ord. 66-08, passed 5-12-2008)
§ 1608.10 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   In all cases of conflict between the Avon Lake Fire Code, as adopted in §
1608.01, and any other municipal ordinance or technical code adopted thereby,
the stricter standard or code shall control, except in the case of the Ohio
Building Code, which shall control in any case, except as provided in § 1409.10
(a).
(Ord. 66-08, passed 5-12-2008)
§ 1608.11 SUBMISSION OF RECORDS.
   Record of all tests, inspections and maintenance required by the Avon Lake
Fire Code or other OFC recognized standards required under this chapter shall
be submitted to the Avon Lake Fire Department by the person or entity
performing such tests, inspections or maintenance in a manner prescribed by the
Fire Chief.
(Ord. 84-2018, passed 5-14-2018)
§ 1608.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
Fire Code, or violates or fails to comply with any order made hereunder, or
builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans
submitted and approved by the city or in violation of a permit issued
hereunder, or fails to comply with such an order or permit as affirmed or
modified by a court of proper jurisdiction after appeal, shall, severally for
each and every violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than $500 or
imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both.
   (b)   The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the
violation or permit it to continue, and all persons are required to abate,
remedy or remove such violations or defects within a time period based on the
seriousness of the hazard(s). When not otherwise specified, each ten-day period
beyond the date of remedy that the prohibited condition(s) are maintained shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (c)   The application of the penalty provided for in division (a) of this
section shall not be held to prevent or preclude the enforced abatement, remedy
or, removal of the hazardous conditions through other legal measures or
actions.
(Ord. 66-08, passed 5-12-2008)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   The code of ordinances of Avon Lake comprises all ordinances and resolutions
of a general and permanent nature. The provisions of such general and permanent
ordinances and resolutions are set forth in full in the code of ordinances.
   References must be made frequently to many special ordinances and
resolutions, particularly those relating to property, such as easements,
vacations, dedications, plat approvals, purchases, leases, appropriations and
the like. In the following Tables A through J, all such ordinances and
resolutions are listed. These Tables list ordinances and resolutions
chronologically by subject and include both a citation to and a brief
description of each ordinance and resolution.
   Table
      
Table A.   Franchises
      
Table B.   Easements
      
Table C.   Vacating of Streets and Alleys
      
Table D.   Dedication and Plat Approval
      
Table E.   Purchase of Property for Municipal Use
      
Table F.   Lease of Property for Municipal Use
      
Table G.   Appropriation of Property
      
Table H.   Zoning Map Changes
      
Table I .   Change of Name of Streets
      
Table J.   Historic Landmarks
TABLE A: FRANCHISES
 
Ord./
Res.  Date Description
No.
153-  12-
66    27-  Fixing rates of Columbia Gas of Ohio, Inc. for natural gas for three years.
      1966
      3-   To the Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co., for street lighting service for
19-67 13-  five years.
      1967
      3-   Repeals Ord. 153-66. Fixing rates of Columbia Gas of Ohio, Inc. for natural
48-70 23-  gas for three years.
      1970
104-  11-
71    22-  To Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co., for street lighting.
      1971
58-73 4-9- Repeals Ord. 48-70. Fixing price of natural gas from Columbia Gas of Ohio,
      1973 Inc. for three years.
      5-   Repeals Ord. 58-73. Fixing price of natural gas from Columbia Gas of Ohio,
67-76 24-  Inc., for four years.
      1976
149-  11-
76    8-   Fixing price of natural gas from Columbia Gas of Ohio, Inc., for two years.
      1976
      3-
39-77 28-  Amends Ord. 104-71.
      1977
212-  12-  To the Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co., for street lighting service for
78    11-  nine years.
      1978
      6-   Fixing price of natural gas from Columbia Gas of Ohio, Inc., through Dec. 31,
68-79 11-  1980.
      1979
      9-
89-81 28-  Fixing price of natural gas from Columbia Gas of Ohio, Inc., for two years.
      1981
101-  10-  To Continental Cablevision of Northeast Ohio, Inc., to construct, operate and
81    26-  maintain a cable television system in the city for 12 years.
      1981
113-  8-   Fixing price of natural gas from Columbia Gas of Ohio, Inc., through Nov. 15,
84    27-  1986.
      1984
108-  6-9- Amends Ord. 101-81.
86    1986
Res.  6-9-
109-  1986 Approves rate increase for cable television service.
86
162-  11-
93    22-  Amends Ord. 101-81.
      1993
      3-   To Continental Cablevision of Ohio, Inc., a renewal franchise to operate and
62-94 28-  maintain a cable communications system for 15 years.
      1994
      3-   Authorizes the Mayor to execute a letter of agreement with Continental
63-94 28-  Cablevision of Ohio, Inc., relating to franchise renewal capital grants.
      1994
      7-   Approves rate increase for basic cable television services from Continental
123-  24-  Cablevision of Ohio, Inc., and orders that charges for additional cable
95    1995 outlets in subscribers’ homes cease and that grantee refund such charges to
           subscribers.
Res.  8-   Approves merger between Continental Cablevision, Inc., and U.S. West, Inc.,
151-  26-  and transfer of control of cable television franchise to U.S. West, Inc.
96    1996
Res.  6-   Approves a change in control of the cable franchise to AT&T Comcast
146-  24-  Corporation.
02    2002
      2-
53-03 24-  Approves basic tier cable television rate.
      2003
Res.  9-   Approves change in control of the Avon Lake cable franchise from Comcast
156-  26-  Corporation to Time-Warner.
05    2005
68-   5-
2006  22-  Amending Res. 156-2005.
      2006
 
TABLE B: EASEMENTS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date       Description
Res. 76       1-12-1925  To Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co., to cross Lake
                         Road with wires.
Res. 78       1-12-1925  To Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co., to construct a
                         breakwater.
Res. 77       1-14-1925  To Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co., to cross Lake
                         Road with a bridge.
5-59          1-26-1959  To city, for water line over property of Selma Musall.
5-60          1-11-1960  To city, for sewers on property of K.H. Bickel.
56-60         6-27-1960  To city, for sewer lines in Rosewood Drive.
95-60         10-24-1960 To city, for sewer and water lines in Shopping Center
                         area.
110-60        11-28-1960 To city, for sewers in property of L.A. and K.Y.
                         Andersen.
88-61         9-11-1961  To city, for sidewalks along Electric Boulevard from
                         First Congregational Church.
89-61         9-11-1961  To city, for sidewalks along Electric Boulevard from
                         A.A. Bossell.
90-61         9-11-1961  To city, for sidewalks along Electric Boulevard from
                         Bishop Hoban.
91-64         6-1-1964   Accepting easement over Private Drive at 33656 Lake
                         Road for sanitary sewer construction.
163-64        11-23-1964 Accepting an easement from R.B. Kubach for walk and
                         roadway purposes.
164-64        11-23-1964 Accepting an easement from E.A. Look, trustee, for
                         walk and roadway purposes.
169-64        12-14-1964 Accepting an easement from M.J. and A. Madercic for
                         walk and roadway purposes.
13-65         2-8-1965   Accepting an easement from C. and V. Lott for roadway
                         purposes.
32-65         4-12-1965  Accepting an easement from Schenck Orchard Co. for
                         public right-of-way purposes near 31925 Walker Road.
72-65         7-26-1965  Accepting an easement from V. and A. LaForgia on north
                         side of Walker Road for right-of-way purposes.
73-65         7-26-1965  Accepting an easement from E. and M. Maklebust near
                         33455 Lake Road for right-of-way purposes.
83-66         6-13-1966  Accepting an easement from Ceico Co. for sanitary
                         sewer.
                         Granting an easement to Cleveland Electric
84-66         6-13-1966  Illuminating Co. for relocation of railroad track
                         embankment and location of conveyor across Electric
                         Boulevard.
20-67         3-27-1967  Granting an easement to Cleveland Electric
                         Illuminating Co. for constructing high lines.
93-68         9-23-1968  Accepting an easement from B. Price for water
                         distribution system improvements.
9-69          1-27-1969  Accepting an easement from Ceico Co. for water
                         distribution system improvements.
32-71         2-22-1971  Authorizes agreements for drainage rights-of-way for
                         relocation of Walker Road ditch.
24-72         1-24-1972  Accepting an easement from Gra-Gull Owners Assn. for
                         storm sewer construction and maintenance.
102-72        7-10-1972  Accepting an easement on Curtis Drive for sidewalk
                         purposes.
65-73         4-9-1973   Acquisition of construction easements for relocation
                         of portions of Heider Ditch on Walker Road.
172-73        10-8-1973  Accepting an easement from Avon Lake Shore, Inc. for
                         storm sewer drainage.
                         Accepting easements from S.F. and M.L. Porter and W.J.
47-75         6-23-1975  and M.E. Tomanek for construction of sidewalks on Lear
                         Road.
50-75         6-23-1975  To Norfolk and Western Rwy. for continuing the use of
                         Moore Road for a railroad siding.
                         Accepting an easement from A.K. and H.M. Barschow for
60-76         4-26-1976  storm drainage purposes (Coveland Drive Lake Outlet
                         for Beck Road drainage area).
61-76         4-26-1976  Accepting easements for installation of a water main
                         for Southern Lorain County Water Authority.
                         Accepting an easement and license for installation of
66-76         5-10-1976  a water main for Southern Lorain County Water
                         Authority.
89-76         6-14-1976  Accepting an easement and license for installation of
                         a water main for Rural Lorain County Water Authority.
                         Accepting easements in Landings Subdivisions Nos. 1
114-77        9-12-1977  and 2 for water line, roadway and sanitary sewer
                         purposes.
                         Authorizing purchase of easements from W. and M.
155-78        7-22-1978  Mitchell for drainage and driveway purposes in
                         connection with improvements to the Hill Ditch in the
                         area south of Walker Road to Weber Road.
                         Authorizing purchase of easements for a storm sewer in
156-78        7-22-1978  the Western Avon Lake Industrial Storm and Drainage
                         Improvement District.
                         Accepting an easement for public passageway purposes
162-78        8-28-1978  and for drainage and utilities in the Heider Ditch
                         Recreation Drainage area.
                         Accepting an easement from A. Bersinger for
37-81         4-13-1981  construction of a culvert headwall and sidewalk on
                         Electric Boulevard.
                         Accepting an easement from T. and C. Thomas for
38-81         4-13-1981  construction of a culvert headwall and sidewalk on
                         Electric Boulevard.
                         Accepting a 25-foot ditch easement from D.H. Powers,
40-81         4-27-1981  Trustee, and Sunrise Development Co., for cleaning and
                         maintenance of properties adjoining Green Pointe
                         Subdivision.
                         Accepting an easement in The Westwinds Condominium
127-84        9-19-1984  area for operating and maintaining water lines and
                         sanitary sewers.
                         Accepting easements from W.D. and C.R. Carlisle, A.A.
165-85        12-23-1985 and B.A. Klingshirn and J. and E.M. Nesnidal for
                         extension of a watermain east of Pin Oak Parkway.
95-86         6-2-1986   Accepting a channel easement on Walker Road.
                         Authorizing easement agreement with J & W Development
178-86        10-13-1986 Co. and accepting a ditch easement in Woodlands
                         Subdivision.
235-87        10-26-1987 Accepting a water line easement from Learwood Square
                         Co.
135-89        6-26-1989  Authorizing easement agreement with Cleveland Electric
                         Illuminating Co. for water purposes.
                         Authorizing easement agreements for installation of
26-94         2-14-1994  water main from Avon Lake at Electric Boulevard to
                         Route 82, Columbia Twp.
                         Authorizing easement agreements for installation of
121-96        6-10-1996  Englewood Sewer Project from Drummond Street to
                         Beachdale Drive along south side of Lake Road.
                         Authorizing easement agreement with Ohio Department of
37-97         2-24-1997  Transportation for temporary right-of-way easements
                         for replacement of Heider Ditch Culvert on Lake Road.
                         To A.V.D. Bossche, for maintenance and landscaping
147-97        7-14-1997  purposes, and accepting an easement from A.V.D.
                         Bossche on Lake Road for the Englewood Sewer Project.
                         Authorizing purchase of an easement for the Central
15-99         1-25-1999  Avon Lake Drainage Project from Kopf. Construction
                         Corp., at Waterside Crossing.
                         Authorizing purchase of an easement for the Central
16-99         1-25-1999  Avon Lake Drainage Project from Park City Realty Corp.
                         in The Reserve of Avon Lake.
22-99         2-8-1999   Authorizing purchase of an easement for the Central
                         Avon Lake Drainage Project from S.J. Mitchell.
                         Authorizing purchase of an easement for the Central
23-99         2-8-1999   Avon Lake Drainage Project from R. and M. Flynn, on
                         property fronting Webber Road.
24-99         2-8-1999   Authorizing purchase of an easement for the Central
                         Avon Lake Drainage Project from M. Willson.
164-00        6-26-2000  Authorizing easement agreement with Westwinds Joint
                         Venture for storm sewer purposes.
77-09         7-13-2009  Vacating an easement within the Avon Lake Harbor
                         Estates Subdivision.
98-2011       9-26-2011  Authorizing a sidewalk easement agreement with Kopf
                         Construction Corporation.
163-2014      12-22-2014 Authorizing an agreement to vacate a portion of a
                         storm sewer easement at 33128 Lake Road.
                         Authorizing the Mayor to sign an electric power
Res. 23-78    4-24-2023  service easement with the Illuminating Company, a
                         First Energy Company.
 
TABLE C: VACATING OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
 
Ord./
Res.  Date Description
No.
      3-
19-60 15-  Part of Drummond, Englewood and Woodstock Streets.
      1960
130-  8-
64    24-  1,903 feet of Knickerbocker Road east of Moore Road.
      1964
      1-
2-65  11-  Portion of South Drive in Belmar Beach Subdivision Nos. 1 and 2.
      1965
      1-
3-65  11-  Portion of North Drive in Belmar Beach Subdivision.
      1965
      1-
4-65  11-  Portion of South Drive in the Inwood Beach Allotment No. 2 Addition.
      1965
      1-
5-65  11-  Portions of North and South Drives in Avon Vineyard Subdivision.
      1965
      1-   Portions of North and South Drives in Coveland Co.’s Glen Arden Beach
6-65  11-  Subdivision No. 2.
      1965
      1-   Portions of North and South Drives in Arbor Land Co.’s Woodhaven Beach
7-65  11-  Subdivision No. 1.
      1965
12-68 1-8- Portion of North Drive in Vineyard Beach Subdivision.
      1968
13-68 1-8- Portions of South Drive in Vineyard Beach Subdivision.
      1968
14-68 1-8- Portion of North Drive in Belmar Beach Subdivision.
      1968
15-68 1-8- Portion of Overlook Road in Avon Dover Beach Subdivision.
      1968
      3-
19-69 10-  Portion of Durrell Avenue east of Belmar Boulevard.
      1969
      4-
33-69 14-  Portion of Miller Road.
      1969
      4-   Hamilton Avenue, Lafayette Avenue and portions of South Drive in Avon Lake
47-71 12-  Harbor Estates Subdivision.
      1971
      2-
20-73 12-  Portions of Old Miller Road.
      1973
198-  12-
73    10-  Portions of Groveland Avenue.
      1973
144-  10-
76    25-  Portions of Electric Boulevard.
      1976
147-  11-
76    8-   Portions of Colony Drive.
      1976
      4-
44-77 11-  Portion of Electric Boulevard.
      1977
119-  9-
77    26-  Portion of Division Road.
      1977
138-  10-
79    8-   Portion of Groveland Drive.
      1979
104-  7-
80    21-  Portion of Electric Boulevard.
      1980
109-  9-
83    26-  Vacating and apportioning part of Glendale Avenue.
      1983
120-  7-
86    14-  Part of Charleston Avenue.
      1986
107-  5-
90    29-  Portion of Midway Road.
      1990
132-  7-9- Portion of North Drive.
90    1990
176-  9-
90    10-  Part of Highland Avenue.
      1990
121-  7-
92    27-  Portion of South Drive and a 20-foot alley.
      1992
192-  10-
94    24-  Portion of Colony Drive.
      1994
222-  12-
94    12-  Portion of Knickerbocker Road.
      1994
104-  6-
99    14-  Portion of Durrell Avenue.
      1999
      3-   Vacating and apportioning a 12-foot alley located between S/L 126 and S/
61-00 13-  L 353 in the Avon Point Allotment, and S/L 106 in Gamellia Subdivision No.
      2000 6.
255-  12-  Portion of Groveland Drive 50-foot right-of-way from Lear Road extending
00    11-  west approximately 250 feet to vacated Glendale Avenue.
      2000
109-  5-
03    19-  Vacating all of Stratford Road right-of-way west of Jaycox Road.
      2003
190-  9-8- Vacating a portion of South Drive.
03    2003
199-  9-   Vacating portions of Highland Avenue and Cove Avenue within the Lake
03    22-  Breeze Allotment.
      2003
248-  11-  Vacating Block “D” in the Westwinds Subdivision No. 6, located between
03    10-  Highland Avenue and Bayview Drive.
      2003
140-  6-   Vacating all of Parkside Avenue and Caldwell Avenue in the area of
04    14-  Avondale Avenue, portions of Woodruff Avenue, Elberton Avenue, Greenwood
      2004 Avenue and a portion of Electric Boulevard, west of Avondale Avenue.
113-  7-
05    11-  Vacating an easement on Gable Lane.
      2005
79-07 7-9- Vacating all of Electric Boulevard, North Drive, and the remaining portion
      2007 of South Drive East of Miller Road up to Alameda Avenue.
140-  11-  Approving a vacation plat for a drive on the west side of Miller Road
2012  14-  south of Electric Boulevard and a portion of Hamilton Avenue, and
      2012 consolidation of the parcels.
120-  9-9- Vacating an easement within Coronado Cove Subdivision No. 1.
2013  2013
135-  10-  Vacating the portion of a 20-foot alley as part of the Avon Lake Harbor
2016  11-  Estates on the east side of Miller Road and Lake Road.
      2016
177-  11-  Approving a vacation for a portion of Lewis Avenue and lot consolidation
2017  27-  within the Avon Center Estates Subdivision.
      2017
28-   2-
2018  26-  Approving a partial right-of-way vacation for Belmont Drive.
      2018
158-  10-  Approving a vacation for portions of Electric Boulevard, South Drive,
2018  9-   Durrell Avenue, Clinton Avenue and Waterbury Avenue and consolidation plat
      2018 of the parcels.
35-   3-   Approving a vacation of a portion of Overlook Road to change from right-
2020  23-  of-way to a fee simple parcel.
      2020
77-   7-
2020  13-  Approving a vacation of a portion of Overlook Road.
      2020
23-   9-   Approving a lot split and vacation for portions of Alameda Avenue, North
161   25-  Drive and Electric Boulevard; repealed by Ord. 23-164.
      2023
23-   10-  Approving a vacation for portions of Alameda Avenue, North Drive and
165R  10-  Electric Boulevard.
      2023
25-   7-
135   14-  Approving a vacation for portions of the Electric Boulevard right-of- way.
      2025
25-   9-8- Approving a vacation for a portion of the Shields Avenue and Electric
136   2025 Boulevard rights-of-way.
25-   9-8- Approving Avon Center Estates Subdivision No. 2, Phase 6, rights-of- way
150   2025 vacations and consolidation of plat.
          
 
TABLE D: DEDICATION AND PLAT APPROVAL
 
Ord./
Res.   Date   Description
No.
29-59  5-26-  Plat of Avon Estate Subdivision 1.
       1959
34-59  6-8-   Plat of Avon Estate Subdivision 1.
       1959
38-59  6-22-  Plat of North Point Drive in Eagle Point.
       1959
56-59  9-28-  Plat of Beard Subdivision 1.
       1959
62-59  10-26- Plat of Yoder Subdivision 2.
       1959
63-59  10-27- Plat of Yoder Subdivision 3.
       1959
70-59  11-9-  Accepting Moorewood Avenue.
       1959
71-59  11-9-  Deed of K.R. Evenson Co.
       1959
12-60  1-8-   Deed of Avon Shores Homes, Inc.
       1960
6-60   1-11-  Plat of Rice Park Drive.
       1960
9-60   1-27-  Plat of Avon Acres Subdivision 2.
       1960
10-60  1-27-  Plat of Moorewood Subdivision 2.
       1960
28-60  3-28-  Deed of Parkland Drive, Bonnie View Drive and Colony Drive.
       1960
29-60  3-28-  Deed of West Shore Drive and Avalon Road.
       1960
32-60  4-11-  Deed of West Shore Drive.
       1960
85-60  9-26-  Plat of Moorewood Subdivision 3.
       1960
86-60  9-26-  Plat of Moorewood Subdivision 4.
       1960
87-60  9-26-  Plat of Avon Acres Subdivision 3.
       1960
92-60  10-10- Plat of Moorewood Subdivision 2 and accepting Parkwood Drive.
       1960
112-60 11-28- Plat of Yoder Subdivision 4.
       1960
87-61  9-11-  Plat of Avon Acres Subdivision 2.
       1961
91-61  9-11-  Parcel at Avon Belden Road and Electric Boulevard.
       1961
94-61  9-25-  Parcel at Curtis Drive and Laurel Avenue.
       1961
26-62  2-12-  Plat of Yoder Subdivision 5.
       1962
102-62 7-30-  Plat of Avon Acres Subdivision 4 for record.
       1962
112-62 9-10-  Plat of Orchard Estates Subdivision 4 for record.
       1962
134-62 10-22- Part of Herrmann Drive.
       1962
17-63  2-11-  Revised plat of Moorewood Subdivision 3 and part of Moorewood
       1963   Avenue.
18-63  2-11-  Parcel of Gary Construction Co. between Moorewood Subdivision 3
       1963   and Lake Road.
42-63  4-22-  Property in Avon Twp., Secs. 7 and 18, for Redwood Boulevard.
       1963
81-64  5-25-  Plat of Peck Subdivision on Jaycox Road.
       1964
109-64 7-13-  Plat of Westview Subdivision.
       1964
142-64 9-21-  Plats of Gama Homes, Inc. Subdivisions 2 and 3 along Glenview
       1964   Drive and Avon Belden Road.
8-65   1-11-  Plat of Yoder Subdivision 6.
       1965
69-65  7-12-  Plat of Gama Subdivision 4.
       1965
105-65 11-22- Plat of Gama Subdivision 5A.
       1965
121-65 12-13- Yoder Boulevard and Midway Drive in Yoder Subdivision 5.
       1965
124-65 12-13- Plat of Yoder Subdivision 8.
       1965
10-66  1-10-  Plat of Avon Acres Subdivision 5.
       1966
22-66  2-7-   Plat of Shields Road.
       1966
101-66 7-11-  Plat of Gama Subdivision 5B.
       1966
8-67   2-13-  Ashwood Drive, portions of Redwood Boulevard, Durrell Avenue and
       1967   Canterbury Road in Orchard Estates Subdivision 4.
9-67   2-13-  Plat of White Oaks Subdivision 1.
       1967
76-68  7-29-  Portion of Artsdale Drive near Electric Boulevard.
       1968
115-68 11-11- Amends Ord. 76-68. Portion of Artsdale Drive near Electric
       1968   Boulevard and additional portion of Redwood Boulevard.
126-68 12-23- Plat of White Oaks Subdivision 2.
       1968
       7-14-  Ashwood Drive, portions of Electric Boulevard, Redwood Boulevard,
70-69  1969   Durrell Avenue and Canterbury Road in Orchard Estates Subdivision
              4.
89-69  10-13- Plat of Washington Square Subdivisions 1, 2 and 3.
       1969
90-71  9-13-  Plat of Washington Square Subdivision 4.
       1971
10-73  1-22-  Plat of Washington Square Subdivision 5.
       1973
181-73 11-12- Plat of Washington Square Subdivision 6.
       1973
183-73 11-12- Plat of Yoder Subdivision 9.
       1973
215-73 12-28- Accepting and dedicating lands received from the Avon Lake public
       1973   schools to be used for a street turn-around on Groveland Avenue.
Res.   5-13-  Accepting dedication of land in the Inwood Boulevard area from
71-74  1974   Community Planners, Inc.
95-75  11-10- Plat of Washington Square Subdivision No. 7, Phase 1.
       1975
82-76  6-14-  Plat of “The Landings” Subdivision No. 1.
       1976
88-76  6-14-  Plat of Washington Square Subdivision No. 8.
       1976
129-76 9-27-  Plat of Washington Square Subdivision No. 9.
       1976
51-77  4-11-  Plat of “The Landings” Subdivision No. 2.
       1977
109-77 9-12-  Plat of “The Landings” Subdivision No. 3.
       1977
36-78  1-23-  Plat of Georgetown Subdivision No. 1.
       1978
74-78  4-10-  Plat of “The Landings” Subdivision No. 4.
       1978
163-78 8-28-  Plat of “The Landings” Subdivision No. 6.
       1978
164-78 8-28-  Plat of “The Landings” Subdivision No. 5.
       1978
206-78 11-27- Amends Ord. 36-78.
       1978
19-79  2-12-  Plat of James Realty Subdivision No. 2.
       1979
121-79 9-17-  Plat of James Realty Subdivision No. 1.
       1979
122-79 9-17-  Plat of Green Pointe Subdivision No. 1.
       1979
Res.   9-17-  Accepting dedication of property in the Division Road area from
123-79 1979   Kopf Construction Corp.
134-79 10-8-  Plat of Green Pointe Subdivision No. 2.
       1979
153-79 12-10- Plat of Green Pointe Subdivision No. 3.
       1979
111-80 8-25-  Plat of Green Pointe Subdivision No. 4.
       1980
112-80 8-25-  Plat of Green Pointe Subdivision No. 5.
       1980
5-81   1-12-  Plat of Green Pointe Subdivision No. 7.
       1981
8-81   2-9-   Plat of Green Pointe Subdivision No. 6.
       1981
10-83  1-24-  Plat of Green Pointe Subdivision No. 8.
       1983
21-83  2-28-  Amends Ord. 115-68.
       1983
51-83  5-23-  Dedication of Webber Road.
       1983
62-83  6-13-  Plat of James Realty Subdivision No. 3.
       1983
84-83  7-11-  Plat of Green Pointe Subdivision No. 9.
       1983
86-84  5-14-  Plat of James Realty Subdivision No. 4.
       1984
98-84  6-25-  Plat of Westwinds Subdivision No. 1.
       1984
124-84 9-17-  Plat of Lear West Estates Subdivision No. 2.
       1984
125-84 9-17-  Plat of Westwinds Subdivision No. 2.
       1984
126-84 9-17-  Plat of Westwinds Subdivision No. 3.
       1984
56-85  5-13-  Plat of Westwinds Subdivision No. 4.
       1985
57-85  5-13-  Plat of Lear West Subdivision No. 3.
       1985
74-85  6-24-  Plat of James Realty Subdivision No. 5, Phase I.
       1985
103-85 8-26-  Plat of Westwinds Subdivision No. 5.
       1985
68-86  4-21-  Plat of James Realty Subdivision No. 6.
       1986
83-86  5-12-  Plat of Westwinds Subdivision No. 6.
       1986
94-86  6-2-   Dedication of Walker Road.
       1986
106-86 6-9-   Plat of James Realty Subdivision No. 8.
       1986
129-86 7-28-  Plat of James Realty Subdivision No. 7.
       1986
172-86 10-13- Plat of Westwinds Subdivision No. 7.
       1986
179-86 10-27- Plat of Woodlands Subdivision No. 1.
       1986
182-86 10-27- Plat of James Realty Subdivision No. 9.
       1986
209-86 12-1-  Plat of Britannia Estates Subdivision No. 1.
       1986
5-87   1-12-  Plat of Westwinds Subdivision No. 8.
       1987
19-87  2-9-   Plat of Sweetbriar Subdivision, Phase I.
       1987
140-87 6-8-   Plat of Westwinds Subdivision No. 9.
       1987
141-87 6-8-   Plat of Woodlands Subdivision No. 2.
       1987
142-87 6-8-   Plat of Woodlands Subdivision No. 3.
       1987
166-87 7-13-  Plat of Sweetbriar Subdivision No. 2.
       1987
167-87 7-13-  Plat of Fairways Subdivision No. 1.
       1987
168-87 7-13-  Plat of Gable Subdivision No. 1.
       1987
191-87 8-24-  Plat of James Realty Subdivision No. 10.
       1987
193-87 8-24-  Plat of Moorelands Subdivision No. 2.
       1987
197-87 8-24-  Plat of Fairways Subdivision No. 2.
       1987
244-87 11-23- Plat of James Realty Subdivision No. 11.
       1987
245-87 11-23- Plat of Westwinds Subdivision No. 10.
       1987
252-87 12-14- Amends Ord. 245-87.
       1987
28-88  1-11-  Plat of Fairways Subdivision No. 3.
       1988
30-88  1-25-  Plat of Woodlands Subdivision No. 4.
       1988
31-88  1-25-  Plat of Woodlands Subdivision No. 5.
       1988
133-88 7-11-  Plat of James Realty Subdivision No. 12.
       1988
142-88 8-1-   Plat of Westwinds Subdivision No. 11.
       1988
143-88 8-1-   Plat of Woodlands South Subdivision.
       1988
144-88 8-1-   Plat of Britannia Estates Subdivision No. 2.
       1988
163-88 9-12-  Plat of Mooreland Subdivision No. 3.
       1988
176-88 10-10- Plat of Woodlands Subdivision No. 6.
       1988
177-88 10-10- Plat of Fairways Subdivision No. 4.
       1988
182-88 10-24- Plat of Westwinds Subdivision No. 12.
       1988
183-88 10-24- Plat of Westwinds Subdivision No. 13.
       1988
6-89   1-9-   Plat of Gamellia Construction Subdivision No. 1.
       1989
96-89  6-5-   Plat of Gamellia Subdivision No. 2.
       1989
112-89 6-12-  Plat of Fairways Subdivision No. 5.
       1989
113-89 6-12-  Plat of Fairways Subdivision No. 6.
       1989
114-89 6-12-  Plat of Fairways Subdivision No. 7.
       1989
115-89 6-12-  Plat of Fairways Subdivision No. 8.
       1989
177-89 8-21-  Plat of Woodlands Subdivision No. 7.
       1989
193-89 9-11-  Plat of Britannia Estates Subdivision No. 3.
       1989
194-89 9-11-  Plat of Britannia Estates Subdivision No. 4.
       1989
222-89 11-27- Plat of Dakotas Subdivision Phase 1.
       1989
223-89 11-27- Plat of Sweetbriar Subdivision No. 3.
       1989
224-89 11-27- Plat of Sweetbriar Subdivision No. 4.
       1989
226-89 11-27- Plat of Sweetbriar Subdivision No. 5.
       1989
236-89 12-11- Plat of James Realty Subdivision No. 13.
       1989
37-90  2-12-  Plat of Westwinds Subdivision No. 14.
       1990
38-90  2-12-  Plat of Westwinds Subdivision No. 15.
       1990
64-90  4-2-   Plat of Windemere Subdivision.
       1990
96-90  5-14-  Amends Ord. 224-89.
       1990
97-90  5-14-  Amends Ord. 226-89.
       1990
121-90 6-25-  Plat of North Point Drive Extension Centerline.
       1990
179-90 9-10-  Plat of Britannia Estates Subdivision No. 5.
       1990
180-90 9-10-  Plat of Gamellia Subdivision No. 3.
       1990
181-90 9-10-  Plat of Sweetbriar Subdivision No. 6.
       1990
231-90 11-26- Plat of Gamellia Subdivision No. 4.
       1990
40-91  3-11-  Plat of Westwinds Subdivision No. 16.
       1991
53-91  5-13-  Plat of Avon Lake Harbor Estates Resubdivision Phase 1.
       1991
74-91  6-24-  Plat of Gamillia Subdivision No. 5.
       1991
94-91  7-29-  Plat of Westwinds Subdivision No. 17.
       1991
124-92 7-27-  Plat of Gamellia Subdivision No. 6.
       1992
163-92 10-26- Plat of Meadows Subdivision.
       1992
4-93   1-11-  Plat of Division Road Subdivision.
       1993
32-93  3-22-  Plat of Windsor Hollow Subdivision No. 1.
       1993
124-93 9-27-  Plat of Windsor Hollow Subdivision No. 2.
       1993
177-93 12-13- Plat of Reserve of Avon Lake Subdivision Phase 1.
       1993
178-93 12-13- Plat of Westwind Subdivision No. 18.
       1993
122-94 6-13-  Plat of Meadows Subdivision Phase 2.
       1994
130-94 6-27-  Plat of Colonies Subdivision.
       1994
169-94 9-12-  Plat of Jaycox Road Subdivision Phase 1.
       1994
98-95  6-12-  Plat of Jaycox Road Subdivision No. 2.
       1995
115-95 7-10-  Plat of Bridgeside Subdivision Phase I.
       1995
23-96  1-8-   Plat of Westwinds Subdivision No. 19.
       1996
44-96  2-12-  Plat of Woodfield Estates Subdivision No.1.
       1996
165-96 9-9-   Plat of Gamellia Subdivision No. 7.
       1996
184-96 10-14- Plat of Meadows Subdivision No. 3.
       1996
209-96 11-11- Plat of Reserve of Avon Lake Subdivision No. 2.
       1996
210-96 11-11- Approving Westwinds Subdivision No. 2.
       1996
211-96 11-11- Plat of Woodfield Estates Subdivision No. 2.
       1996
218-96 11-25- Plat of Bridgeside Subdivision No. 2.
       1996
221-96 12-9-  Plat of Caneel Run Subdivision No. 1.
       1996
82-97  4-28-  Plat of Meadows Subdivision No. 4.
       1997
168-97 9-8-   Plat of Westwinds Subdivision No. 20.
       1997
215-97 11-24- Plat of Woodfield Estates Subdivision No. 3.
       1997
35-98  2-9-   Plat of Westwinds Subdivision No. 21.
       1998
45-98  3-9-   Plat of Reserve of Avon Lake Subdivision No. 3.
       1998
46-98  3-9-   Plat of Sweetbriar Subdivision No. 8.
       1998
50-98  3-9-   Plat of Sweetbriar Subdivision No. 7.
       1998
127-98 8-17-  Plat of Woodfield Estates Subdivision No. 4.
       1998
128-98 8-17-  Plat of Kingsmille Subdivision.
       1998
179-98 10-12- Plat of Parkside Subdivision No. 1.
       1998
80-99  4-12-  Plat of Reserve of Avon Lake Subdivision No. 4.
       1999
81-99  4-12-  Plat of Waterside Crossing South Subdivision No. 1.
       1999
134-99 7-12-  Plat of resubdivision of a portion of Woodhaven Beach No. 1.
       1999
156-99 8-23-  Plat of Westwinds Subdivision No. 22.
       1999
168-99 9-27-  Plat of Parkside Subdivision No. 2.
       1999
205-99 11-22- Plat of Brownstone Village PUD No. 1.
       1999
206-99 11-22- Plat of Brownstone Village PUD No. 2.
       1999
43-00  2-14-  Plat of Reserve of Avon Lake Subdivision No. 5.
       2000
100-00 5-8-   Preliminary plan of the Wildberry Development.
       2000
104-00 5-8-   Plat of Margie Lane Subdivision.
       2000
105-00 5-8-   Plat of Waterside Crossing North Planned Unit Development No. 1.
       2000
106-00 5-8-   Plat of Bridgeside Subdivision No. 3.
       2000
184-00 8-21-  Plat of Brownstone Village Planned Unit Development No. 3.
       2000
240-00 10-23- Plat of Chillemi Lear Road Resubdivision No. 1.
       2000
8-01   1-8-   Final plat of Charleston Place R-2 Development.
       2001
9-01   1-8-   Plat of Titus Hill Planned Unit Subdivision.
       2001
32-01  2-12-  Plat of Reserve of Avon Lake Subdivision No. 6.
       2001
65-01  4-9-   Plat of Waterside Crossing South Subdivision No. 2.
       2001
107-01 6-11-  Plat of Dakotas Subdivision No. 2.
       2001
168-01 9-10-  Plat of Legacy Point PUD Phase 1.
       2001
170-01 9-10-  Plat of Wildberry Subdivision Phase I.
       2001
179-02 9-9-   Plat of The Reserve of Avon Lake Subdivision Phase 7.
       2002
181-02 9-9-   Plat of the right-of-way for portions of Jaycox Road.
       2002
182-02 9-9-   Plat of the right-of-way for portions of Walker Road.
       2002
229-02 11-11- Plat of Waterside Crossing North Planned Unit Development No. 2.
       2002
230-02 11-11- Plat of Pine Meadows Planned Unit Development Phase 1.
       2002
242-02 11-11- Lot split and consolidation plat for the future Piccolo Place
       2002   Planned Unit Development.
262-02 12-23- Plat of Coronado Cove Planned Unit Development Phase 1.
       2002
263-02 12-23- Plat of Waterside Crossing South Planned Unit Development Phase
       2002   3.
13-03  1-13-  Plat of Bridgeside Planned Unit Development Phase 1.
       2003
14-03  1-13-  Plat of Bridgeside Planned Unit Development Phase 2.
       2003
15-03  1-13-  Plat of Bridgeside Planned Unit Development Phase 3.
       2003
66-03  3-10-  Plat of Legacy Pointe Planned Unit Development Phase 2.
       2003
67-03  3-10-  Plat of Coronado Cove Planned Unit Development Phase 2.
       2003
126-03 6-9-   Final plat for the Wildberry Subdivision Phase II.
       2003
193-03 9-8-   Final plat for Piccolo Place Planned Unit Development.
       2003
202-03 9-22-  Final plat for Waterside Crossing South Planned Unit Development
       2003   Phase 4.
203-03 9-22-  Final plat for Waterside Crossing South Planned Unit Development
       2003   Phase 5.
255-03 11-10- Plat for the Woods of Avon Lake.
       2003
267-03 11-24- Plat for Hunt Club Planned Unit Development, Phase 1.
       2003
49-04  3-8-   Final plat for Legacy Pointe Planned Unit Development, Phase 3.
       2004
68-04  3-22-  Final plat for Bridgeside Planned Unit Development, Phase 4.
       2004
93-04  4-26-  Final plat for Hunt Club Planned Unit Development, No. 2.
       2004
123-04 5-24-  Plat for the resubdivision of a portion of Bridgeside Planned
       2004   Unit Development, No. 4.
124-04 5-24-  Final plat for Waterside Crossing North, Phase 3.
       2004
160-04 7-12-  Resubdivision plat for Bridgeside Planned Unit Development, Phase
       2004   1.
179-04 8-23-  Plat for Pine Meadows Planned Unit Development, Phase 2.
       2004
192-04 9-13-  Final plat for Legacy Pointe Planned Unit Development, Phase 4.
       2004
193-04 9-13-  Improvements to a portion of Electric Boulevard, west of
       2004   Brunswick Drive.
203-04 9-27-  Plat for Woodfield Subdivision, No. 5.
       2004
3-05   1-10-  Plat for Wildberry Subdivision, Phase 3.
       2005
4-05   1-10-  Plat for Westwinds Subdivision No. 23.
       2005
5-05   1-10-  Electric Boulevard right-of-way dedication plat.
       2005
19-05  2-14-  Final plat for Hunt Club Planned Unit Development, No. 3.
       2005
48-05  4-11-  Re-subdivision plat for Waterside Crossing South, Block E.
       2005
53-05  4-11-  Proposed plat for Ventanas Subdivision, Phase 1.
       2005
120-05 7-11-  Final plat for the Centennial Estates Subdivision.
       2005
131-05 8-22-  Plat for Monaco Place Subdivision.
       2005
145-05 9-12-  Proposed plat for Ventanas Subdivision, Phase 2.
       2005
150-05 9-26-  Cove Avenue partial right-of-way dedication plat.
       2005
169-05 11-28- Plat for Hunt Club Planned Unit Development, Phase 4.
       2005
23-06  2-27-  Final plat for Waterside Crossing North, Phase 4.
       2006
49-06  4-24-  Approving the improvement plans for Rebecca’s Lane Planned Unit
       2006   Development.
50-06  4-24-  Approving the plat for Hunt Club Planned Unit Development, Phase
       2006   5.
75-06  6-12-  Dedicating Walker Road Park as a city park.
       2006
77-06  6-26-  Approving the Cove Avenue partial right-of-way dedication plat.
       2006
110-06 9-25-  Approving the improvement plans for Waterside Crossing North
       2006   Cluster Group C.
111-06 9-25-  Approving the improvement plans for Legacy Points Planned Unit
       2006   Development, Phase 6.
112-06 9-25-  Approving the general development plans for Piccolo Place Planned
       2006   Unit Development, Phases 2 and 3.
135-06 11-27- Approving the improvement plans for Piccolo Place Planned Unit
       2006   Development, Phase 2.
10-    2-12-  Approving the revised general development plan for Pine Meadows
2007   2007   Planned Unit Development, Phases 3 and 4.
27-07  3-26-  Accepting the dedication to public use for right-of-way purposes
       2007   certain parcels designated as Pin Oak Parkway.
43-07  4-23-  Approving the re-subdivision plat for Bridgeside Planned Unit
       2007   Development No. 5, Phase 2.
46-07  5-14-  Dedicating the Wedgewood Drive green space as a city park.
       2007
61-07  6-25-  Approving the final plat for Legacy Pointe Planned Unit
       2007   Development, Phase 5.
63-07  6-25-  Approving the improvement plans for Pine Meadows Planned Unit
       2007   Development Subdivision, Phase 3.
65-07  6-25-  Approving the plat for the Highland Avenue/Cove Avenue extension.
       2007
84-07  7-9-   Approving the plat for Piccolo Place Planned Unit Development,
       2007   Phase 2.
85-07  7-9-   Approving the plat for the resubdivision of a portion of Cove
       2007   Avenue as part of the Lake Breeze Allotment.
86-07  7-9-   Approving the plat for Waterside Crossing North Planned Unit
       2007   Development, Cluster Group C.
87-07  8-27-  Approving the plat for Hunt Club Planned Unit Development, Phase
       2007   6.
88-07  8-27-  Approving the plat for Wildberry Subdivision, Phase 4.
       2007
121-07 10-22- Approving the preliminary plan for Gramercy Place Subdivision.
       2007
133-07 11-26- Approving the plat for Pine Meadows Planned Unit Development
       2007   Phase 3.
134-07 11-26- Approving the plat for Montego Court.
       2007
32-08  3-10-  Approving the preliminary plan for Gramercy Place Subdivision,
       2008   Phase 3.
113-08 7-14-  Approving the final plat for Gramercy Place Subdivision, Phase 3.
       2008
173-08 12-8-  Approving the final plat for Legacy Pointe, Phase 6.
       2008
176-08 12-22- Approving the final plat for Pine Meadows Planned Unit
       2008   Development Subdivision, Phase 4.
10-09  1-26-  Approving the final plat for Gramercy Place, Phase 2.
       2009
36-09  4-13-  Approving a revision to the preliminary plan for Gramercy Place,
       2009   Phase 3.
59-09  6-8-   Approving a revision to the preliminary plan for Gramercy Place,
       2009   Phase 3.
66-09  6-22-  Approving the improvement plans for Gramercy Place, Phase 3.
       2009
15-    1-25-  Approving the final plat for Commerce Parkway.
2010   2010
102-   9-27-  Approving the plat for the resubdivision of a portion of Cove
2010   2010   Avenue as part of Lake Breeze Allotment Subdivision No. 3.
104-   10-4-  Approving the plat for the resubdivision of a portion of Cove
2010   2010   Avenue as part of Lake Breeze Allotment Subdivision No. 4.
51-    5-23-  Approving the plat for Lake Breeze Allotment Subdivision No. 5.
2011   2011
86-    6-11-  Approving the final plat for Waterside Crossing North, Phase 5.
2012   2012
119-   8-27-  Approving the improvement plans for Gramercy Place, Phase 3.
2012   2012
120-   8-27-  Approving the Chillemi Lear Road re-subdivision plat, No. 2.
2012   2012
134-   10-9-  Approving the final plat for Waterside Crossing North, Phase 6.
2012   2012
103-   7-8-   Approving the preliminary plan for Hampshire Highlands Multi-
2013   2013   Family Development.
104-   7-8-   Approving the final plat for Gramercy Place, Phase 3.
2013   2013
105-   7-8-   Approving the improvement plans for Fernwood Avenue.
2013   2013
106-   7-8-   Approving the re-subdivision plat for Leeward Court.
2013   2013
121-   9-9-   Approving the reconsolidation plat for 120 and 122 Forest Hill
2013   2013   Drive.
85-    6-23-  Approving the improvement plans for Legacy Pointe, Phase 8.
2014   2014
86-    6-23-  Approving the improvement plans for Waterside Crossing North,
2014   2014   Phase 2.
136-   10-27- Approving the final plat for Aqua Marine Subdivision.
2014   2014
14-    2-9-   Approving the preliminary plan for Alten Subdivision.
2015   2015
45-    3-23-  Approving the improvement plan for Piccolo Place Planned Unit
2015   2015   Development No. 3.
46-    3-23-  Approving the improvement plan for Avon Center Estates, No. 2.
2015   2015
61-    4-27-  Approving the re-subdivision plat for 109 Brookfield Road.
2015   2015
108-   8-24-  Approving the final plat for Waterside Crossing North C- No. 2.
2015   2015
119-   9-21-  Approving the improvement plans for Arrington Village Phase I.
2015   2015
120-   9-21-  Approving the preliminary plan for Arrington Village.
2015   2015
140-   10-26- Approving the plat for Piccolo Place Planned Unit Development,
2015   2015   Phase 3.
148-   11-23- Approving a revision to the improvement/preliminary plan for
2015   2015   Arrington Village.
150-   11-23- Approving the improvement plans for Alten Subdivision.
2015   2015
153-   12-14- Approving the final plat for Rebecca Lane Planned Unit
2015   2015   Development (PUD).
158-   12-14- Approving the final plat for Legacy Pointe, Phase 8.
2015   2015
42-    3-28-  Approving the general development plan for Port West PUD.
2016   2016
43-    4-11-  Approving the improvement plans for Arrington Village, Phase 2.
2016   2016
48-    4-25-  Approving the final plat for Arrington Village, Phase 1.
2016   2016
69-    6-13-  Approving the improvement plans for Legacy Pointe Phase 9.
2016   2016
70-    6-13-  Approving the improvement plans for Port West Phase 1.
2016   2016
95-    6-27-  Approving the improvement plan for Avon Center Estates, No. 2,
2016   2016   Phase 3.
137-   10-11- Approving the plat for the resubdivision of a portion of property
2016   2016   at 33326 Bonnieview Drive.
143-   10-24- Approving the final plat for Alten Subdivision.
2016   2016
11-    1-23-  Approving the plat for Arrington Village, Phase 2.
2017   2017
16-    2-13-  Approving a revision to the general development plan for
2017   2017   Waterside Crossing South.
37-    3-13-  Approving the preliminary plan for Powdermaker Village Townhomes,
2017   2017   Phase 5.
68-    4-10-  Approving the plat for Aqua Marine Subdivision No. 2.
2017   2017
119-   9-11-  Approving the improvement plans for Chandon Subdivision No. 1.
2017   2017
143-   11-13- Approving the consolidation plat of two parcels on the west side
2017   2017   of Lear Road and South of Walker Road.
144-   11-13- Approving the final plat for Legacy Pointe, Phase 9.
2017   2017
145-   11-13- Approving the revisions to the improvement plans for Waterside
2017   2017   Crossings South, Nos. 6 and 7.
156-   11-27- Approving the revisions to the improvement plans for Chandon
2017   2017   Subdivision Nos. 1 and 2.
176-   11-27- Accepting the dedication to public use for right-of-way purposes
2017   2017   certain parcels designated as Beachwood Estates Nos. 2, 3, and 4,
              and Moorewood No. 2.
179-   11-27- Approving the improvement plans for Avon Center Estates,
2017   2017   Subdivision No. 2, Phase 4.
194-   12-18- Approving the improvement plans for Powdermaker Townhomes No.
2017   2017   113.
195-   12-18- Approving the improvement plans for Powdermaker Townhomes No.
2017   2017   117.
45-    3-26-  Approving the final plat for Chandon Subdivision No. 1.
2018   2018
92-    5-14-  Approving the final plat for Waterside Crossings South
2018   2018   Subdivision No. 6.
138-   7-9-   Approving the final plat for Lear Road Holdings Subdivision No.
2018   2018   1.
155-   9-24-  Approving the final plat for Waterside Crossings South
2018   2018   Subdivision No. 7.
21-    2-25-  Approving the final plat for Chandon Subdivision No. 2 Planned
2019   2019   Unit Development Phase 2.
97-    7-8-   Approving the final plat for Chandon Subdivision No. 3.
2019   2019
104-   8-26-  Approving the final plat for Waterside Crossings South
2019   2019   Subdivision No. 8.
16-    2-10-  Approving the final plat for Chandon Subdivision No. 4 Planned
2020   2020   Unit Development.
65-    6-8-   Approving the final plat for Lear Road Holdings Subdivision No.
2020   2020   2.
82-    8-24-  Approving the improvement plans for Legacy-Webber Subdivision.
2020   2020
97-    10-26- Approving the final plat for South Port Subdivision No. 1.
2020   2020
       1-25-  Approving the improvement plans for Legacy Isle Subdivision No. 1
21-18  2021   with the condition that the stormwater management be installed
              prior to any improvements.
21-22  2-8-   Approving the final plat for the Harbour Planned Unit Development
       2021   Subdivision No. 1.
21-95  6-14-  Approving the improvement plans for South Port Subdivision No. 2.
       2021
21-96  6-14-  Approving the improvement plans for the Harbour Planned Unit
       2021   Development Subdivision No. 2.
21-109 7-12-  Dedicating West Shore Drive as an Avon Lake City park.
       2021
21-121 9-13-  Approving the final plat for Woodbridge Cluster Planned Unit
       2021   Development.
21-130 9-13-  Approving the consolidation plat at 33450 Lake Road.
       2021
21-133 9-27-  Approving the improvement plans for Port West Subdivision No. 2.
       2021
21-134 9-27-  Approving the re-subdivision plat for 31745 Leeward Court.
       2021
21-162 11-8-  Approving the improvement plans for Port West Subdivision No. 3.
       2021
21-163 11-8-  Approving the final plat for Port West Subdivision No. 1.
       2021
21-183 12-20- Approving the re-subdivision plat for Woodbridge Way.
       2021
22-18  2-28-  Approving the site improvement plans for Sandridge Subdivision.
       2022
22-63  5-9-   Approving the revision to the final plat for Port West
       2022   Subdivision No. 1.
22-64  5-9-   Approving the final plat for Port West Subdivision No. 2.
       2022
22-65  5-9-   Approving the final plat for Port West Subdivision No. 3.
       2022
       6-13-  Confirming the recommendation of Planning Commission for a
22-90  2022   conditional use site plan for a recreational indoor facility at
              32925 Pin Oak Parkway.
22-96R 6-27-  Approving the improvement plans for Port Side Subdivision No. 1.
       2022
22-99  6-27-  Approving the final plat for the Harbour Planned Unit Development
       2022   Subdivision No. 2.
22-100 6-27-  Approving the improvement plans for Legacy Isle Subdivision No.
       2022   2.
22-132 9-26-  Approving the final plat for South Port Subdivision No. 2.
       2022
22-155 10-11- Approving the final plat for Legacy Isle Subdivision No. 1.
       2022
22-156 10-11- Approving the improvement plans for Port West Subdivision No. 4.
       2022
23-110 6-12-  Approving the improvement plans for the Harbour Planned Unit
       2023   Development Subdivision No. 3.
23-111 6-12-  Approving the improvement plans for Legacy Isle Subdivision No.
       2023   2B.
23-152 9-11-  Approving the final plat for Port Side Subdivision.
       2023
       9-25-  Approving a lot split and vacation for portions of Alameda
23-161 2023   Avenue, North Drive and Electric Boulevard; repealed by Ord. 23-
              164.
23-164 10-10- Approving a lot split and vacation for portions of Alameda
       2023   Avenue, North Drive and Electric Boulevard.
23-169 10-23- Approving the final plat for Port West Subdivision No. 4.
       2023
23-187 11-27- Approving the improvement plan for Port West Subdivision No. 5.
       2023
23-188 11-27- Approving the final plat for Legacy Isle Subdivision No. 2.
       2023
24-7   1-8-   Approving the improvement plans for the Harbour Planned Unit
       2024   Development Subdivision No. 4.
24-14  1-22-  Approving the final plat for the Harbour Planned Unit Development
       2024   Subdivision No. 3.
24-102 7-8-   Approving the Harbour Planned Unit Development Subdivision No. 4
       2024   final plat.
24-103 7-8-   Approving Port West Subdivision No. 5 final plat.
       2024
24-147 10-15- Approving the final plat for Walker Road Planned Unit Development
       2024   Port Side Cluster Subdivision, Phase 2.
25-28  2-10-  Approving the final plat for Legacy Isle Subdivision No. 3.
       2025
25-29  2-10-  Approving the final plat for South Port Subdivision No. 3.
       2025
25-127 6-23-  Approving the final plat for Sandridge Run Subdivision.
       2025
25-128 7-7-   Approving the final plat for Port Side Townhouse Subdivision.
       2025
25-149 9-8-   Approving the improvement plan for Christ Church Industrial
       2025   Subdivision.
25-151 10-14- Approving the improvement plan for Avon Center Estates No. 2,
       2025   Phase 6.
25-187 11-24- Approving the improvement plan for Harbor Crest Townhouse
       2025   Subdivision No. 1.
25-188 11-24- Approving the improvement plan for Harbor Crest Townhouse
       2025   Subdivision No. 2.
             
 
TABLE E: PURCHASE OF PROPERTY FOR MUNICIPAL USE
 
Ord./Res. No. Date       Description
55-61         6-12-1961  Property in Avon Twp., Sec. 19, for water works plant.
21-62         1-22-1962  Property on north side of Electric Boulevard adjacent
                         to Bleser Field.
143-63        12-23-1963 Purchase of property between Lake Road and Lake Erie
                         from E.H. Reith.
                         Accepting conveyance of a parcel extending easterly
57-64         4-13-1964  from Moore Road into the Industrial Park Area for
                         street right-of- way purposes.
58-64         4-13-1964  Accepting conveyance of a .132 acre parcel from L.
                         Eiben for widening Grove Avenue.
124-64        7-27-1964  Authorizes purchase of property from B. Blanc as part
                         of the Miller Road Recreational Area.
                         Authorizes purchase of part of Miller Road
140-64        9-14-1964  Recreational Area from C. Weaver and L.D. and E.
                         Williams.
                         Accepting conveyance of a parcel in Avon Lake
144-64        9-28-1964  Industrial Park from A. and H. Klingshirn for right-
                         of-way purposes.
145-64        9-28-1964  Authorizes purchase of a five-acre parcel adjacent to
                         Miller Road City Dump from the Ceico Co.
146-64        9-28-1964  Accepting conveyance of a parcel on Lake Road from
                         Gama Homes, Inc. for recreation purposes.
148-64        10-12-1964 Authorizes purchase of Lake Shore Methodist Church
                         property for sidewalk and sewer construction purposes.
107-65        11-22-1965 Purchase of two acres from J. and E. Gilliam for
                         Miller Road Recreational Area.
                         Accepting conveyance of a parcel in Sec. 18 of
122-65        12-13-1965 Original Avon Twp. from Gama Homes, Inc. for
                         recreation purposes.
                         Accepting conveyance of a parcel in Sec. 7 of Original
9-66          1-10-1966  Avon Twp. from Avon Acres Development Co. for
                         recreation purposes.
                         Accepting conveyance of 220.70 feet between Oakwood
45-66         3-14-1966  Avenue and Forest Boulevard from R. and J. Ireland for
                         right-of-way purposes.
79-66         5-23-1966  Accepting 106.5 square feet parcel from L. Gelman for
                         right-of-way purposes abutting Lake Erie.
142-66        11-14-1966 Exchanges a parcel in the Inwood Area for a
                         substantially equal area from W. and M. Eschenfelder.
                         Accepting conveyance of a 0.0785 acre parcel abutting
1-67          1-9-1967   Grove Street from E. and J. Young for right-of-way
                         purposes.
                         Authorizes purchase of land in Miller Road
27-67         4-17-1967  Recreational Area from B. and A. Geiss for
                         recreational purposes.
49-67         9-14-1967  Purchase of 4.37 acres on west side of Lear Road for
                         improvements in water distribution system.
60-67         10-23-1967 Accepting conveyance of 0.0785 acre abutting Grove
                         Street from E. Young for right-of-way purposes.
                         Accepting conveyance from H. and V. Huge for parcel
64-67         11-13-1967 abutting Electric Boulevard between Beck and Lear
                         Roads for right-of-way purposes.
                         Accepting conveyance from V. and E. Janicek for parcel
70-67         12-26-1967 abutting Electric Boulevard between Beck and Lear
                         Roads for right-of-way purposes.
102-68        10-14-1968 Authorizes purchase of 1.013 acres north of Lake Road
                         from R. Slusser.
61-69         6-9-1969   Purchase of land between Hermann Drive and Armour
                         Drive east of Belle Road for recreational purposes.
                         Purchase of two parcels (8.346 acres) owned by S.
71-71         6-28-1971  George in the Electric Boulevard - Highland Avenue
                         area for park purposes.
25-72         2-14-1972  Accepting conveyance of property owned by Jaycox
                         Development Inc. for Walker Road right-of-way.
34-72         2-28-1972  Purchase of 17.5 acres on Center Road from E. Odom for
                         service and sanitary landfill purposes.
75-72         5-22-1972  Purchase of parts of Heider Ditch at Walker Road from
                         J. and T. Christ for right-of-way purposes.
65-73         4-9-1973   Authorizes purchase of rights-of-way for relocation of
                         portions of Heider Ditch at Walker Road.
76-73         4-23-1973  Authorizes payment for the purchase of rights-of-way
                         for Walker Road improvements.
194-73        11-26-1973 Authorizes purchase of property at the intersection of
                         York Street and Electric Boulevard from G. Forthober.
                         Purchase of property at the intersection of York
16-74         1-14-1974  Street and Electric Boulevard from G. Forthober for
                         street and park purposes.
                         Authorizes purchase of real property from J.F. and
116-74        7-8-1974   M.O. Mayer (intersection of Highland Avenue and
                         Electric Boulevard) for street purposes.
13-77         1-11-1977  Authorizes purchase of approximately 5 acres from W.,
                         R. and E. Mitchell for a proposed fire station.
53-77         4-25-1977  Authorizes purchase of approximately 5 acres from W.,
                         R. and E. Mitchell for a proposed fire station.
135-77        10-24-1977 Authorizes purchase of approximately 40 acres from the
                         Mitzel Zuckerman Co. for a public landfill.
154-77        11-28-1977 Accepting lands from Community Improvement Corp. for
                         railroad siding and street purposes.
195-78        10-23-1978 Authorizes purchase of lands adjacent to Weiss Park
                         from the Estate of A. Solom.
                         Authorizes purchase of property adjacent to the
144-79        11-12-1979 waterworks facility at Lake and Moore Roads from
                         G.S.T., a partnership.
131-80        10-13-1980 Authorizes purchase of property adjacent to Inwood
                         Park from C.P. Gilgenbach.
                         Authorizes purchase of property on the southwest
146-97        7-14-1997  corner of Miller and Lake Roads, immediately across
                         from Miller Park, from P. Black, for park purposes.
148-97        7-14-1997  Authorizes purchase of property located at 32756 Lake
                         Road from L.E. Horsfall for park purposes.
154-97        8-18-1997  Amends Ord. 146-97.
                         Authorizes a consent order for the purchase of land
Res. 203-97   11-10-1997 located along Pin Oak Parkway and Avon Belden Road
                         from T.E. Wasserman, et al., for the Pin Oak Parkway
                         Extension Project.
                         Authorizes a consent order for the purchase of land
Res. 204-97   11-10-1997 located along Pin Oak Parkway and Avon Belden Road
                         from August Properties for the Pin Oak Parkway
                         Extension Project.
                         Authorizes a consent order for the purchase of land
Res. 205-97   11-10-1997 located along Pin Oak Parkway and Avon Belden Road
                         from A. Klingshirn for the Pin Oak Parkway Extension
                         Project.
                         Authorizes a consent order for the purchase of land
Res. 206-97   11-10-1997 located along Pin Oak Parkway and Avon Belden Road
                         from Carlisle Property for the Pin Oak Parkway
                         Extension Project.
207-97        11-10-1997 Authorizes purchase of property from J. and E. Reigert
                         for the Pin Oak Parkway Extension Project.
                         Authorizes purchase of property from J.L. and J.M.
208-97        11-10-1997 Guggenbiller for the Pin Oak Parkway Extension
                         Project.
                         Authorizes purchase of property located at the
                         southwest corner of the Walkes Rd./S.R. 83
209-97        11-10-1997 intersection from H.H. and M.C. Yieh for the
                         construction of a facility to house the Municipal
                         Court and the Police Department, adjacent to the Fire
                         Department.
                         Authorizes purchase agreement with the Ohio Department
Res. 226-00   9-25-2000  of Transportation for purchase of land on Electric
                         Boulevard.
150-03        6-23-2003  Authorizes purchase of additional right-of-way for the
                         Electric Boulevard Sidewalk Project.
170-04        7-12-2004  Authorizes purchase of land for the relocation of
                         State Route 83.
                         Authorizes purchase of land for public purposes on
216-04        10-11-2004 Lake Road, immediately adjacent to Veterans Memorial
                         Park.
66-06         5-22-2006  Authorizes the purchase of land for public purposes,
                         for the Save the Woods Project.
94-06         7-10-2006  Authorizes the purchase of land for public purposes,
                         for the Save the Woods Project.
141-06        12-11-2006 Authorizes the purchase of land for public purposes,
                         for the Save the Woods Project.
57-07         6-11-2007  Authorizes the purchase of land for public purposes,
                         for the expansion of Veterans Memorial Park.
                         Authorizing conveyance of the two easternmost parcels
76-07         7-9-2007   of land at Miller Road Park in exchange for two
                         parcels of land adjacent to the westernmost side of
                         Miller Road Park for public purpose.
125-09        12-21-2009 Authorizing an agreement to purchase approximately
                         5.0637 acres of land to be used for park purposes.
                         Authorizing an agreement to purchase approximately
76-2015       6-8-2015   .4880 acre of land to be used for expansion and
                         improvement of the water pollution control center.
                         Authorizing the Mayor and the Board of Municipal
                         Utilities to enter into an agreement to purchase
136-2016      10-11-2016 approximately .75 acre of land to be used for a
                         pumping station for the Elyria emergency
                         interconnection.
                         Authorizing the Mayor and the Avon Lake Board of
                         Municipal Utilities to execute an option for the
117-2017      8-28-2017  purchase of approximately .7498 acres of land in
                         Amherst Twp. to be used for an emergency booster
                         pumping station.
48-2018       3-26-2018  Authorizing the Mayor to purchase 110 Moore Road in
                         the City of Avon Lake.
179-2018      12-10-2018 Authorizing the Mayor to purchase 58 West Shore Road
                         in the City of Avon Lake.
                         Authorizing the Mayor to execute a purchase and sale
19-2019       2-25-2019  agreement with Westwinds Recreational Association,
                         Inc. for the acquisition of Block H in Westwinds
                         Subdivision No. 6.
                         Authorizing the Mayor to execute a purchase and sale
67-2019       6-10-2019  agreement to sell a portion of Colony Drive to Daniel
                         G. Wightman and Elsje Wightman.
                         Authorizing the Mayor to execute a purchase and sale
68-2019       6-10-2019  agreement to sell a portion of Permanent Parcel No.
                         04-00- 008-104-047.
                         Authorizing the Mayor to execute a purchase agreement
56-2020       4-27-2020  with Legacy Pointe Ltd. for the sale of Permanent
                         Parcel No. 04-00-017-103-103.
                         Authorizing the Mayor to execute a purchase and sale
21-72         4-26-2021  agreement to sell Permanent Parcel No. 04-00-008-104-
                         072 and Permanent Parcel No. 04-00-008-104-076.
                         Authorizing the Mayor to execute a purchase and sale
22-28         3-7-2022   agreement to purchase Permanent Parcel No. 04-00-017-
                         102-212.
                         Authorizing the Mayor to execute a purchase and sale
22-35         3-28-2022  agreement to sell Permanent Parcel No. 04-00-008-104-
                         072 and Permanent Parcel No. 04-00-008-104-076 and
                         repealing Ord. 21-72.
                         Authorizing the Mayor to execute an agreement for the
22-100        5-22-2023  purchase of West Shore Road, Lorain County Permanent
                         Parcel Nos. 04-00-006-103-001 and 04-00-006-103-002.
                         Authorizing the Mayor to execute an agreement for the
22-101        5-22-2023  purchase of 64 West Shore Road, Lorain County
                         Permanent Parcel Nos. 04-00-006-101-082.
                         Authorizing the Mayor to execute a purchase agreement
                         to purchase 90 and 92 Moore Road and Avalon Road,
23-118        7-10-2023  Lorain County Permanent Parcel Nos. 04-00-006-103-007,
                         04-00-006-103-008, 04-00-006-103-015, 04-00-006-103-
                         018 and 04-00-006-103-021, from Moore Road
                         Investments, LLC.
                         Authorizing the Mayor to execute a purchase agreement
23-146        8-28-2023  to purchase 68 West Shore Road, Lorain County
                         Permanent Parcel No. 04-00-006-101-064, from Linda
                         Votruba and Chad Wright.
                         Authorizing the Mayor to execute a purchase agreement
23-147        8-28-2023  to purchase 84 Moore Road, Lorain County Permanent
                         Parcel Nos. 04-00-006-103-003, 04-00-006-103-006 and
                         04-00-006-103-019, from Michael Hess.
                         Authorizing the Mayor to execute a purchase agreement
23-163        10-10-2023 to sell Permanent Parcel No. 04-00-017-102-212 on Pin
                         Oak Parkway to Bey Properties, LLC.
                         Authorizing the Mayor to execute a purchase agreement
24-28         3-11-2024  to purchase 35.38 acres on Lake Road from Avon Lake
                         Environmental Redevelopment Group, LLC.
                         Authorizing the Mayor to execute an agreement to
24-172        11-12-2024 purchase 76 West Shore Road from Michael B. Reichlin
                         and MBR76, LLC.
                         Authorizing the Mayor to execute an agreement to
24-182        12-9-2024  purchase the northeast corner of Avalon Road and Lake
                         Road from Paoloconst, LLC.
                         Authorizing the Mayor to execute an agreement to
24-189        12-9-2024  purchase five parcels on West Shore Road from Elam
                         Bruegger and Ruth Bruegger.
                         Authorizing the Mayor to execute a real estate
                         purchase agreement between the city and Avon Lake
25-167        11-24-2025 Environmental Redevelopment Group, LLC for the
                         acquisition of approximately 23 acres of land located
                         in the city.
                         Authorizing the Mayor to execute an agreement to
25-183        11-10-2025 purchase Lorain County Permanent Parcel No. 04-00-021-
                         000-203, located on Avon Commerce Parkway, from Kopf
                         Construction Corporation.
                         Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a purchase
25-184        12-8-2025  agreement with the Avon Lake City School District for
                         the acquisition of the former Erieview School
                         Property, located at 32630 Electric Boulevard.
                        
 
TABLE F: LEASE OF PROPERTY FOR MUNICIPAL USE
 
Ord./
Res.  Date Description
No.
Res.  11-  Authorizes the Mayor to renew leases to two dwellings in the Miller Road
112-  22-  Recreation Area.
65    1965
      4-
58-71 26-  Land adjacent to city disposal areas.
      1971
      4-
54-72 24-  Portion of Avon Lake Municipal Park for boat storage and docking.
      1972
      3-   Authorizes the Mayor to execute a lease for city use of the parking lot of the
55-74 25-  Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co. adjacent to Miller Road.
      1974
102-  6-   Authorizes amendment to lease for city use of a parking lot of the Cleveland
74    24-  Electric Illuminating Co. for the Cleveland Transit System Bus Service.
      1974
129-  8-   Authorizes lease for city use of lands of Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co.
74    28-  for parking purposes adjacent to old city landfill.
      1974
42-   2-   Authorizes lease of the Assembly Hall at Veterans’ Memorial Park to the Avon
2003  10-  Lake Landmark Preservation Society.
      2003
46-   3-   Authorizing the leasing of Assembly Hall at Veterans Memorial Park to the Avon
2008  31-  Lake Landmark Preservation Society.
      2008
76-   6-   Authorizing a ground site lease agreement with Clear Wireless, LLC, a Nevada
2010  28-  Limited Liability Company.
      2010
148-  11-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute a lease agreement with TBP Avon Lake, LLC for
2017  13-  the rental of certain premises in the Artstown Shopping Center, 33483 Lake
      2017 Road, Avon Lake.
176-  12-  Authorizing the leasing of the Peter Miller House at Miller Road Park to
2018  10-  Heritage Avon Lake.
      2018
64-   5-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute an amendment to the lease with TBP Avon Lake,
2019  28-  LLC.
      2019
23-   10-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute a sublease between Joann Dosztal, d/b/a Pass
170   23-  CLE Athletic Company and Stop 65.
      2023
25-   12-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute the amended and restated lease with Avon Lake
206   8-   Public Library.
      2025
          
 
TABLE G: APPROPRIATION OF PROPERTY
 
Ord./Res. No. Date       Description
18-60         3-14-1960  Property in Avon Twp., Sec. 7, for water works.
44-61         5-8-1961   Property in Avon Twp., Sec. 6, for park purposes.
46-61         5-8-1961   Property in Avon Twp., Sec. 6, for parks.
51-61         5-22-1961  Two parcels in Avon Twp., Sec. 7, for water works
                         plant.
                         Appropriation of Geiss property in the Miller Road
47-65         5-10-1965  Recreation Area for expansion of recreation
                         facilities.
                         Appropriation of Gilliam property in the Miller Road
48-65         5-10-1965  Recreation Area for expansion of recreation
                         facilities.
                         Appropriation of part of Original Avon Twp., Sec. 7,
57-69         5-26-1969  for construction of water works additions and
                         improvements.
Res. 157-77   11-28-1977 Appropriation of property of L. Stana, G.C. and B.
                         Meyer and C.E.I. Co. for sidewalk purposes.
                         Appropriation of property of F.J. Hoge, R.D. and M.E.
Res. 158-77   11-28-1977 Crawford, S. Trivanovich, P.W., D. and T. Tanner, K.D.
                         and A.R. Forrester, H. Price, J. Kidd, A.B. Miller and
                         C.E.I. Co. for sidewalk purposes.
                         Appropriation of property of W. Newman, T. and C.
Res. 82-78    4-10-1978  Litz, W.P. and E. Newman, T. Hoge, R. and F.C. Berg
                         and S. Trivanovich for sidewalk purposes.
10-85         1-28-1985  Appropriation of property for State Route 83 project.
11-85         1-28-1985  Appropriation of property for State Route 83 project.
14-85         2-11-1985  Appropriation of property for State Route 83 project.
15-85         2-11-1985  Appropriation of property for temporary right-of-way
                         for State Route 83 project.
16-85         2-11-1985  Appropriation of property for State Route 83 project.
32-85         2-25-1985  Appropriation of property for State Route 83 project.
33-85         2-25-1985  Appropriation of property for State Route 83 project.
38-85         3-25-1985  Appropriation of property for State Route 83 project.
46-85         4-8-1985   Appropriation of property for State Route 83 project.
204-89        9-25-1989  Appropriation of property for North Point Drive
                         project.
205-89        9-25-1989  Appropriation of property for North Point Drive
                         project.
125-92        7-27-1992  Appropriation of property for Walker Road widening
                         project.
126-92        7-27-1992  Appropriation of property for Walker Road widening
                         project.
118-01        7-9-2001   Appropriation of property on Walker and Moore Roads in
                         exchange for a parcel of land on Miller Road.
                         Authorizes conveyance of a parcel of land adjacent to
                         the property known as Bicentennial Park in exchange
189-04        9-13-2004  for a larger parcel of land in the same vicinity for
                         public purposes and to enlarge the property known as
                         Bicentennial Park.
 
TABLE H: ZONING MAP CHANGES
 
Ord./
Res.  Date Description
No.
48    5-8- Residence area determined.
      1922
      4-
85    27-  Residence areas determined.
      1925
      6-
411   12-  Property on Avon Belden Road from 2A to 1B.
      1939
      4-
713   12-  Property on north side of Walker Road from 1B to 2A.
      1948
      12-
1157  23-  Certain properties classified as B-1A.
      1957
      11-
75-59 3-   Property at Walker and Lear Roads, from R-1 to B-1A.
      1959
      3-
24-60 28-  Property in Avon Twp., Sec. 6, from R-1 to CP-1.
      1960
      7-
60-60 11-  Property in Avon Twp., Sec. 6, from B-1A to CP-1.
      1960
64-60 8-1- Property in Avon Twp., Sec. 6, from R-1 to B1-A.
      1960
      2-
16-61 27-  Property in Avon Twp., Sec. 8, from R-1 to I.
      1961
38-61 5-8- Property in Avon Twp., Sec. 6, from R-1 to B-2.
      1961
39-61 5-8- Property in Avon Twp., Sec. 31, from B-1A to CP-1.
      1961
      7-
66-61 10-  Seven parcels in Avon Twp., Secs. 6, 7, 17 and 18, from R-1 to R-1A.
      1961
      7-
68-61 10-  Property in Avon Twp., Sec. 7, from R-1 to R-3.
      1961
157-  12-
61    10-  Seven parcels in Avon Twp., Secs. 7, 18, 19 and 20, from R-1 to R-1A.
      1962
113-  9-
62    10-  Property in Avon Twp., Sec. 30, from R-1 to R-1A.
      1962
73-66 5-9- Property bounded by the Avon Lake Sewage Treatment Plant, from R-1 and B-
      1966 2 to I.
108-  10-  Property at the southeasterly corner of the intersection of Electric
68    28-  Boulevard and Moore Road, from R-1 to R-3.
      1968
109-  10-
68    28-  Property near Arlington Construction Co. land, from CP-1 to R-3.
      1968
108-  10-
70    12-  Land west of Miller Road and south of Electric Boulevard, from R-1A to R-3.
      1970
      6-   Part of proposed Avon Park Subdivision Proposed and entire proposed Krogh-
73-71 28-  Barr Avon Beach Allotment from R-1A to I.
      1971
120-  8-
74    12-  Lands west of Avon Belden Road, from R-1 to B-1, limited to tennis courts.
      1974
      5-
28-75 12-  Lands east of Avon Belden Road and north of Walker Road, from R-1 to R-3.
      1975
      6-   Lands on York Street adjacent to and east of Avon Lake Shopping Center,
79-77 27-  from R-1 to B-2.
      1977
      4-
89-78 24-  Lands east of Avon Belden Road and north of Walker Road, from R-1 to B-2.
      1978
115-  5-
78    22-  Lands at the northeast corner of Lake and Moore Roads, from R-3 to B-1.
      1978
211-  12-
78    11-  Lands on Lake Road owned by the Municipal Waterworks, from R-3 to R-1.
      1978
      5-
73-80 27-  Lands on Lake Road, from B-1 to R-1.
      1980
103-  7-
80    21-  Lands on Lake Road, from R-1 to R-3.
      1980
52-81 6-8- Land in proposed West Winds Subdivision, from R-1 to R-3.
      1981
      8-
74-81 24-  Land on Electric Boulevard, west of Lear Road, from B-2 to R-1.
      1981
      7-
99-82 12-  Lands behind 694 Avon Belden Road, from R-1 to B-1.
      1982
131-  11-
85    11-  Lands on Walker Road, from R-1 to R-2.
      1985
      3-
53-86 24-  Lands in the vicinity of June Street and Moore Road, from B-2 to CP-1.
      1986
      5-
89-86 27-  Lands on Lake Road in the vicinity of Miller Road, from R-1A to R-2.
      1986
199-  11-  Lands on west side of Avon Belden Road, north of Service Garage, from R-
86    24-  2 to B-2.
      1986
189-  8-
87    24-  Block G in Westwinds Subdivision, from R-1 to R-3.
      1987
      2-   6.19 acres south of Mooreland Subdivision No. 1 on Moore Road, from R-1 to
56-88 22-  R-1A.
      1988
2-89  1-9- 32709 Walker Road, from R-1 to B-2.
      1989
232-  12-  Lands at the northwest corner of the Avon Belden/Walker Road intersection,
89    11-  from R-1 to B-1.
      1989
233-  12-  Lands at the northwest corner of the Avon Belden/Walker Road intersection,
89    11-  from R-1 to B-2.
      1989
      4-   Lands on west side of Moore Road, south of June Street and west of Burton
57-92 27-  Street, from B-2 and CP-1 to R-3.
      1992
151-  10-
92    5-   Amends Ord. 99-82.
      1992
218-  11-  Lands on north side of Walker Road, west of Avon Belden Road, from R-1 to
94    28-  B-2.
      1994
221-  12-  Lands on north side of Walker Road, west of Avon Belden Road, from R-1 to
94    12-  B-2.
      1994
      2-   Lands in the south-central portion of the city (in the vicinity of Belmont
26-95 20-  and Avon Belden Roads), from I to LI.
      1995
      4-   A 15,000 square foot lot on the west side of Avon Belden Road approximately
62-95 10-  1,500 feet from the city’s southern border, from R-1 to B-1.
      1995
      3-   A 35.83 acre tract of land on the northwest corner of Avon Belden Road and
52-98 23-  Walker Road, from R-1 to R-3.
      1998
      3-
59-00 13-  Land on southeast corner of Lear Road and Walker Road, from R-1 to R-2.
      2000
      3-   Land on one parcel south of the southeast corner of Lear Road and Walker
60-00 13-  Road, from R-1 to R-2.
      2000
      4-
68-01 23-  Land located north of Walker Road and west of Moore Road, from B-2 to R-3.
      2001
183-  10-
01    8-   Land located north of Walker Road and west of Moore Road, from B-2 to R-3.
      2001
217-  10-
02    14-  Land located at 412 Avon Belden Road, from R-3 to O-1.
      2002
261-  11-  Land located on Avon Belden Road between the Fire Department driveway and
02    25-  516 Avon Belden Road, from R-1 to B-2.
      2002
      4-   13.79 acre tract owned by Joan M. Musial, to be designated as being located
77-03 14-  within an agricultural district.
      2003
      2-9- 33.78 acre tract of land owned by Grace Emily Fettinger, by and through
29-04 2004 Hollie F. Anzenberger, legal guardian, to be designated as being located
           within an agricultural district.
247-  11-  Aqua Marine property which is bordered by the westerly corporation line of
04    22-  Avon Lake, Miller Road on the east, Lake Road on the north, and Walker Road
      2004 on the south, from B-2 and R-1 to R-3.
80-07 7-9- Certain land located at the southeast corner of Miller Road and Lake Road
      2007 from R-1A to B-1.
139-  12-
07    10-  Certain land located along Webber Road from LI to R-2.
      2007
143-  10-
08    27-  Portions of land located at Miller Road and Walker Road from B-2 to R-3.
      2008
      3-9- Approving with modifications the application made by Hollie F. Anzenberger,
24-09 2009 guardian of Grace Emily Fettinger, to have certain land owned by her
           designated as being located within an Agricultural District.
139-  11-  Property at 130 Miller Road adjacent to the Avon Lake Animal Clinic, from
2012  14-  R-1A to B-1.
      2012
Res.  2-   Approving with modifications the application made by Hollie F. Anzenberger,
27-   24-  guardian of Grace Emily Fettinger, to have certain land owned by her
2014  2014 designated as being located within an Agricultural District.
2-    1-   Rezoning 13.81 acres of property on the south side of Webber Road from LI
2015  12-  to R-2.
      2015
3-    1-   Rezoning 9.46 acres of property on the south side of Webber Road from LI to
2015  12-  R-2.
      2015
      3-   Approving with modifications the application made by ABK Limited, the
35-   23-  successor in interest to Allan A. and Barbara A. Klingshirn, to have
2015  2015 certain land owned by it designated as being located within an Agricultural
           District.
36-   3-   Approving with modifications the application made by LNK Limited, aka Lee
2015  23-  and Nancy Klingshirn, to have certain land owned by it designated as being
      2015 located within an Agricultural District.
113-  9-   Rezoning 1.12 acres and 1.18 acres of property at Walker Road and Taylor
2016  12-  Avenue, from B-2 General Commerce, to R-3 Multi-Family Residence.
      2016
1-    1-9- Rezoning a portion of 127 Miller Road and the recently vacated alley from
2017  2017 R1-A to B-1 Limited Business.
142-  11-  Rezoning two parcels of land on the west side of Lear Road and south of
2017  13-  Walker Road from R-1 Single Family Residential to R-2 Multi-Family
      2017 Residential.
12-   2-   Rezoning Aqua Marine southeast expansion at Walker Road and Miller Road
2018  12-  from B-2 General Commerce to R-3 Multi-Family Residential.
      2018
57-   5-   Rezoning 134 Miller Road and a portion of a vacated alley from R-1A
2019  13-  Residence to B-1 Limited Business.
      2019
103-  8-   Rezoning properties owned by Moore Road Properties, Ltd., known as 525
2019  26-  Moore Road, from R-1 Residence to B-2 General Business.
      2019
Res.  2-   Approving the application made by ABK Limited to have certain land owned by
19-   24-  it designated as being located within an Agricultural District.
2020  2020
Res.  2-   Approving the application made by LNK Limited to have certain land owned by
20-   24-  it designated as being located within an Agricultural District.
2020  2020
24-   3-9- Rezoning a portion of Permanent Parcel No. 04-00-008- 104-134 Webber Road
2020  2020 from LI Light Industrial to R-2 Multi-Family Residential.
25-   3-9- Rezoning a portion of Permanent Parcel No. 04-00-008- 104-125 Pin Oak
2020  2020 Parkway from LI Light Industrial to R-2 Multi-Family Residential.
109-  12-  Rezoning Permanent Parcel No. 04-00-017-101-090 and Permanent Parcel No.
2020  14-  04-00-017-101-066 from R-1 Single Family Residential to R-2 Multi-Family
      2020 Residential.
22-   9-   Rezoning Permanent Parcel No. 04-00-018-128-232 and Permanent Parcel No.
131   12-  94-00-018-128-224 from B-1 Limited Business District to an R-3 Multi-Family
      2022 Residence District.
      3-   Rezoning Permanent Parcel No. 04-00-006-114-078 from P-I Public
24-39 25-  Institutional District to a B-1 Limited Business District.
      2024
      5-   Designating the section of Lake Road starting at a point 417 feet east of
24-57 28-  Moore Road and ending at a point 1,095 feet west of Moore Road, for a total
      2024 of 1,512 feet (0.29 miles) as a business district.
25-   11-  Rezoning Permanent Parcel No. 04-00-006-135-071 from B-2 General Business
166   10-  District to R-1A Single-Family Residence District.
      2025
          
 
TABLE I: CHANGE OF NAME OF STREETS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date       Description
684           1-13-1947  Elsasser Drive to Brookfield Road.
10-61         1-23-1961  Malenda Avenue to Canterbury Road.
177-64        12-14-1964 Part of Knickerbocker Road to Pin Oak Parkway.
156-80        11-24-1980 Georgetown Court to Coventry Court.
101-91        8-26-1991  Rosewood Avenue to Elmwood Drive.
244-02        11-25-2002 Logan Court to Bayberry Court.
200-03        9-22-2003  Legacy Point Parkway to Legacy Pointe Parkway.
                        
 
TABLE J: HISTORIC LANDMARKS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date       Description
13-2012       2-13-2012  Designating the Peter Miller House and property as an
                         historic landmark.
52-2013       5-13-2013  Designating the Lake Shore Cemetery as an historic
                         landmark.
111-2013      8-26-2013  Designating Assembly Hall, known as the Folger Home,
                         as an historic landmark.
64-2015       5-11-2015  Designating the Dunning Home located at 240 Jaycox
                         Road as an historic landmark.
142-2015      11-9-2015  Designating the Anson Titus House located at 33350
                         Lake Road as an historic landmark.
114-2016      9-12-2016  Designating the Hubbard-Duerk House located at 549
                         Avon Belden Road as an historic landmark.
140-2016      10-24-2016 Designating the Satter Homestead located at 32295
                         Walker Road as an historic landmark.
23-2017       2-27-2017  Designating the Buer Homestead located at 609 Jaycox
                         Road as an historic landmark.
187-2017      12-18-2017 Designating the Krebs Farm located at 520 Lear Road as
                         a full site historic landmark.
188-2017      12-18-2017 Designating the Lear Homestead located at 309 Lear
                         Road as a full site historic landmark.
                         Designating Beach Park Station, Stop 65 (Building 1
189-2017      12-18-2017 facade only) located at 33483 Lake Road as an historic
                         landmark.
                         Designating the Lake Shore Electric Railway Baggage
190-2017      12-18-2017 Car No. 38 located at 33483 Lake Road as an object
                         historic landmark.
13-2018       2-12-2018  Designating the Beck House (house only) located at
                         32211 Lake Road as an historic landmark.
164-2018      10-22-2018 Designating 192 Lear Road as an historic landmark.
                         Designating the Red Aircraft Warning Beacon mounted
25-148        10-14-2025 atop the Avon Lake Power Plant Smokestack as a
                         historic landmark.
                        
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to the Ohio Revised Code
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO THE OHIO REVISED CODE
 
R.C. Code Section                        Code Section
Title LVII                               886.02
1.01                                     202.01
1.02                                     202.02
1.05                                     202.02
1.14                                     202.03
1.15                                     202.03
1.23                                     202.05
1.42                                     202.03
1.43                                     202.03
1.44                                     202.02
1.45                                     202.03
1.50                                     202.06
1.55                                     202.05
1.57                                     202.04
1.58                                     202.04
1.59                                     202.02
3.06                                     260.02
9.01                                     Chapter 274
9.17                                     252.04;
                                         252.041
                                         Charter §§ 24;
9.481                                    31;
                                         37
                                         Charter §§ 24;
9.481(B)(2)(b)                           31;
                                         37
9.64(C)                                  260.28
9.64(E)                                  260.28
9.68                                     672.01
111.15                                   1246.02
111.15(A)(2)                             1476.10
119.01 to 119.13                         478.03
119.06 to 119.13                         1410.06
                                         220.01;
121.22                                   271.04;
                                         886.21
124.34                                   276.02
124.38                                   260.05
124.40                                   Chapter 276;
                                         276.02
125.182                                  606.27
125.30                                   886.02
128.01(A)                                606.32
128.32(E) - (G)                          606.32
128.99(A), (B)                           606.32
Chapter 135                              232.06
149.381                                  274.03
149.39 et seq.                           274.01
149.39                                   274.03
149.43                                   274.06;
                                         1484.06
149.43(B)(1)                             274.06
149.43(B)(8)                             274.06
149.43(E)(1)                             274.06
319.26                                   606.11
321.37                                   606.11
411.14                                   414.05
507.13                                   606.11
519.01                                   660.04
701.01                                   202.02
709.023                                  886.02
Chapter 711                              1210.03
Chapter 713                              1210.03
715.22                                   440.01
715.67                                   202.99
715.691                                  886.02;
                                         886.06
715.70                                   886.02;
                                         886.06
715.71                                   886.02;
                                         886.06
715.72                                   886.06
715.74                                   886.02
Chapter 718                              886.01;
                                         886.02
718.01(L)                                886.02
718.03                                   886.02
721.04                                   206.06;
                                         830.02
723.01                                   440.01
727.01 through 727.49                    1238.05
731.02                                   250.03
731.12                                   250.03
731.22                                   222.01
                                         1608.01;
731.231                                  1410.01;
                                         1416.01
731.25                                   222.01
731.56 through 731.59                    232.01
731.57                                   232.01
733.78                                   606.11
737.051                                  Chapter 276
737.10                                   Chapter 276
737.11                                   Chapter 276
901.51                                   642.07
901.99(A)                                642.07
925.62                                   618.06
925.99(B)                                618.06
Chapter 955                              618.16
955.10                                   618.09
955.11 et seq.                           618.01;
                                         618.23
955.11                                   618.16—
                                         618.19
955.11(A)(5)                             618.01
955.11(D)                                618.16
955.21                                   618.08
955.22                                   618.22
955.22(C)                                618.19
955.22(F)                                618.19
955.22(I)                                618.19
955.222                                  618.17
955.24                                   618.09
955.25                                   618.11
955.54                                   618.25;
                                         618.25
955.99                                   618.19
955.99(B)                                618.09;
                                         618.11
955.99(E)                                618.08
955.99(O)                                618.28
959.01                                   618.02
959.02                                   618.03
959.03                                   618.04
959.13                                   618.05
959.131                                  618.05
959.21                                   618.29
959.99(B)                                618.03
959.99(C)                                618.04
959.99(D)                                618.05;
                                         618.29
959.99(E)                                618.05
959.99(E)(3)                             618.02
959.99(E)(7)                             618.29
1349.17                                  642.20
1349.99(A)                               642.20
1351.4(e)                                232.06
1521.13                                  1476.20
1546.01                                  670.01
1547.02                                  670.01
1547.03                                  670.02
1547.04                                  670.03
1547.05                                  670.04
1547.051                                 670.04
1547.052                                 670.04
1547.06                                  670.05
1547.07                                  670.06
1547.071                                 670.07
1547.072                                 670.06
1547.08                                  670.08
1547.09                                  670.09
1547.10                                  670.39
1547.11                                  670.10
1547.111                                 670.11
1547.12                                  670.12
1547.132                                 670.06
1547.14                                  670.13
1547.15                                  670.14
1547.16                                  670.15
1547.18                                  670.16
1547.19                                  670.17
1547.20                                  670.18
1547.21                                  670.19
1547.22                                  670.20
1547.23                                  670.21
1547.24                                  670.22
1547.25                                  670.23
1547.251                                 670.24
1547.26                                  670.25
1547.27                                  670.26
1547.28                                  670.27
1547.29                                  670.28
1547.30                                  670.29
1547.301                                 670.29
1547.302                                 670.29
1547.303                                 670.29
1547.304                                 670.29
1547.31(A) - (H)                         670.30
1547.32                                  670.33
1547.33                                  670.33
1547.34                                  670.34
1547.38                                  670.31
1547.39                                  670.32
1547.40                                  670.32
1547.41                                  670.35
1547.53                                  670.36
1547.531                                 670.37
1547.533                                 670.37
1547.59                                  670.39
1547.63                                  670.40
1547.65                                  670.44
1547.66                                  670.38
1547.92                                  670.45
                                         670.08;
1547.99(B)                               670.11;
                                         670.38;
                                         670.39
1547.99(D)                               670.06;
                                         670.12
1547.99(E)                               670.06;
                                         670.12
                                         670.23;
                                         670.29;
1547.99(F)                               670.31—
                                         670.33;
                                         670.44;
                                         670.45
1547.99(G)                               670.10
1547.99(H)                               670.29
1547.99(J)                               670.30
1547.99(K)                               670.04
1548.01(B)                               670.41
1548.01(C)                               670.41
1548.03                                  670.41
1548.05                                  670.42
1548.18                                  670.43
1548.99(A)                               670.43
1706.01(K)                               232.06
Chapter 1716                             840.03
Chapter 1724                             250.01
1724.10                                  250.02
1901.01                                  Ch. 298
1901.02                                  Ch. 298
1901.261                                 298.02
2506.01                                  1484.10
Chapter 2151                             636.20
2151.27                                  612.02
2151.34                                  636.26
2151.356 through 2151.358                612.02
2151.421(A)(1)                           606.07
2151.421(A)(4)                           606.07
2151.87                                  636.19
2151.99                                  606.07
                                         1214.03;
Chapter 2505                             1214.09;
                                         1214.11;
                                         1218.03
                                         856.05;
                                         1214.03;
                                         1214.09;
Chapter 2506                             1214.11;
                                         1218.03;
                                         1476.40;
                                         1468.05
2901.01                                  606.01
2901.02                                  606.03
2901.03                                  606.04
2901.04                                  606.05
2901.09                                  606.33
2901.11                                  606.06
2901.13                                  606.07
2901.20                                  416.13;
                                         432.46
2901.21                                  606.08
2901.22                                  606.02
2901.23                                  606.09
2901.24                                  606.10
2903.05                                  636.02
2903.06                                  434.11
2903.08(A)(3), (C)(3), (D)(3), (E) - (G) 434.11
2903.09                                  636.01
2903.10                                  636.24
2903.13                                  636.03
2903.14                                  636.04
2903.16                                  636.24
2903.20(A)                               298.03
2903.20(Q)                               298.03
2903.20(T)                               298.03
2903.21                                  636.05
                                         636.06;
2903.211                                 636.26;
                                         666.23
2903.213                                 636.26
2903.214                                 636.26
2903.216                                 636.26
2903.22                                  636.07
2903.31                                  636.18
2903.311(B), (C)                         636.18
2905.03                                  636.08
2905.12                                  636.09
Chapter 2907                             606.14
2907.01                                  666.01
2907.02                                  666.23
2907.03                                  666.23
2907.03(A)(5) through (A)(13)            666.23
2907.04                                  666.02;
                                         666.23
2907.05                                  666.23
2907.06                                  666.03;
                                         666.23
2907.07                                  666.23
2907.071                                 666.23
2907.08                                  666.05
2907.09                                  666.04
2907.10                                  666.06
2907.23                                  666.07
2907.231                                 666.07
2907.24                                  666.08
2907.241                                 666.09
2907.25                                  666.10
2907.26                                  666.11
2907.31                                  666.12
2907.311                                 666.13
2907.33                                  666.14
2907.35                                  666.15
2907.36                                  666.16
2907.37                                  666.17
2907.38                                  666.18
2907.39                                  666.19
2907.40                                  666.20
2909.01                                  642.01
2909.03                                  642.10
2909.04                                  Chapter 278
2909.06                                  642.11
2909.07                                  642.12
2909.08(A) - (E)                         672.04
2909.09                                  642.11
2909.10                                  642.38
2909.101                                 642.38
2909.11(B) - (D)                         642.31
2909.31                                  606.31
2911.21                                  642.13
2911.211                                 642.14
2911.23                                  642.13
2911.32                                  642.15
2913.01                                  636.26;
                                         642.01
2913.02                                  642.02
2913.02(B)                               642.02
2913.03                                  642.05
2913.04                                  642.06
2913.07                                  642.37
2913.08                                  642.01
2913.11                                  642.16
2913.21                                  642.19
2913.31(B), (C)(2)                       642.17
2913.32                                  642.18
2913.33                                  642.21
2913.40                                  642.36
2913.401                                 642.36
2913.41                                  642.22
2913.42                                  642.23
2913.43                                  642.24
2913.44                                  642.25
2913.441                                 606.29
2913.45                                  642.27
2913.47                                  642.33
2913.48                                  642.35
2913.51                                  642.28
2913.61(B) - (E)                         642.30
2913.71                                  642.03
2913.72                                  642.04
2915.01                                  630.01;
                                         840.04
2915.02(A) - (G), (K)                    630.02
2915.03                                  630.03
2915.04                                  630.04
2915.05                                  630.05
2915.06                                  630.14
2915.061                                 630.14
2915.09                                  630.06
2915.091                                 630.10
2915.092                                 630.11
2915.093                                 630.12
2915.094                                 630.13
2915.10                                  630.07
2915.11                                  630.08
2915.12                                  630.09
2915.13                                  630.12
2915.14                                  630.15
2917.01                                  648.10
2917.03                                  648.01
2917.031                                 648.01
2917.04                                  648.02
2917.05                                  648.03
2917.11                                  648.04
2917.12                                  648.05
2917.13                                  648.06
2917.14                                  648.11
2917.21                                  636.14
2917.211                                 666.22
2917.31                                  648.07
2917.32                                  648.08
2917.40                                  636.17
2917.41                                  642.34
2919.21                                  636.10
2919.22(A) - (E), (H)                    636.11
2919.23                                  636.12
2919.24                                  636.13
2919.25                                  636.16
2919.26                                  636.26
2919.27                                  636.06;
                                         636.26
2921.01                                  606.01
2921.13                                  606.11
2921.14                                  606.12
2921.21                                  606.13
2921.22                                  606.14
2921.23                                  606.15
2921.29                                  606.31
2921.31                                  606.16
2921.32                                  606.17
2921.321                                 642.09
2921.33                                  606.18
2921.331(A) - (C), (E), (F)              606.19
2921.42                                  606.20
2921.43                                  606.21
2921.44                                  606.22
2921.45                                  606.23
2921.51                                  606.28
2921.52(A) - (D)                         606.30
2923.02                                  606.24
2923.03                                  606.25
2923.11(M)                               672.03
2923.1213                                606.11
2923.125                                 606.11
2923.162                                 672.02
2923.24                                  672.06
2925.01                                  606.24;
                                         624.01
2925.03(F)                               624.06;
                                         624.10
2925.04(A), (B), (C)(5), (G)             624.03
2925.11                                  624.04
2925.12                                  624.05
2925.13(A)                               624.06
2925.14                                  624.16
2925.141                                 624.16
2925.31                                  624.07
2925.32(B)(4), (D)(2), (F), (G)          624.08
2925.33                                  624.09
2925.34                                  624.19
2925.36(A) - (D), (F)                    624.10
2925.37(A), (G)                          624.17
                                         624.04;
                                         624.05;
2925.38                                  624.06;
                                         624.07;
                                         624.10;
                                         624.16
2925.50                                  624.13
2925.51                                  624.12
2925.511                                 624.12
2925.55                                  624.18
2925.56                                  624.18
2925.57                                  624.18
2925.58                                  624.18
2925.62                                  624.20
2927.02                                  636.19
2927.021                                 636.19
2927.022                                 636.19
2927.023                                 636.19
2927.024                                 636.19
2927.03                                  636.23
2927.11                                  642.08
2927.12                                  636.22
2927.15                                  636.25
2927.17                                  666.21
2929.01                                  636.26
2929.142                                 434.01
2929.16                                  636.26
2929.17                                  636.26
2929.18                                  642.02
2929.18(A)                               624.06;
                                         624.10
2929.20                                  636.26
2929.21                                  698.02
2929.22                                  698.03
2929.23                                  666.99
2929.24                                  636.19;
                                         698.02
2929.25                                  698.02
2929.26                                  636.26;
                                         698.02
2929.27                                  636.26;
                                         698.02
2929.28                                  642.02;
                                         698.02
2929.28(A)(2)                            636.19
2929.31                                  698.04
                                         624.04;
                                         624.06;
2929.33                                  624.07;
                                         624.10;
                                         624.16
2929.41                                  698.05
2935.01                                  672.03
2935.041                                 606.26
2935.36                                  612.02
2935.36(E)                               698.01
2941.1418                                606.24
2941.1419                                606.24
2941.1420                                606.24
2941.25                                  432.46
Chapter 2950                             666.98
2950.02                                  666.98
2950.034                                 1484.05
2951.041                                 636.26
2953.33                                  612.02
2967.26                                  636.26
2967.28                                  636.26
2971.03                                  606.24
2981.07                                  642.26
2981.11                                  606.27
2981.11 to 2981.13                       672.03
2981.12                                  606.27
2981.13(A)                               606.27
3113.31                                  636.26
3501.28                                  886.02
3501.36                                  886.02
3701.81                                  660.02
3701.82                                  660.01
3701.99(B)                               660.01
3701.99(C)                               660.02
3715.01                                  1246.02
3715.05                                  624.18
3715.06                                  624.18
3716.11                                  636.15
3716.99(C)                               636.15
3719.011                                 612.02
3719.08(A), (E)                          624.15
3719.172                                 624.16
3719.172(A), (B)                         624.10
3719.19                                  624.13
3719.21                                  624.06;
                                         624.10
3719.99(C)                               624.15
3719.99(E)                               624.10
3731.01                                  612.02
3733.41                                  1410.03
                                         606.24;
Chapter 3734                             668.04;
                                         1476.20
3734.18                                  606.24
3737.65                                  1098.14
3737.82                                  672.03
Chapter 3743                             672.03;
                                         1410.08
3743.01                                  672.03
3743.02 through 3743.08                  672.03
3743.03                                  672.03
3743.04(1)                               672.03
3743.05                                  672.03
3743.06                                  672.03
3743.06(C)                               672.03
3743.06(J)                               672.03
3743.06(K)                               672.03
3743.07                                  672.03
3743.08                                  672.03
3743.08(B)(1)                            672.03
3743.08(B)(2)                            672.03
3743.15 through 3743.21                  672.03
3743.16                                  672.03
3743.17(G)                               672.03
3743.18                                  672.03
3743.19                                  672.03
3743.19(D)                               672.03
3743.20                                  672.03
3743.21                                  672.03
3743.21(B)(1)                            672.03
3743.21(B)(2)                            672.03
3743.26                                  672.03
3743.27                                  672.03
3743.40                                  672.03
3743.44                                  672.03
3743.45                                  672.03
3743.45(A)                               672.03
3743.45(D)                               672.03
3743.50 through 3743.55                  672.03
3743.51                                  672.03
3743.53                                  672.03
3743.53(B)                               672.03
3743.53(C)                               672.03
3743.53(D)                               672.03
3743.53(E)                               672.03
3743.54                                  672.03
3743.55                                  672.03
3743.56                                  672.03
3743.58                                  672.03
3743.61(1)                               672.03
3743.60(E) - (J)                         672.03
3743.63                                  672.03
3743.64                                  672.03
3743.65(A) - (H)                         672.03
3743.66                                  672.03
3743.68                                  672.03
3743.68(B)                               672.03
3743.80                                  672.03
3743.99(C)                               672.03
3743.99(D)                               672.03
Chapter 3745                             1470.04
3767.13                                  660.04
3767.29                                  660.06
3767.99(B)                               660.06
3767.99(C)                               660.04
3770.21                                  886.02
3772.01                                  886.02
3780.36                                  624.02
3780.99                                  624.02
Chapter 3781                             1410.04;
                                         1410.06
3781.06                                  1410.03;
                                         1470.02
3781.06(C)(4)                            440.08
3781.061                                 1410.03
3781.10                                  1410.03
3781.108                                 672.03
3781.11(B)                               1410.08
3781.111(C)                              452.04
3781.19                                  1410.06
3781.55                                  666.04
Chapter 3791                             1410.04;
                                         1410.06
Chapter 3902                             1484.05
3791.01                                  1410.04
3791.02                                  1410.04
3791.03                                  1410.04
3791.031                                 660.13
3791.04                                  1410.04
Chapter 4301                             612.02
4301.01                                  612.01
4301.22(A)(1)                            612.02
4301.22(A)(2)                            612.10
4301.22(B)                               612.03
4301.244                                 612.01
4301.62                                  612.07
4301.63                                  612.02
4301.631                                 612.10
4301.633                                 612.02
4301.634                                 612.02
4301.64                                  612.04
4301.65                                  612.11
4301.69                                  612.02
4301.99(A)                               612.07;
                                         612.11
4301.99(B)                               612.04;
                                         612.10
4301.99(C)                               612.02
4301.99(D), (H)                          612.02;
                                         612.03
4301.99(E)                               612.02;
                                         612.10
4301.99(F)                               612.02
4301.99(I)                               612.02
4301.99(J)                               612.11
4303.202(D)(2)                           612.08
4303.208(C)                              612.08
4303.25                                  612.05
4303.99(D)                               612.08
4313.02                                  886.02
                                         402.01;
4501.01                                  416.11;
                                         440.08;
                                         606.24
4501.01(LL)                              402.01
4501.01(TT)                              416.11
4503.02                                  882.01
4503.04                                  882.03
4503.07                                  882.01
4503.10                                  882.02
4503.101                                 882.03
4503.11(A)                               436.13
4503.11(D)                               436.13
4503.111(A), (C)                         436.13
4503.111(B)                              436.14
4503.12(A)                               436.13
4503.12(D)                               436.14
4503.13                                  882.03
4503.16                                  882.03
4503.17                                  882.03
4503.171                                 882.03
4503.18                                  882.01
4503.21(A)                               436.14
4503.21(B), (C)                          436.14
4503.211                                 436.14
4503.41                                  452.04
4503.44                                  452.04;
                                         454.01
4503.44(A)(1)                            452.04
4504.02                                  882.02
4504.08                                  882.04
4505.072                                 438.27
4505.18                                  436.13
4506.01                                  442.01
4506.011                                 442.02
4506.04(A), (B)                          442.03
4506.04(C)                               442.03
4506.10(A), (E)                          442.04
4506.12(I)                               442.03
4506.12(J)                               442.03
4506.15                                  442.05
4506.19                                  442.06
4506.20                                  442.07
4506.23                                  442.08
Chapter 4507                             478.03
4507.02(A)(1)                            436.01
4507.02(A)(2)                            436.02
4507.03                                  436.01
4507.04                                  436.01
4507.05(F), (I)                          436.03
4507.071(B) - (J)                        436.04
4507.213                                 436.01
4507.30                                  436.05
4507.35                                  436.07
4507.99                                  436.02
4509.101                                 606.11
4509.101(D)(2)                           606.11
Chapter 4510                             642.02
4510.02(A)(2)                            606.24
4510.02(A)(6)                            612.02
4510.02(A)(7)                            612.02;
                                         642.02
4510.037(J)                              436.08
                                         436.08;
4510.04                                  436.10—
                                         436.12
4510.05                                  408.03;
                                         698.06
4510.11                                  436.08
4510.111                                 436.08
4510.12                                  436.09
4510.14                                  436.10
4510.16                                  436.11
4510.21                                  436.12
4510.36                                  432.46
4510.44                                  434.02
4511.01                                  402.01
4511.01(A)                               454.01
4511.03                                  432.19
4511.031                                 414.09
4511.04                                  404.02
4511.041                                 404.03
4511.042                                 404.03
4511.05                                  404.04
4511.051                                 412.05
4511.08                                  404.08
4511.09                                  406.02
4511.12(A)                               414.01
4511.12(B)                               414.01
4511.121(A) - (C), (E)                   414.01
4511.121(D)                              414.01
4511.13                                  414.03
4511.131                                 414.04
4511.132                                 432.16
4511.15                                  402.01;
                                         414.10
4511.16                                  414.06
4511.17                                  414.07
4511.18                                  414.08
4511.181                                 434.01
4511.19                                  624.06;
                                         624.10
4511.19(A) - (F)                         434.01
4511.19(G) - (M)                         434.01
4511.191(A)                              434.01
4511.191(D)                              434.01
4511.192                                 434.01
4511.194                                 434.01
4511.20                                  434.03
4511.201                                 434.03
4511.202                                 434.04
4511.203                                 436.06
4511.204                                 432.46
4511.205                                 432.47
4511.21(A) - (G)                         434.05
4511.21(O)                               434.05
4511.21(P)                               434.05
4511.211                                 434.06
4511.213                                 432.21
4511.214                                 434.12
4511.215                                 434.12
4511.216                                 434.12
4511.22                                  434.07
4511.23                                  434.08
4511.24                                  434.09
4511.25                                  432.01
4511.251                                 434.10
4511.26                                  432.02
4511.27                                  432.03
4511.28                                  432.04
4511.29                                  432.05
4511.30                                  432.06
4511.31                                  432.07
4511.32                                  432.31
4511.33                                  432.08
4511.34                                  432.09
4511.35                                  432.32
4511.36                                  432.10
4511.37                                  432.11
4511.38                                  432.12
4511.39                                  432.13
4511.40                                  432.14
4511.41                                  432.15
4511.42                                  432.17
4511.43                                  432.18
4511.431                                 432.22
4511.432                                 432.23
4511.44                                  432.22
4511.441                                 416.09
4511.45                                  432.20
4511.451                                 432.24
4511.452                                 416.08
4511.454                                 432.20
4511.46                                  416.01
4511.47                                  416.02
4511.48                                  416.03
4511.481                                 416.10
4511.49                                  416.04
4511.50                                  416.05
4511.51                                  416.06
4511.511                                 416.07
4511.512                                 416.11
4511.513                                 416.12
4511.514                                 404.01;
                                         416.13
4511.52                                  474.01
4511.53                                  474.02
4511.54                                  474.03
4511.55                                  474.04
4511.56                                  474.05
4511.60                                  432.30
4511.61                                  432.35
4511.62                                  432.34
4511.63                                  432.35
4511.64                                  432.36
4511.65                                  414.02
4511.66                                  452.01
4511.661                                 452.07
4511.67                                  452.02
4511.681                                 452.06
4511.69(A) - (I), (K)                    452.04
4511.70                                  432.26;
                                         452.08
4511.701                                 440.08
4511.71(A)                               432.27
4511.71(B)                               432.27
4511.712                                 432.37
4511.713                                 432.43
4511.714(A), (B)                         432.27
4511.714(C)                              432.27
4511.714(D)                              432.27
4511.72                                  432.28
4511.73                                  432.29
4511.74                                  412.01
4511.75                                  432.33
4511.76                                  404.01
4511.771                                 432.33
4511.78                                  414.03
4511.79                                  442.09
4511.81(A) - (H), (K), (L)               438.30
4511.82                                  432.44
4511.84                                  432.45
4511.85                                  440.11
4511.98                                  432.46
4511.99                                  408.02
4511.991                                 408.02;
                                         432.46
4513.01 to 4513.37                       440.01
4513.02(A), (H)                          438.01
4513.021                                 438.28
4513.03                                  438.02
4513.04                                  438.03
4513.05                                  438.04
4513.06                                  438.05
4513.07                                  438.06
4513.071                                 438.27
4513.08                                  438.07
4513.09                                  438.08
4513.10                                  438.09
4513.11                                  438.10
4513.111                                 438.10
4513.112                                 438.10
4513.113                                 438.10
4513.114                                 438.10
4513.115                                 438.10
4513.12                                  438.11
4513.13                                  438.12
4513.14                                  438.13
4513.15                                  438.14
4513.16                                  438.15
4513.17                                  438.16
4513.171                                 438.17
4513.182                                 438.18
4513.19                                  438.19
4513.20                                  438.20
4513.21                                  438.21
4513.22                                  438.22
4513.23                                  438.23
4513.24                                  438.24
4513.241(C) - (J)                        438.25
4513.241(K)                              438.25
4513.263                                 438.31
4513.29                                  440.04
4513.30                                  438.26
4513.31                                  440.06
4513.32                                  440.05
4513.34                                  440.01
4513.34(F)                               440.01
4513.34(G)                               440.01
4513.361                                 404.11
4513.60                                  452.06
4513.601                                 452.06
4513.61                                  452.05
4513.64                                  452.05
4513.66                                  436.19
4513.68                                  436.19
                                         438.09;
                                         438.18;
4513.99                                  438.20;
                                         438.26;
                                         440.04—
                                         440.06
4519.01                                  476.01
4519.02                                  476.08
4519.09                                  476.09
4519.20                                  476.02
4519.40                                  476.03
4519.401                                 434.12
4519.41                                  476.04
4519.41(F)                               476.03
4519.44                                  476.05
4519.46                                  476.06
4519.48                                  476.07
4519.66                                  476.09
4521.01                                  454.01
4521.02                                  454.02
4521.04                                  454.04
4521.08(C)                               454.07
4549.02                                  436.16
4549.021                                 436.17
4549.03                                  436.18
4549.05                                  444.01
4549.08                                  436.15
4549.081(B)                              414.01
4549.081(C)                              414.01
4549.11(A)                               436.13
4549.11(B)                               436.14
4549.12(A)                               436.13
4549.12(B)                               436.14
4549.20                                  438.32
4703.01 to 4703.19                       1476.10
Chapter 4723                             438.30
4729.01                                  612.02
Chapter 4730                             666.01
Chapter 4731                             666.01
4731.14                                  810.01
4731.29                                  810.01
Chapter 4733                             1476.10
4737.05 to 4737.12                       668.04
Chapter 4740                             1438.10;
                                         1438.11
4740.07                                  1438.10
4749.01                                  636.26;
                                         850.01
4749.03                                  636.26;
                                         850.02
                                         624.01;
                                         624.04;
Chapter 4772                             624.05;
                                         624.10;
                                         624.16
Chapter 4781                             1476.10
4905.03(A), (C), (D), (E) or (G)         432.46
Chapter 4906                             1476.20
4907.47                                  882.01
4927.01                                  886.05
4933.18                                  642.32
4933.19                                  642.32
5104.01                                  1410.03
5104.03                                  1410.03
Chapter 5119                             1246.02
Chapter 5123                             1246.02
5123.19                                  1216.06
5301.63                                  1240.04
5301.70                                  1230.05
5309.05                                  1484.13
5309.42                                  1484.13
Chapter 5312                             1484.02
5321.04(A)(9)                            662.04
5321.17(C)                               662.04
5513.01(B)                               252.06
5577.01 to 5577.09                       440.01
5577.05                                  404.01;
                                         440.02
5577.06                                  440.02
5577.11                                  440.03
5577.15                                  440.05
5577.99(C)                               440.02
5577.99(E)                               440.03
5589.08                                  440.07
5589.081                                 440.07
5589.12                                  642.29
5589.99(B)                               440.07;
                                         642.29
Chapter 5701                             886.02
5703.056                                 886.02;
                                         886.14
5703.056(B)(3)                           886.02
5717.011                                 886.02;
                                         886.21
5717.03                                  886.02
5727.01                                  886.05
5727.24                                  886.02
5727.30                                  886.02
5743.71                                  606.11
Chapter 5745                             886.02;
                                         886.03
5747.01                                  886.02
5747.08(G)                               886.05
Chapter 6111                             668.04
6111.01                                  1058.02;
                                         1060.02
                                         
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
 
Prior Code Section Code Section
240.08             240.04
252.06             252.05
252.08             252.06
252.10             252.07
256.09             256.08
256.10             256.09
256.11             256.10
256.12             256.11
256.13             256.12
256.14             256.13
256.16             256.14
256.17             256.15
256.195            256.16
256.196            256.17
256.20             256.18
256.21             256.19
256.23             256.20
256.24             256.21
260.001            260.01
260.01             260.02
260.02             260.03
260.03             260.04
260.035            260.05
260.04             260.06
260.05             260.07
260.06             260.08
260.07             260.09
260.08             260.10
260.09             260.11
260.10             260.12
260.11             260.13
260.12             260.14
260.14             260.15
260.15             260.16
260.16             260.17
260.17             260.18
260.18             260.19
260.20             260.20
260.22             260.21
260.23             260.22
260.24             260.23
260.26             260.25
260.27             260.26
260.28             260.27
404.02             404.01
404.03             404.02
404.035            404.03
414.07             414.06
414.08             414.07
414.09             414.08
414.10             414.09
432.155            432.16
432.16             432.17
432.17             432.18
432.18             432.19
432.19             432.20
432.195            432.21
432.20             432.22
432.205            432.23
432.21             432.24
432.22             432.25
432.23             432.26
432.24             432.27
432.25             432.28
432.26             432.29
432.27             432.30
432.28             432.31
432.29             432.32
432.30             432.33
432.31             432.34
432.32             432.35
432.33             432.36
432.34             432.37
432.35             432.38
432.36             432.39
432.37             432.40
432.38             432.41
432.39             432.42
432.40             432.43
432.41             432.44
432.42             432.45
432.43             432.46
432.44             432.47
434.011            434.02
434.02             434.03
434.025            434.04
434.03             434.05
434.035            434.06
434.04             434.07
434.05             434.08
434.06             434.09
434.07             434.10
434.08             434.11
434.09             434.12
436.035            436.04
436.04             436.05
436.05             436.06
436.06             436.07
436.071            436.08
436.072            436.09
436.073            436.10
436.074            436.11
436.075            436.12
436.08             436.13
436.09             436.14
436.10             436.15
436.11             436.16
436.12             436.17
436.13             436.18
436.14             436.19
438.165            438.17
438.17             438.18
438.18             438.19
438.19             438.20
438.20             438.21
438.21             438.22
438.22             438.23
438.23             438.24
438.235            438.25
438.24             438.26
438.25             438.27
438.26             438.28
438.27             438.29
438.28             438.30
438.29             438.31
438.31             438.32
444.02             444.01
452.055            452.06
452.06             452.07
452.07             452.08
452.08             452.09
452.09             452.10
452.10             452.11
452.11             452.12
452.12             452.13
452.13             452.14
452.14             452.15
452.15             452.16
474.09             474.08
474.10             474.09
474.11             474.10
474.12             474.11
474.13             474.12
474.14             474.13
474.15             474.14
606.055            606.06
606.06             606.07
606.07             606.08
606.08             606.09
606.09             606.10
606.10             606.11
606.105            606.12
606.11             606.13
606.12             606.14
606.13             606.15
606.14             606.16
606.15             606.17
606.16             606.18
606.165            606.19
606.17             606.20
606.18             606.21
606.19             606.22
606.20             606.23
606.21             606.24
606.22             606.25
606.23             606.26
606.24             606.27
606.25             606.28
606.26             606.29
606.27             606.30
606.28             606.31
606.29             606.32
606.30             606.33
610.04             610.03
610.05             610.04
618.095            618.10
618.10             618.11
618.11             618.12
618.12             618.13
618.13             618.14
618.14             618.15
618.17             618.16
618.18             618.17
618.19             618.18
618.20             618.19
618.21             618.20
618.22             618.21
618.23             618.22
618.24             618.23
618.25             618.24
618.26             618.25
618.27             618.26
618.28             618.27
624.025            624.03
624.03             624.04
624.04             624.05
624.05             624.06
624.07             624.07
624.073            624.08
624.076            624.09
624.08             624.10
624.09             624.11
624.10             624.12
624.11             624.13
624.12             624.14
624.13             624.15
624.15             624.16
624.16             624.17
624.17             624.18
630.091            630.10
630.092            630.11
630.093            630.12
630.094            630.13
630.11             630.14
636.001            636.01
636.01             636.02
636.02             636.03
636.03             636.04
636.04             636.05
636.045            636.06
636.05             636.07
636.06             636.08
636.09             636.09
636.10             636.10
636.11             636.11
636.12             636.12
636.125            636.13
636.15             636.14
636.16             636.15
636.17             636.16
636.18             636.17
636.19             636.18
636.20             636.19
636.21             636.20
636.22             636.21
636.23             636.22
636.24             636.23
636.25             636.24
636.26             636.25
642.035            642.04
642.04             642.05
642.05             642.06
642.06             642.07
642.07             642.08
642.08             642.09
642.09             642.10
642.10             642.11
642.11             642.12
642.12             642.13
642.125            642.14
642.13             642.15
642.14             642.16
642.145            642.17
642.146            642.18
642.15             642.19
642.155            642.20
642.16             642.21
642.17             642.22
642.18             642.23
642.19             642.24
642.20             642.25
642.205            642.26
642.21             642.27
642.22             642.28
642.23             642.29
642.24             642.30
642.25             642.31
642.26             642.32
642.28             642.33
642.30             642.34
642.31             642.35
642.32             642.36
642.33             642.37
660.13             660.12
660.14             660.13
660.15             660.14
666.085            666.09
666.09             666.10
666.10             666.11
666.11             666.12
666.115            666.13
670.03             670.02
670.04             670.03
670.055            670.04
670.06             670.05
670.07             670.06
670.075            670.07
670.08             670.08
670.09             670.09
670.10             670.10
670.105            670.11
670.11             670.12
670.12             670.13
670.13             670.14
670.14             670.15
670.15             670.16
670.16             670.17
670.17             670.18
670.18             670.19
670.19             670.20
670.20             670.21
670.21             670.22
670.22             670.23
670.23             670.24
670.24             670.25
670.25             670.26
670.26             670.27
670.27             670.28
670.28             670.29
670.29             670.30
670.30             670.31
670.31             670.32
670.32             670.33
670.33             670.34
670.335            670.35
670.34             670.36
670.345            670.37
670.35             670.38
670.36             670.39
670.37             670.40
670.39             670.41
670.40             670.42
670.41             670.43
670.42             670.44
670.44             670.45
672.09             672.01
672.095            672.02
672.10             672.03
672.12             672.04
672.13             672.05
672.14             672.06
810.03             810.03
1010.111           1010.12
1010.12            1010.13
1018.05            1018.04
1018.06            1018.05
1018.07            1018.06
1018.08            1018.07
1018.09            1018.08
1018.10            1018.09
1018.11            1018.10
1018.12            1018.11
1018.13            1018.12
1018.14            1018.13
1056.05            1056.04
1056.06            1056.05
1070.08            1070.07
1070.09            1070.08
1070.10            1070.09
1410.06            1410.05
1410.07            1410.06
1410.08            1410.07
1410.09            1410.08
1438.04            1438.03
1438.05            1438.04
1438.06            1438.05
1438.07            1438.06
1438.08            1438.07
1438.09            1438.08
1438.10            1438.09
1438.11            1438.10
1438.12            1438.11
1438.13            1438.12
1468.10            1468.99
                   
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed  Code Section
76       1-12-1925      TSO Table B
78       1-12-1925      TSO Table B
77       1-14-1925      TSO Table B
112-65   11-22-1965     TSO Table F
71-74    5-13-1974      TSO Table D
157-77   11-28-1977     TSO Table G
158-77   11-28-1977     TSO Table G
82-78    4-10-1978      TSO Table G
124-79   9-17-1979      1070.05;
                        TSO Table D
29-82    1-25-1982      1070.03
48-82    3-22-1982      1070.03
109-86   6-9-1986       TSO Table A
72-88    3-28-1988      232.04
114-88   6-27-1988      232.02
116-89   6-12-1989      1099.01
55-91    5-13-1991      210.01
181-94   9-26-1994      252.05
151-96   8-26-1996      TSO Table A
203-97   11-10-1997     TSO Table E
204-97   11-10-1997     TSO Table E
205-97   11-10-1997     TSO Table E
206-97   11-10-1997     TSO Table E
13-99    1-25-1999      252.06
226-00   9-25-2000      TSO Table E
146-02   6-24-2002      TSO Table A
156-05   9-26-2005      TSO Table A
27-2014  2-24-2014      TSO Table H
47-2018  3-26-2018      204.02
19-2020  2-24-2020      TSO Table H
20-2020  2-24-2020      TSO Table H
21-151   10-25-2021     252.07
23-78    4-24-2023      TSO Table B
                       
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No.        Date Passed Code Section
1046            - -         TSO Table B
9               7-8-1918    TSO Table C
15              5-26-1919   TSO Table A
33              11-22-1920  TSO Table A
41              7-11-1921   TSO Table D
44              12-27-1921  TSO Table A
48              5-8-1922    TSO Table H
60              8-13-1923   TSO Table D
62              10-8-1923   TSO Table D
65              4-14-1924   TSO Table D
66              5-26-1924   TSO Table D
67              5-26-1924   TSO Table D
70              7-14-1924   TSO Table D
71              8-11-1924   TSO Table D
72              8-11-1924   TSO Table D
73              9-22-1924   TSO Table D
79              1-26-1925   TSO Table D
82              3-9-1925    TSO Table B
83              4-16-1925   TSO Table D
85              4-27-1925   TSO Table H
96              8-10-1925   TSO Table D
106             8-22-1925   TSO Table D
97              8-24-1925   TSO Table D
110             3-22-1926   TSO Table E
115             4-26-1926   TSO Table D
116             4-26-1926   TSO Table D
117             4-26-1926   TSO Table D
118             4-26-1926   TSO Table D
119             5-10-1926   TSO Table D
121             5-24-1926   TSO Table D
122             5-24-1926   TSO Table D
123             5-24-1926   TSO Table D
124             5-24-1926   TSO Table D
128             8-9-1926    TSO Table A
131             9-13-1926   TSO Table A
135             12-13-1926  TSO Table B
136             12-13-1926  TSO Table D
137             12-13-1926  TSO Table D
140             4-11-1927   TSO Table D
141             6-13-1927   TSO Table A
142             7-11-1927   TSO Table D
144             10-24-1927  TSO Table D
150             4-9-1928    TSO Table D
151             4-9-1928    TSO Table D
152             5-14-1928   TSO Table D
154             5-28-1928   TSO Table B
179             8-27-1928   TSO Table D
184             10-8-1928   TSO Table D
185             10-8-1928   TSO Table D
195             4-8-1929    TSO Table D
231             5-26-1930   TSO Table A
232             6-9-1930    TSO Table B
232             6-9-1930    TSO Table A
238             9-4-1930    TSO Table D
254             7-13-1931   TSO Table D
362             6-14-1937   TSO Table D
363             6-14-1937   TSO Table F
388             6-13-1938   TSO Table D
403             2-13-1939   TSO Table D
404             2-27-1939   TSO Table B
411             6-12-1939   TSO Table H
415             6-26-1939   TSO Table D
412             7-10-1939   1022.01;
                            1022.02
454             8-26-1940   TSO Table E
456             9-23-1940   1014.01;
                            1014.04
491             12-22-1941  TSO Table E
503             1-26-1942   TSO Table D
507             3-9-1942    TSO Table E
520             8-31-1942   TSO Table F
525             11-9-1942   1022.03
568             4-24-1944   TSO Table D
580             9-11-1944   TSO Table E
587             10-23-1944  TSO Table B
602             5-28-1945   TSO Table E
609             8-13-1945   TSO Table D
618             11-12-1945  TSO Table D
644             5-13-1946   TSO Table G
683             1-13-1947   TSO Table C
684             1-13-1947   TSO Table I
701             6-23-1947   TSO Table E
740             2-23-1948   TSO Table E
741             2-23-1948   TSO Table E
754             3-20-1948   TSO Table F
713             4-12-1948   TSO Table H
761             4-26-1948   TSO Table F
762             4-26-1948   TSO Table F
769             9-27-1948   TSO Table D
807             6-27-1949   TSO Table B
863             9-14-1950   618.07
868             11-14-1950  TSO Table B
54141           1-16-1952   TSO Table C
953             6-22-1953   TSO Table F
986             5-24-1954   TSO Table E
1000            10-11-1954  TSO Table E
1008            11-22-1954  TSO Table B
1010            12-28-1954  404.08;
                            412.06
1011            1-13-1955   TSO Table D
1028            2-28-1955   TSO Table D
1032            3-19-1955   TSO Table D
1045            5-9-1955    TSO Table B
1048            5-9-1955    TSO Table D
1054            6-13-1955   TSO Table E
1058            6-13-1955   TSO Table D
1068            8-22-1955   TSO Table D
1070            9-19-1955   TSO Table D
1075            11-14-1955  TSO Table D
1092            4-9-1956    TSO Table D
1095            5-28-1956   TSO Table B
1101            7-9-1956    1014.02—
                            1014.04
1102            7-9-1956    TSO Table D
1105            7-23-1956   TSO Table D
1111            10-8-1956   TSO Table C
1118            12-10-1956  TSO Table D
1121            1-14-1957   TSO Table D
1132            5-27-1957   TSO Table D
1134            6-11-1957   TSO Table D
1140            8-26-1957   TSO Table D
1141            8-27-1957   TSO Table D
1157            12-23-1957  TSO Table H
1155            1-13-1958   TSO Table D
1170            2-24-1958   TSO Table D
1199            5-14-1958   TSO Table D
1211            7-28-1958   TSO Table D
1217            10-14-1958  TSO Table C
1223            10-27-1958  1430.06
                            204.01;
                            208.01;
                            240.01;
                            242.01;
                            432.42;
                            440.01;
                            452.14;
1233            11-24-1958  610.01;
                            660.09;
                            660.10;
                            660.12;
                            672.05;
                            1430.02—
                            1430.05;
                            1434.01—
                            1434.10
1235            12-9-1958   TSO Table D
1238            12-22-1958  TSO Table D
5-59            1-26-1959   TSO Table B
                            1438.02—
17-59           3-9-1959    1438.04;
                            1438.07
29-59           5-26-1959   TSO Table D
34-59           6-8-1959    TSO Table D
38-59           6-22-1959   TSO Table D
56-59           9-28-1959   TSO Table D
62-59           10-26-1959  TSO Table D
                            208.01;
68-59           10-26-1959  1052.01—
                            1052.06
63-59           10-27-1959  TSO Table D
75-59           11-3-1959   TSO Table H
70-59           11-9-1959   TSO Table D
71-59           11-9-1959   TSO Table D
12-60           1-8-1960    TSO Table D
5-60            1-11-1960   TSO Table B
6-60            1-11-1960   TSO Table D
9-60            1-27-1960   TSO Table D
10-60           1-27-1960   TSO Table D
18-60           3-14-1960   TSO Table G
19-60           3-15-1960   TSO Table C
24-60           3-28-1960   TSO Table H
28-60           3-28-1960   TSO Table D
29-60           3-28-1960   TSO Table D
32-60           4-11-1960   TSO Table D
56-60           6-27-1960   TSO Table B
60-60           7-11-1960   TSO Table H
64-60           8-1-1960    TSO Table H
85-60           9-26-1960   TSO Table D
86-60           9-26-1960   TSO Table D
87-60           9-26-1960   TSO Table D
92-60           10-10-1960  TSO Table D
95-60           10-24-1960  TSO Table B
110-60          11-28-1960  TSO Table B
112-60          11-28-1960  TSO Table D
10-61           1-23-1961   TSO Table I
16-61           2-27-1961   TSO Table H
38-61           5-8-1961    TSO Table H
39-61           5-8-1961    TSO Table H
44-61           5-8-1961    TSO Table G
46-61           5-8-1961    TSO Table G
51-61           5-22-1961   TSO Table G
55-61           6-12-1961   TSO Table E
66-61           7-10-1961   TSO Table H
68-61           7-10-1961   TSO Table H
87-61           9-11-1961   TSO Table D
88-61           9-11-1961   TSO Table B
89-61           9-11-1961   TSO Table B
90-61           9-11-1961   TSO Table B
91-61           9-11-1961   TSO Table D
94-61           9-25-1961   TSO Table D
8-62            1-8-1962    276.01;
                            276.03
21-62           1-22-1962   TSO Table E
26-62           2-12-1962   TSO Table D
                            208.01;
50-62           4-23-1962   1078.01—
                            1078.06
102-62          7-30-1962   TSO Table D
112-62          9-10-1962   TSO Table D
113-62          9-10-1962   TSO Table H
132-62          10-22-1962  474.06—
                            474.10
134-62          10-22-1962  TSO Table D
157-61          12-10-1962  TSO Table H
17-63           2-11-1963   TSO Table D
18-63           2-11-1963   TSO Table D
                            208.01;
                            248.01;
29-63           3-11-1963   286.01;
                            286.02;
                            1078.01—
                            1078.06
42-63           4-22-1963   TSO Table D
109-63          10-28-1963  452.03
124-63          11-25-1963  1438.05
143-63          12-23-1963  TSO Table E
57-64           4-13-1964   TSO Table E
58-64           4-13-1964   TSO Table E
81-64           5-25-1964   TSO Table D
91-64           6-1-1964    TSO Table B
109-64          7-13-1964   TSO Table D
124-64          7-27-1964   TSO Table E
130-64          8-24-1964   TSO Table C
140-64          9-14-1964   TSO Table E
142-64          9-21-1964   TSO Table D
144-64          9-28-1964   TSO Table E
145-64          9-28-1964   TSO Table E
146-64          9-28-1964   TSO Table E
148-64          10-12-1964  TSO Table E
163-64          11-23-1964  TSO Table B
164-64          11-23-1964  TSO Table B
169-64          12-14-1964  TSO Table B
177-64          12-14-1964  TSO Table I
181-64          12-31-1964  412.07
2-65            1-11-1965   TSO Table C
3-65            1-11-1965   TSO Table C
4-65            1-11-1965   TSO Table C
5-65            1-11-1965   TSO Table C
6-65            1-11-1965   TSO Table C
7-65            1-11-1965   TSO Table C
8-65            1-11-1965   TSO Table D
13-65           2-8-1965    TSO Table B
32-65           4-12-1965   TSO Table B
47-65           5-10-1965   TSO Table G
48-65           5-10-1965   TSO Table G
69-65           7-12-1965   TSO Table D
72-65           7-26-1965   TSO Table B
73-65           7-26-1965   TSO Table B
105-65          11-22-1965  TSO Table D
107-65          11-22-1965  TSO Table E
121-65          12-13-1965  TSO Table D
122-65          12-13-1965  TSO Table E
124-65          12-13-1965  TSO Table D
129-65          12-27-1965  254.01—
                            254.10
9-66            1-10-1966   TSO Table E
10-66           1-10-1966   TSO Table D
22-66           2-7-1966    TSO Table D
45-66           3-14-1966   TSO Table E
73-66           5-9-1966    TSO Table H
79-66           5-23-1966   TSO Table E
83-66           6-13-1966   TSO Table B
84-66           6-13-1966   TSO Table B
101-66          7-11-1966   TSO Table D
142-66          11-14-1966  TSO Table E
152-66          12-27-1966  240.02
153-66          12-27-1966  TSO Table A
1-67            1-9-1967    TSO Table E
8-67            2-13-1967   TSO Table D
9-67            2-13-1967   TSO Table D
19-67           3-13-1967   TSO Table A
20-67           3-27-1967   TSO Table B
27-67           4-17-1967   TSO Table E
45-67           8-28-1967   298.01
49-67           9-14-1967   TSO Table E
60-67           10-23-1967  TSO Table E
64-67           11-13-1967  TSO Table E
70-67           12-26-1967  TSO Table E
12-68           1-8-1968    TSO Table C
13-68           1-8-1968    TSO Table C
14-68           1-8-1968    TSO Table C
15-68           1-8-1968    TSO Table C
33-68           3-11-1968   1464.01—
                            1464.08
73-68           7-10-1968   208.01
76-68           7-29-1968   TSO Table D
93-68           9-23-1968   TSO Table B
102-68          10-14-1968  TSO Table E
108-68          10-28-1968  TSO Table H
109-68          10-28-1968  TSO Table H
115-68          11-11-1968  TSO Table D
126-68          12-23-1968  TSO Table D
9-69            1-27-1969   TSO Table B
19-69           3-10-1969   TSO Table C
33-69           4-14-1969   TSO Table C
36-69           4-14-1969   440.01
57-69           5-26-1969   TSO Table G
61-69           6-9-1969    TSO Table E
70-69           7-14-1969   TSO Table D
89-69           10-13-1969  TSO Table D
48-70           3-23-1970   TSO Table A
104-70          9-28-1970   204.03
108-70          10-12-1970  TSO Table H
32-71           2-22-1971   TSO Table B
33-71           2-22-1971   208.01
47-71           4-12-1971   TSO Table C
58-71           4-26-1971   TSO Table F
71-71           6-28-1971   TSO Table E
72-71           6-28-1971   1434.06
73-71           6-28-1971   TSO Table H
90-71           9-13-1971   TSO Table D
104-71          11-22-1971  TSO Table A
24-72           1-24-1972   TSO Table B
25-72           2-14-1972   TSO Table E
34-72           2-28-1972   TSO Table E
54-72           4-24-1972   TSO Table F
75-72           5-22-1972   TSO Table E
102-72          7-10-1972   TSO Table B
10-73           1-22-1973   TSO Table D
20-73           2-12-1973   TSO Table C
58-73           4-9-1973    TSO Table A;
                            TSO Table B
65-73           4-9-1973    TSO Table E
76-73           4-23-1973   TSO Table E
155-73          9-10-1973   240.02
172-73          10-8-1973   TSO Table B
181-73          11-12-1973  TSO Table D
183-73          11-12-1973  TSO Table D
194-73          11-26-1973  TSO Table E
198-73          12-10-1973  TSO Table C
215-73          12-28-1973  TSO Table D
217-73          12-28-1973  648.09
16-74           1-14-1974   TSO Table E
55-74           3-25-1974   TSO Table F
80-74           5-13-1974   1070.01
                            406.01—
                            406.08;
                            610.01;
                            610.02;
                            660.09;
                            660.10;
                            660.12;
94-74           6-10-1974   672.05;
                            1014.99;
                            1052.99;
                            1078.04;
                            1438.99;
                            1442.99;
                            1464.09;
                            1464.10
95-74           6-10-1974   208.01;
                            222.02
102-74          6-24-1974   TSO Table F
116-74          7-8-1974    TSO Table E
120-74          8-12-1974   TSO Table H
127-74          8-26-1974   1096.01
129-74          8-28-1974   TSO Table F
                            810.01;
7-75            3-24-1975   810.02;
                            810.03;
                            810.99
28-75           5-12-1975   TSO Table H
47-75           6-23-1975   TSO Table B
50-75           6-23-1975   TSO Table B
95-75           11-10-1975  TSO Table D
49-76           4-12-1976   1438.01
60-76           4-26-1976   TSO Table B
61-76           4-26-1976   TSO Table B
                            208.01;
63-76           5-10-1976   610.02;
                            610.03
66-76           5-10-1976   TSO Table B
67-76           5-24-1976   TSO Table A
78-76           6-14-1976   208.01
80-76           6-14-1976   208.01
82-76           6-14-1976   TSO Table D
88-76           6-14-1976   TSO Table D
89-76           6-14-1976   TSO Table B
129-76          9-27-1976   TSO Table D
144-76          10-25-1976  TSO Table C
145-76          10-25-1976  286.04
147-76          11-8-1976   TSO Table C
149-76          11-8-1976   TSO Table A
13-77           1-11-1977   TSO Table E
39-77           3-28-1977   TSO Table A
44-77           4-11-1977   TSO Table C
51-77           4-11-1977   TSO Table D
53-77           4-25-1977   TSO Table E
79-77           6-27-1977   TSO Table H
102-77          8-22-1977   660.07
109-77          9-12-1977   TSO Table D
114-77          9-12-1977   TSO Table B
119-77          9-26-1977   TSO Table C
135-77          10-24-1977  TSO Table E
136-77          10-24-1977  208.01
154-77          11-28-1977  TSO Table E
36-78           1-23-1978   TSO Table D
74-78           4-10-1978   TSO Table D
89-78           4-24-1978   TSO Table H
90-78           4-24-1978   882.01—
                            882.05
115-78          5-22-1978   TSO Table H
140-78          7-10-1978   636.20;
                            636.21
155-78          7-22-1978   TSO Table B
156-78          7-22-1978   TSO Table B
162-78          8-28-1978   TSO Table B
163-78          8-28-1978   TSO Table D
164-78          8-28-1978   TSO Table D
195-78          10-23-1978  TSO Table E
206-78          11-27-1978  TSO Table D
211-78          12-11-1978  TSO Table H
212-78          12-11-1978  TSO Table A
19-79           2-12-1979   TSO Table D
68-79           6-11-1979   TSO Table A
121-79          9-17-1979   TSO Table D
122-79          9-17-1979   TSO Table D
134-79          10-8-1979   TSO Table D
135-79          10-8-1979   1410.05
138-79          10-8-1979   TSO Table C
144-79          11-12-1979  TSO Table E
149-79          11-26-1979  432.25
153-79          12-10-1979  TSO Table D
64-80           5-12-1980   208.01
73-80           5-27-1980   TSO Table H
78-80           5-27-1980   660.03
103-80          7-21-1980   TSO Table H
104-80          7-21-1980   TSO Table C
111-80          8-25-1980   TSO Table D
112-80          8-25-1980   TSO Table D
128-80          9-22-1980   1442.01
131-80          10-13-1980  TSO Table E
156-80          11-24-1980  TSO Table I
5-81            1-12-1981   TSO Table D
8-81            2-9-1981    TSO Table D
24-81           3-23-1981   830.01;
                            830.02
26-81           3-23-1981   208.01
37-81           4-13-1981   TSO Table B
38-81           4-13-1981   TSO Table B
40-81           4-27-1981   TSO Table B
52-81           6-8-1981    TSO Table H
74-81           8-24-1981   TSO Table H
89-81           9-28-1981   TSO Table A
93-81           9-28-1981   208.01
101-81          10-26-1981  TSO Table A
109-81          11-23-1981  452.13
116-81          12-14-1981  208.01
39-82           2-22-1982   274.02—
                            274.04
91-82           6-28-1982   208.01
99-82           7-12-1982   TSO Table H
119-82          9-27-1982   208.01
153-82          12-27-1982  208.01
10-83           1-24-1983   TSO Table D
21-83           2-28-1983   TSO Table D
42-83           4-11-1983   208.01
51-83           5-23-1983   TSO Table D
62-83           6-13-1983   TSO Table D
84-83           7-11-1983   TSO Table D
109-83          9-26-1983   TSO Table C
151-83          12-12-1983  208.01
147-83          12-26-1983  1056.05
33-84           1-23-1984   208.01
53-84           3-12-1984   208.01
86-84           5-14-1984   TSO Table D
                            208.01;
90-84           6-11-1984   474.12—
                            474.14
98-84           6-25-1984   TSO Table D
113-84          8-27-1984   TSO Table A
124-84          9-17-1984   TSO Table D
125-84          9-17-1984   TSO Table D
126-84          9-17-1984   TSO Table D
127-84          9-19-1984   TSO Table B
135-84          10-8-1984   1096.02
136-84          10-8-1984   1070.03
147-84          10-22-1984  276.02
149-84          10-22-1984  606.24
152-84          11-12-1984  208.01
                            208.01;
163-84          11-26-1984  1480.01—
                            1480.09;
                            1480.99
                            208.01;
175-84          12-26-1984  1056.01—
                            1056.04
7-85            1-28-1985   478.01—
                            478.12
10-85           1-28-1985   TSO Table G
11-85           1-28-1985   TSO Table G
14-85           2-11-1985   TSO Table G
15-85           2-11-1985   TSO Table G
16-85           2-11-1985   TSO Table G
32-85           2-25-1985   TSO Table G
33-85           2-25-1985   TSO Table G
38-85           3-25-1985   TSO Table G
46-85           4-8-1985    TSO Table G
51-85           5-13-1985   208.01
56-85           5-13-1985   TSO Table D
57-85           5-13-1985   TSO Table D
74-85           6-24-1985   TSO Table D
103-85          8-26-1985   TSO Table D
131-85          11-11-1985  TSO Table H
165-85          12-23-1985  TSO Table B
52-86           3-24-1986   208.01
53-86           3-24-1986   TSO Table H
68-86           4-21-1986   TSO Table D
83-86           5-12-1986   TSO Table D
85-86           5-12-1986   208.01
89-86           5-27-1986   TSO Table H
94-86           6-2-1986    TSO Table D
95-86           6-2-1986    TSO Table B
106-86          6-9-1986    TSO Table D
108-86          6-9-1986    TSO Table A
120-86          7-14-1986   TSO Table C
129-86          7-28-1986   TSO Table D
139-86          8-18-1986   208.01
172-86          10-13-1986  TSO Table D
178-86          10-13-1986  TSO Table B
179-86          10-27-1986  TSO Table D
182-86          10-27-1986  TSO Table D
199-86          11-24-1986  TSO Table H
209-86          12-1-1986   TSO Table D
5-87            1-12-1987   TSO Table D
10-87           1-26-1987   208.01
                            1098.01—
15-87           2-9-1987    1098.24;
                            1098.99
16-87           2-9-1987    208.01
19-87           2-9-1987    TSO Table D
33-87           3-9-1987    240.04
44-87           3-23-1987   208.01
65-87           4-13-1987   208.01
140-87          6-8-1987    TSO Table D
141-87          6-8-1987    TSO Table D
142-87          6-8-1987    TSO Table D
166-87          7-13-1987   TSO Table D
167-87          7-13-1987   TSO Table D
168-87          7-13-1987   TSO Table D
189-87          8-24-1987   TSO Table H
191-87          8-24-1987   TSO Table D
193-87          8-24-1987   TSO Table D
197-87          8-24-1987   TSO Table D
235-87          10-26-1987  TSO Table B
239-87          11-9-1987   660.05
244-87          11-23-1987  TSO Table D
245-87          11-23-1987  TSO Table D
252-87          12-14-1987  TSO Table D
                            252.01;
254-87          12-14-1987  252.03;
                            252.04
28-88           1-11-1988   TSO Table D
30-88           1-25-1988   TSO Table D
31-88           1-25-1988   TSO Table D
56-88           2-22-1988   TSO Table H
74-88           4-11-1988   208.01
97-88           5-23-1988   208.01
                            258.01—
113-88          6-27-1988   258.03;
                            258.05;
                            258.07
114-88          6-27-1988   232.01;
                            232.03
117-88          6-27-1988   1070.06;
                            1070.99
133-88          7-11-1988   TSO Table D
142-88          8-1-1988    TSO Table D
143-88          8-1-1988    TSO Table D
144-88          8-1-1988    TSO Table D
163-88          9-12-1988   TSO Table D
176-88          10-10-1988  TSO Table D
177-88          10-10-1988  TSO Table D
182-88          10-24-1988  TSO Table D
183-88          10-24-1988  TSO Table D
2-89            1-9-1989    TSO Table H
6-89            1-9-1989    TSO Table D
65-89           4-25-1989   206.01
75-89           5-8-1989    208.01
83-89           5-22-1989   208.01
88-89           5-22-1989   660.14
96-89           6-5-1989    TSO Table D
106-89          6-12-1989   404.09
107-89          6-12-1989   208.01
112-89          6-12-1989   TSO Table D
113-89          6-12-1989   TSO Table D
114-89          6-12-1989   TSO Table D
115-89          6-12-1989   TSO Table D
135-89          6-26-1989   TSO Table B
153-89          7-17-1989   208.01
155-89          7-17-1989   276.04
164-89          7-17-1989   264.01
171-89          7-31-1989   404.10
177-89          8-21-1989   TSO Table D
193-89          9-11-1989   TSO Table D
194-89          9-11-1989   TSO Table D
204-89          9-25-1989   TSO Table G
205-89          9-25-1989   TSO Table G
222-89          11-27-1989  TSO Table D
223-89          11-27-1989  TSO Table D
224-89          11-27-1989  TSO Table D
226-89          11-27-1989  TSO Table D
232-89          12-11-1989  TSO Table H
233-89          12-11-1989  TSO Table H
236-89          12-11-1989  TSO Table D
239-89          12-26-1989  208.01
24-90           2-12-1990   610.04
37-90           2-12-1990   TSO Table D
38-90           2-12-1990   TSO Table D
                            1010.01—
                            1010.08;
56-90           3-26-1990   1010.10;
                            1010.11;
                            1010.13;
                            1010.99
64-90           4-2-1990    TSO Table D
82-90           4-23-1990   208.01
96-90           5-14-1990   TSO Table D
97-90           5-14-1990   TSO Table D
107-90          5-29-1990   TSO Table C
121-90          6-25-1990   TSO Table D
132-90          7-9-1990    TSO Table C
176-90          9-10-1990   TSO Table C
179-90          9-10-1990   TSO Table D
180-90          9-10-1990   TSO Table D
181-90          9-10-1990   TSO Table D
197-90          10-8-1990   1442.02;
                            1442.03
214-90          10-29-1990  274.05
231-90          11-26-1990  TSO Table D
1-91            1-14-1991   236.01
16-91           2-11-1991   1442.04;
                            1442.99
40-91           3-11-1991   TSO Table D
53-91           5-13-1991   TSO Table D
74-91           6-24-1991   TSO Table D
91-91           7-8-1991    618.07
94-91           7-29-1991   TSO Table D
101-91          8-26-1991   TSO Table I
171-91          12-23-1991  208.01
40-92           3-23-1992   668.01—
                            668.07
57-92           4-27-1992   TSO Table H
66-92           4-27-1992   1048.01;
                            1048.99
73-92           5-11-1992   208.01
82-92           6-1-1992    208.01
83-92           6-8-1992    208.01
88-92           6-22-1992   1442.05
                            850.01;
119-92          7-27-1992   850.02;
                            850.99
120-92          7-27-1992   440.01
121-92          7-27-1992   TSO Table C
124-92          7-27-1992   TSO Table D
125-92          7-27-1992   TSO Table G
126-92          7-27-1992   TSO Table G
151-92          10-5-1992   TSO Table H
153-92          10-12-1992  660.03
163-92          10-26-1992  TSO Table D
4-93            1-11-1993   TSO Table D
32-93           3-22-1993   TSO Table D
106-93          8-23-1993   298.02
107-93          8-24-1993   1442.06
112-93          9-13-1993   238.01
124-93          9-27-1993   TSO Table D
162-93          11-22-1993  TSO Table A
163-93          11-22-1993  232.05
177-93          12-13-1993  TSO Table D
178-93          12-13-1993  TSO Table D
181-93          12-27-1993  208.01
26-94           2-14-1994   TSO Table B
46-94           3-14-1994   208.01
62-94           3-28-1994   TSO Table A
63-94           3-28-1994   TSO Table A
80-94           4-25-1994   278.02—
                            278.05
                            284.01;
83-94           4-25-1994   284.02;
                            284.04
122-94          6-13-1994   TSO Table D
130-94          6-27-1994   TSO Table D
169-94          9-12-1994   TSO Table D
191-94          10-24-1994  667.01—
                            667.08
192-94          10-24-1994  TSO Table C
                            1018.01—
199-94          10-24-1994  1018.13;
                            1018.99
218-94          11-28-1994  TSO Table H
221-94          12-12-1994  TSO Table H
222-94          12-12-1994  TSO Table C
235-94          12-19-1994  1480.10
236-94          12-19-1994  208.01
10-95           1-23-1995   246.02
26-95           2-20-1995   TSO Table H
62-95           4-10-1995   TSO Table H
98-95           6-12-1995   TSO Table D
115-95          7-10-1995   TSO Table D
122-95          7-24-1995   454.01—
                            454.10
123-95          7-24-1995   TSO Table A
142-95          9-11-1995   452.16
150-95          9-25-1995   1416.01
166-95          10-9-1995   208.01
176-95          10-23-1995  1608.01
                            1490.01—
175-95          10-26-1995  1490.13;
                            1490.99
200-95          11-27-1995  258.04
23-96           1-8-1996    TSO Table D
39-96           2-12-1996   208.01
44-96           2-12-1996   TSO Table D
97-96           5-13-1996   208.01
121-96          6-10-1996   TSO Table B
165-96          9-9-1996    TSO Table D
184-96          10-14-1996  TSO Table D
196-96          11-11-1996  252.02;
                            252.03
209-96          11-11-1996  TSO Table D
210-96          11-11-1996  TSO Table D
211-96          11-11-1996  TSO Table D
214-96          11-25-1996  208.01;
                            1052.07
218-96          11-25-1996  TSO Table D
221-96          12-9-1996   TSO Table D
1-97            1-13-1997   232.06
37-97           2-24-1997   TSO Table B
38-97           3-10-1997   212.01
39-97           3-10-1997   208.01
82-97           4-28-1997   TSO Table D
137-97          7-14-1997   208.01;
                            1052.07
146-97          7-14-1997   TSO Table E
147-97          7-14-1997   TSO Table B
148-97          7-14-1997   TSO Table E
154-97          8-18-1997   TSO Table E
162-97          8-25-1997   240.02
168-97          9-8-1997    TSO Table D
207-97          11-10-1997  TSO Table E
208-97          11-10-1997  TSO Table E
209-97          11-10-1997  TSO Table E
215-97          11-24-1997  TSO Table D
22-98           1-26-1998   208.01;
                            1052.07
32-98           2-9-1998    208.01
35-98           2-9-1998    TSO Table D
45-98           3-9-1998    TSO Table D
46-98           3-9-1998    TSO Table D
47-98           3-9-1998    1410.01
50-98           3-9-1998    TSO Table D
52-98           3-23-1998   TSO Table H
                            840.01;
                            840.02;
53-98           3-23-1998   840.04—
                            840.08;
                            840.10;
                            840.99
83-98           5-11-1998   222.01
87-98           5-11-1998   208.01
127-98          8-17-1998   TSO Table D
128-98          8-17-1998   TSO Table D
165-98          10-12-1998  206.02—
                            206.05
179-98          10-12-1998  TSO Table D
182-98          10-26-1998  270.02—
                            270.04
193-98          10-26-1998  1608.01
10-99           1-25-1999   230.01
15-99           1-25-1999   TSO Table B
16-99           1-25-1999   TSO Table B
22-99           2-8-1999    TSO Table B
23-99           2-8-1999    TSO Table B
24-99           2-8-1999    TSO Table B
38-99           3-8-1999    240.02
72-99           4-12-1999   412.08
80-99           4-12-1999   TSO Table D
81-99           4-12-1999   TSO Table D
103-99          6-14-1999   1010.09
104-99          6-14-1999   TSO Table C
134-99          7-12-1999   TSO Table D
156-99          8-23-1999   TSO Table D
168-99          9-27-1999   TSO Table D
182-99          10-4-1999   440.01
205-99          11-22-1999  TSO Table D
206-99          11-22-1999  TSO Table D
20-00           1-24-2000   208.01
43-00           2-14-2000   TSO Table D
45-00           2-14-2000   240.02
52-00           2-28-2000   208.01
59-00           3-13-2000   TSO Table H
60-00           3-13-2000   TSO Table H
61-00           3-13-2000   TSO Table C
100-00          5-8-2000    TSO Table D
104-00          5-8-2000    TSO Table D
105-00          5-8-2000    TSO Table D
106-00          5-8-2000    TSO Table D
164-00          6-26-2000   TSO Table B
184-00          8-21-2000   TSO Table D
240-00          10-23-2000  TSO Table D
                            1490.01—
252-00          11-27-2000  1490.13;
                            1490.99
255-00          12-11-2000  TSO Table C
273-00          12-18-2000  1416.01
8-01            1-8-2001    TSO Table D
9-01            1-8-2001    TSO Table D
22-01           2-12-2001   240.02
23-01           2-12-2001   208.01
32-01           2-12-2001   TSO Table D
43-01           3-12-2001   208.01
65-01           4-9-2001    TSO Table D
68-01           4-23-2001   TSO Table H
107-01          6-11-2001   TSO Table D
118-01          7-9-2001    TSO Table G
168-01          9-10-2001   TSO Table D
170-01          9-10-2001   TSO Table D
183-01          10-8-2001   TSO Table H
228-01          12-10-2001  208.01
29-02           2-11-2002   240.02
31-02           2-11-2002   208.01
60-02           3-11-2002   282.01—
                            282.04
                            220.01—
61-02           3-11-2002   220.04;
                            220.06—
                            220.25
63-2002         3-11-2002   1410.01
73-02           3-25-2002   208.01
74-2002         3-25-2002   208.01
176-02          9-9-2002    840.05
179-02          9-9-2002    TSO Table D
181-02          9-9-2002    TSO Table D
182-02          9-9-2002    TSO Table D
217-02          10-14-2002  TSO Table H
229-02          11-11-2002  TSO Table D
230-02          11-11-2002  TSO Table D
242-02          11-11-2002  TSO Table D
244-02          11-25-2002  TSO Table I
261-02          11-25-2002  TSO Table H
262-02          12-23-2002  TSO Table D
263-02          12-23-2002  TSO Table D
13-03           1-13-2003   TSO Table D
14-03           1-13-2003   TSO Table D
15-03           1-13-2003   TSO Table D
42-2003         2-10-2003   TSO Table F
53-03           2-24-2003   TSO Table A
57-03           3-10-2003   208.01
66-03           3-10-2003   TSO Table D
67-03           3-10-2003   TSO Table D
77-03           4-14-2003   TSO Table H
109-03          5-19-2003   TSO Table C
126-03          6-9-2003    TSO Table D
150-03          6-23-2003   TSO Table E
190-03          9-8-2003    TSO Table C
193-03          9-8-2003    TSO Table D
199-03          9-22-2003   TSO Table C
200-03          9-22-2003   TSO Table I
202-03          9-22-2003   TSO Table D
203-03          9-22-2003   TSO Table D
247-03          11-10-2003  208.01
248-03          11-10-2003  TSO Table C
255-03          11-10-2003  TSO Table D
267-03          11-24-2003  TSO Table D
8-04            1-12-2004   1608.01
29-04           2-9-2004    TSO Table H
39-04           2-23-2004   220.04
40-04           2-23-2004   220.21
41-04           2-23-2004   284.02
47-04           3-8-2004    278.02
49-04           3-8-2004    TSO Table D
68-04           3-22-2004   TSO Table D
82-04           4-5-2004    208.01
93-04           4-26-2004   TSO Table D
104-04          5-10-2004   252.04
118-04          5-10-2004   208.01
123-04          5-24-2004   TSO Table D
124-04          5-24-2004   TSO Table D
140-04          6-14-2004   TSO Table C
160-04          7-12-2004   TSO Table D
                            286.01;
166-04          7-12-2004   286.02;
                            286.04
170-04          7-12-2004   TSO Table E
179-04          8-23-2004   TSO Table D
186-04          9-13-2004   208.01
189-04          9-13-2004   TSO Table G
192-04          9-13-2004   TSO Table D
193-04          9-13-2004   TSO Table D
203-04          9-27-2004   TSO Table D
209-04          10-11-2004  258.06
215-04          10-11-2004  252.03
216-04          10-11-2004  TSO Table E
222-04          10-25-2004  1010.01;
                            1010.06
226-04          10-25-2004  1416.01
                            1442.01;
228-04          10-25-2004  1442.05;
                            1442.06
247-04          11-22-2004  TSO Table H
3-05            1-10-2005   TSO Table D
4-05            1-10-2005   TSO Table D
5-05            1-10-2005   TSO Table D
19-05           2-14-2005   TSO Table D
48-05           4-11-2005   TSO Table D
53-05           4-11-2005   TSO Table D
58-05           4-25-2005   1410.01
102-2005        6-27-2005   206.06
113-05          7-11-2005   TSO Table C
120-05          7-11-2005   TSO Table D
123-05          7-11-2005   668.01—
                            668.07
131-05          8-22-2005   TSO Table D
145-05          9-12-2005   TSO Table D
150-05          9-26-2005   TSO Table D
169-05          11-28-2005  TSO Table D
23-06           2-27-2006   TSO Table D
42-06           4-10-2006   208.01
49-06           4-24-2006   TSO Table D
50-06           4-24-2006   TSO Table D
66-06           5-22-2006   TSO Table E
68-2006         5-22-2006   TSO Table A
75-06           6-12-2006   TSO Table D
77-06           6-26-2006   TSO Table D
83-06           6-26-2006   666.98
94-06           7-10-2006   TSO Table E
110-06          9-25-2006   TSO Table D
111-06          9-25-2006   TSO Table D
112-06          9-25-2006   TSO Table D
134-06          11-27-2006  1070.07
135-06          11-27-2006  TSO Table D
141-06          12-11-2006  TSO Table E
145-06          12-18-2006  220.01
146-06          12-18-2006  220.21
150-06          12-18-2006  667.02
10-2007         2-12-2007   TSO Table D
14-07           2-12-2007   208.01
15-07           2-26-2007   208.01
27-07           3-26-2007   TSO Table D
43-07           4-23-2007   TSO Table D
46-07           5-14-2007   TSO Table D
57-07           6-11-2007   TSO Table E
61-07           6-25-2007   TSO Table D
63-07           6-25-2007   TSO Table D
65-07           6-25-2007   TSO Table D
76-07           7-9-2007    TSO Table E
                            1061.01—
78-07           7-9-2007    1061.18;
                            1061.99
79-07           7-9-2007    TSO Table C
80-07           7-9-2007    TSO Table H
84-07           7-9-2007    TSO Table D
85-07           7-9-2007    TSO Table D
86-07           7-9-2007    TSO Table D
87-07           8-27-2007   TSO Table D
88-07           8-27-2007   TSO Table D
121-07          10-22-2007  TSO Table D
133-07          11-26-2007  TSO Table D
134-07          11-26-2007  TSO Table D
139-07          12-10-2007  TSO Table H
140-07          12-10-2007  208.01
26-08           2-25-2008   208.01
32-08           3-10-2008   TSO Table D
46-2008         3-31-2008   TSO Table F
47-08           3-31-2008   1430.03
                            1608.01—
66-08           5-12-2008   1608.10;
                            1608.99
67-08           5-12-2008   232.06
69-08           5-12-2008   284.02
80-08           5-19-2008   232.07
101-08          7-14-2008   208.01
106-08          7-14-2008   208.01
113-08          7-14-2008   TSO Table D
118-08          7-14-2008   1490.06
130-08          9-8-2008    1490.12
132-08          9-22-2008   648.09
167-08          10-8-2008   1070.03
143-08          10-27-2008  TSO Table H
164-08          12-8-2008   208.01
165-08          12-8-2008   1070.01
169-08          12-8-2008   1070.07
170-2008        12-8-2008   1070.08
171-08          12-8-2008   1070.09
173-08          12-8-2008   TSO Table D
176-08          12-22-2008  TSO Table D
1-09            1-12-2009   220.01
10-09           1-26-2009   TSO Table D
13-09           1-26-2009   208.01
24-09           3-9-2009    TSO Table H
26-09           3-16-2009   278.02
36-09           4-13-2009   TSO Table D
58-09           6-8-2009    668.02—
                            668.07
59-09           6-8-2009    TSO Table D
66-09           6-22-2009   TSO Table D
77-09           7-13-2009   TSO Table B
117-08          7-14-2009   1490.07
82-09           8-24-2009   284.02;
                            284.04
125-09          12-21-2009  TSO Table E
3-2010          1-11-2010   208.01
5-2010          1-11-2010   278.02
15-2010         1-25-2010   TSO Table D
21-2010         2-22-2010   220.04
                            1065.01—
40-2010         3-3-2010    1065.09;
                            1065.99
36-2010         3-22-2010   272.03;
                            272.04
39-2010         3-22-2010   1438.01
41-2010         3-22-2010   208.01
52-2010         4-26-2010   208.01
73-2010         6-28-2010   252.02
74-2010         6-28-2010   252.03
75-2010         6-28-2010   252.04
76-2010         6-28-2010   TSO Table F
102-2010        9-27-2010   TSO Table D
104-2010        10-4-2010   TSO Table D
8-2011          2-28-2011   258.04
16-2011         3-14-2011   208.01
25-2011         4-11-2011   270.02
                            1490.03;
26-2011         4-11-2011   1490.06;
                            1490.07;
                            1490.99
27-2011         4-11-2011   208.01
46-2011         5-23-2011   240.02
51-2011         5-23-2011   TSO Table D
98-2011         9-26-2011   TSO Table B
133-2011        12-12-2011  1010.11
13-2012         2-13-2012   TSO Table J
36-2012         3-12-2012   208.01
78-2012         6-11-2012   618.14
86-2012         6-11-2012   TSO Table D
                            1060.01—
88-2012         6-25-2012   1060.17;
                            1060.99
                            1058.01—
89-2012         6-25-2012   1058.15;
                            1058.99
96-2012         6-25-2012   208.01
97-2012         6-25-2012   1410.01
110-2012        7-9-2012    1070.04
119-2012        8-27-2012   TSO Table D
120-2012        8-27-2012   TSO Table D
134-2012        10-9-2012   TSO Table D
139-2012        11-14-2012  TSO Table H
140-2012        11-14-2012  TSO Table C
157-2012        12-17-2012  208.01
158-2012        12-17-2012  1052.01
159-2012        12-17-2012  1056.03
1-2013          1-14-2013   668.06;
                            668.07
4-2013          1-14-2013   618.13
                            844.01;
5-2013          1-28-2013   844.02;
                            844.99
6-2013          1-28-2013   208.01
                            1058.01—
25-2013         3-25-2013   1058.14;
                            1058.99
                            1060.01—
26-2013         3-25-2013   1060.17;
                            1060.99
                            1468.01—
32-2013         3-25-2013   1468.09;
                            1468.99
34-2013         4-8-2013    208.01
52-2013         5-13-2013   TSO Table J
59-2013         5-28-2013   208.01
60-2013         5-28-2013   1078.01;
                            1078.04
75-2013         6-10-2013   258.02;
                            276.04
83-2013         6-24-2013   272.04
103-2013        7-8-2013    TSO Table D
104-2013        7-8-2013    TSO Table D
105-2013        7-8-2013    TSO Table D
106-2013        7-8-2013    TSO Table D
110-2013        7-8-2013    232.03
111-2013        8-26-2013   TSO Table J
115-2013        8-26-2013   232.03
120-2013        9-9-2013    TSO Table C
121-2013        9-9-2013    TSO Table D
129-2013        10-28-2013  232.06
                            1438.06;
147-2013        11-25-2013  1438.09—
                            1438.12
148-2013        11-25-2013  208.01
155-2013        12-9-2013   1078.01
                            660.03;
                            660.04;
                            660.12;
                            668.07;
25-2014         2-24-2014   844.01;
                            844.02;
                            1048.01;
                            1090.01—
                            1090.12;
                            1090.99
29-2014         2-24-2014   208.01
                            208.01;
                            220.02—
                            220.04;
                            220.11;
                            244.01;
                            258.04;
                            276.04;
                            282.02;
                            284.02;
                            412.07;
                            668.01;
                            1010.02;
                            1010.03;
                            1010.06;
                            1010.11;
                            1018.02;
                            1022.03;
                            1058.02;
                            1058.05;
                            1058.06;
                            1058.08;
43-2014         4-14-2014   1058.12;
                            1060.02;
                            1060.06;
                            1061.02;
                            1061.07;
                            1061.13—
                            1061.15;
                            1065.02;
                            1065.05;
                            1065.07;
                            1065.08;
                            1070.03;
                            1070.05;
                            1090.04—
                            1090.06;
                            1090.09—
                            1090.11;
                            1096.01;
                            1442.01;
                            1442.05;
                            1442.06;
                            1490.03
85-2014         6-23-2014   TSO Table D
86-2014         6-23-2014   TSO Table D
79-2014         7-9-2014    208.01
104-2014        7-14-2014   618.13
                            440.01;
114-2014        9-8-2014    1014.04;
                            1065.05;
                            1090.09
133-2014        10-27-2014  284.02
136-2014        10-27-2014  TSO Table D
153-2014        12-8-2014   272.04
163-2014        12-22-2014  TSO Table B
2-2015          1-12-2015   TSO Table H
3-2015          1-12-2015   TSO Table H
14-2015         2-9-2015    TSO Table D
                            452.04;
15-2015         2-9-2015    452.16;
                            454.10
27-2015         3-9-2015    230.01
28-2015         3-9-2015    618.13
33-2015         3-9-2015    208.01
35-2015         3-23-2015   TSO Table H
36-2015         3-23-2015   TSO Table H
45-2015         3-23-2015   TSO Table D
46-2015         3-23-2015   TSO Table D
54-2015         4-13-2015   662.01—
                            662.06
61-2015         4-27-2015   TSO Table D
64-2015         5-11-2015   TSO Table J
                            220.26;
                            268.01;
68-2015         6-8-2015    268.02;
                            276.02;
                            1468.05
75-2015         6-8-2015    208.01
76-2015         6-8-2015    TSO Table E
84-2015         6-8-2015    208.01
89-2015         7-13-2015   1070.99
108-2015        8-24-2015   TSO Table D
110-2015        9-14-2015   1010.11;
                            1010.12
119-2015        9-21-2015   TSO Table D
120-2015        9-21-2015   TSO Table D
121-2015        9-28-2015   208.01
126-2015        10-13-2015  618.16—
                            618.19
                            618.01;
132-2015        10-13-2015  618.20—
                            618.26
136-2015        10-26-2015  618.13
140-2015        10-26-2015  TSO Table D
142-2015        11-9-2015   TSO Table J
143-2015        11-9-2015   274.06
148-2015        11-23-2015  TSO Table D
149-2015        11-23-2015  208.01
150-2015        11-23-2015  TSO Table D
153-2015        12-14-2015  TSO Table D
158-2015        12-14-2015  TSO Table D
163-2015        12-21-2015  886.01—
                            886.26
7-2016          1-11-2016   886.21
17-2016         2-8-2016    284.02
29-2016         3-14-2016   840.05
42-2016         3-28-2016   TSO Table D
43-2016         4-11-2016   TSO Table D
48-2016         4-25-2016   TSO Table D
                            1024.01—
68-2016         6-13-2016   1024.16;
                            1024.99
69-2016         6-13-2016   TSO Table D
70-2016         6-13-2016   TSO Table D
71-2016         6-13-2016   208.01
95-2016         6-27-2016   TSO Table D
107-2016        8-22-2016   208.01
108-2016        8-22-2016   474.11
113-2016        9-12-2016   TSO Table H
114-2016        9-12-2016   TSO Table J
120-2016        9-12-2016   1024.06;
                            1024.10
124-2016        9-26-2016   220.26
135-2016        10-11-2016  TSO Table C
136-2016        10-11-2016  TSO Table E
137-2016        10-11-2016  TSO Table D
140-2016        10-24-2016  TSO Table J
143-2016        10-24-2016  TSO Table D
165-2016        12-12-2016  618.19;
                            618.27
169-2016        12-12-2016  208.01
1-2017          1-9-2017    TSO Table H
2-2017          1-9-2017    208.01
11-2017         1-23-2017   TSO Table D
16-2017         2-13-2017   TSO Table D
23-2017         2-27-2017   TSO Table J
35-2017         3-13-2017   208.01
36-2017         3-13-2017   666.98
37-2017         3-13-2017   TSO Table D
68-2017         4-10-2017   TSO Table D
80-2017         5-22-2017   1468.02
81-2017         5-22-2017   612.02
96-2017         6-26-2017   1070.02 ;
                            1070.07
113-2017        7-10-2017   222.01
117-2017        8-28-2017   TSO Table E
119-2017        9-11-2017   TSO Table D
142-2017        11-13-2017  TSO Table H
143-2017        11-13-2017  TSO Table D
144-2017        11-13-2017  TSO Table D
145-2017        11-13-2017  TSO Table D
148-2017        11-13-2017  TSO Table F
156-2017        11-27-2017  TSO Table D
176-2017        11-27-2017  TSO Table D
177-2017        11-27-2017  TSO Table C
179-2017        11-27-2017  TSO Table D
180-2017        12-11-2017  208.01
187-2017        12-18-2017  TSO Table J
188-2017        12-18-2017  TSO Table J
189-2017        12-18-2017  TSO Table J
190-2017        12-18-2017  TSO Table J
194-2017        12-18-2017  TSO Table D
195-2017        12-18-2017  TSO Table D
                            220.04,
196-2017        12-18-2017  278.02;
                            284.02;
                            284.04
197-2017        12-18-2017  667.01
12-2018         2-12-2018   TSO Table H
13-2018         2-12-2018   TSO Table J
28-2018         2-26-2018   TSO Table C
35-2018         3-12-2018   234.01—
                            234.07
45-2018         3-26-2018   TSO Table D
48-2018         3-26-2018   TSO Table E
49-2018         4-9-2018    1442.07
50-2018         4-9-2018    1065.10;
                            1438.08
51-2018         4-9-2018    208.01
82-2018         5-14-2018   208.01
83-2018         5-14-2018   1608.03
84-2018         5-14-2018   1608.11
92-2018         5-14-2018   TSO Table D
99-2018         6-11-2018   1410.01
100-2018        6-11-2018   208.01
101-2018        6-11-2018   1070.02
102-2018        6-11-2018   667.01;
                            667.02
122-2018        7-9-2018    286.01;
                            286.04
138-2018        7-9-2018    TSO Table D
155-2018        9-24-2018   TSO Table D
158-2018        10-9-2018   TSO Table C
164-2018        10-22-2018  TSO Table J
171-2018        11-26-2018  208.01
176-2018        12-10-2018  TSO Table F
177-2018        12-10-2018  452.03
179-2018        12-10-2018  TSO Table E
181-2018        12-17-2018  278.02—
                            278.05
182-2018        12-17-2018  208.01
11-2019         2-11-2019   840.08—
                            840.10
19-2019         2-25-2019   TSO Table E
21-2019         2-25-2019   TSO Table D
23-2019         3-1-2019    1070.02
41-2019         4-8-2019    276.04
52-2019         5-13-2019   618.14
57-2019         5-13-2019   TSO Table H
64-2019         5-28-2019   TSO Table F
67-2019         6-10-2019   TSO Table E
68-2019         6-10-2019   TSO Table E
97-2019         7-8-2019    TSO Table D
                            208.01;
98-2019         7-8-2019    856.01—
                            856.10;
                            856.99
101-2019        8-26-2019   208.01
102-2019        8-26-2019   432.33
103-2019        8-26-2019   TSO Table H
104-2019        8-26-2019   TSO Table D
121-2019        11-12-2019  208.01
126-2019        12-9-2019   208.01
127-2019        12-9-2019   208.01
2-2020          1-13-2020   1070.02
                            452.03;
9-2020          2-10-2020   1010.11;
                            1018.11
16-2020         2-10-2020   TSO Table D
24-2020         3-9-2020    TSO Table H
25-2020         3-9-2020    TSO Table H
26-2020         3-23-2020   244.02
35-2020         3-23-2020   TSO Table C
                            476.03;
                            606.11;
54-2020         4-27-2020   612.06;
                            612.09;
                            672.01;
                            672.02
56-2020         4-27-2020   TSO Table E
65-2020         6-8-2020    TSO Table D
74-2020         7-13-2020   208.01
77-2020         7-13-2020   TSO Table C
82-2020         8-24-2020   TSO Table D
95-2020         10-26-2020  280.01—
                            280.04
97-2020         10-26-2020  TSO Table D
109-2020        12-14-2020  TSO Table H
125-2020        12-21-2020  1410.01
126-2020        12-21-2020  1416.01
21-07           1-25-2021   220.04
21-18           1-25-2021   TSO Table D
21-22           2-8-2021    TSO Table D
                            1476.01—
21-33           2-22-2021   1476.42;
                            1476.99
                            856.02;
21-70           4-26-2021   856.04;
                            856.05
21-72           4-26-2021   TSO Table E
21-95           6-14-2021   TSO Table D
21-96           6-14-2021   TSO Table D
21-92           7-12-2021   220.01
21-109          7-12-2021   TSO Table D
21-121          9-13-2021   TSO Table D
21-130          9-13-2021   TSO Table D
21-132          9-27-2021   432.33
21-133          9-27-2021   TSO Table D
21-134          9-27-2021   TSO Table D
21-162          11-8-2021   TSO Table D
21-163          11-8-2021   TSO Table D
21-147          12-13-2021  256.01—
                            256.21
21-148          12-13-2021  258.01—
                            258.07
                            1210.01—
                            1210.13;
                            1212.01—
                            1212.06;
                            1214.01—
                            1214.12;
                            1216.01—
21-161          12-13-2021  1216.06;
                            1218.01—
                            1218.05;
                            1220.01—
                            1220.04;
                            1222.01—
                            1222.06;
                            1224.01;
                            1224.02;
                            1226.01—
                            1226.05;
                            1228.01—
                            1228.05;
                            1230.01—
                            1230.07;
                            1232.01—
                            1232.07;
                            1234.01—
                            1234.22;
21-161 (Cont’d           1236.01—
                            1236.12;
                            1238.01—
                            1238.15;
                            1240.01—
                            1240.09;
                            1242.01—
                            1242.09;
                            1244.01—
                            1244.06;
                            1244.99;
                            1246.01;
                            1246.02
21-182          12-20-2021  1018.04;
                            1018.05
21-183          12-20-2021  TSO Table D
21-185          12-20-2021  886.01
22-18           2-28-2022   TSO Table D
22-28           3-7-2022    TSO Table E
22-35           3-28-2022   TSO Table E
22-30           4-11-2022   252.02—
                            252.04
22-63           5-9-2022    TSO Table D
22-64           5-9-2022    TSO Table D
22-65           5-9-2022    TSO Table D
22-67           5-23-2022   672.03
22-51           6-13-2022   208.01
22-90           6-13-2022   TSO Table D
22-96R          6-27-2022   TSO Table D
22-99           6-27-2022   TSO Table D
22-100          6-27-2022   TSO Table D
22-106          7-11-2022   250.01—
                            250.03
                            260.01—
22-108          7-11-2022   260.23;
                            260.25—
                            260.27
22-131          9-12-2022   TSO Table H
22-128          9-26-2022   208.01
22-132          9-26-2022   TSO Table D
22-140          9-26-2022   1430.03
22-155          10-11-2022  TSO Table D
22-156          10-11-2022  TSO Table D
22-159          10-24-2022  232.07
                            840.01—
22-169          12-12-2022  840.10;
                            840.99
22-172          12-12-2022  251.01—
                            251.05
22-190          12-19-2022  208.01
22-195          12-19-2022  1236.05
23-1            1-9-2023    208.01
23-34           2-27-2023   260.03;
                            260.08
23-47           2-27-2023   618.01
                            1214.02;
                            1218.03;
                            1218.04;
23-46           3-13-2023   1224.02;
                            1226.01;
                            1228.02;
                            1228.04;
                            1246.02
23-40           3-27-2023   452.03
23-67           4-10-2023   432.46
23-77           4-24-2023   247.01
23-74           5-9-2023    242.01
                            668.01;
                            668.02;
                            668.07;
                            1010.11;
                            1018.01—
23-84           5-9-2023    1018.13;
                            1018.99;
                            1065.01;
                            1065.05;
                            1065.99;
                            1490.06
23-100          5-22-2023   TSO Table E
23-101          5-22-2023   TSO Table E
23-110          6-12-2023   TSO Table D
23-111          6-12-2023   TSO Table D
23-118          7-10-2023   TSO Table E
23-146          8-28-2023   TSO Table E
23-147          8-28-2023   TSO Table E
23-152          9-11-2023   TSO Table D
23-161          9-25-2023   TSO Table C;
                            TSO Table D
23-163          10-10-2023  TSO Table E
23-164          10-10-2023  TSO Table D
23-165R         10-10-2023  TSO Table C
23-169          10-23-2023  TSO Table D
23-170          10-23-2023  TSO Table F
23-187          11-27-2023  TSO Table D
23-188          11-27-2023  TSO Table D
23-199          12-11-2023  208.01
23-200          12-11-2023  288.01—
                            288.04
24-7            1-8-2024    TSO Table D
24-14           1-22-2024   TSO Table D
                            667.01;
24-17R          2-12-2024   667.02;
                            1070.02
24-28           3-11-2024   TSO Table E
                            1214.03;
                            1214.05;
                            1224.01;
                            1226.05;
24-33           3-25-2024   1232.05;
                            1234.22;
                            1238.06;
                            1238.07;
                            1246.02
24-39           3-25-2024   TSO Table H
24-57           5-28-2024   TSO Table H
24-74           6-24-2024   668.02
24-93           7-8-2024    206.02—
                            206.05
24-102          7-8-2024    TSO Table D
24-103          7-8-2024    TSO Table D
24-111          8-26-2024   240.01
24-147          10-15-2024  TSO Table D
24-148          11-12-2024  1224.01
24-172          11-12-2024  TSO Table E
24-177          12-16-2024  208.01
24-182          12-9-2024   TSO Table E
24-189          12-9-2024   TSO Table E
25-28           2-10-2025   TSO Table D
25-29           2-10-2025   TSO Table D
                            260.04;
                            260.08;
                            260.09;
25-32           3-10-2025   260.12,
                            260.15;
                            260.17;
                            260.24
25-35           3-24-2025   238.01
25-36           3-24-2025   238.01
                            1214.01;
                            1214.05;
                            1214.09;
25-109          6-23-2025   1224.01;
                            1226.01;
                            1234.05;
                            1234.22;
                            1236.10
                            1470.01—
25-112          7-14-2025   1470.07;
                            1470.98;
                            1470.99
25-113          7-14-2025   1438.01;
                            1468.10
                            220.01—
                            220.05;
                            220.07;
                            220.10—
25-116          7-14-2025   220.12;
                            220.14—
                            220.21;
                            220.23—
                            220.26
25-127          6-23-2025   TSO Table D
25-128          7-7-2025    TSO Table D
                            474.01;
25-129          6-23-2025   474.05—
                            474.14
25-135          7-14-2025   TSO Table C
                           
 
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
24-172   11-12-2024  TSO Table E
24-182   12-9-2024   TSO Table E
24-189   12-9-2024   TSO Table E
24-177   12-16-2024  208.01
25-28    2-10-2025   TSO Table D
25-29    2-10-2025   TSO Table D
                     260.04;
                     260.08;
                     260.09;
25-32    3-10-2025   260.12,
                     260.15;
                     260.17;
                     260.24
25-35    3-24-2025   238.01
25-36    3-24-2025   238.01
                     1214.01;
                     1214.05;
                     1214.09;
25-109   6-23-2025   1224.01;
                     1226.01;
                     1234.05;
                     1234.22;
                     1236.10
25-127   6-23-2025   TSO Table D
                     474.01;
25-129   6-23-2025   474.05—
                     474.14
25-128   7-7-2025    TSO Table D
                     1470.01—
25-112   7-14-2025   1470.07;
                     1470.98;
                     1470.99
25-113   7-14-2025   1438.01;
                     1468.10
                     220.01—
                     220.05;
                     220.07;
                     220.10—
25-116   7-14-2025   220.12;
                     220.14—
                     220.21;
                     220.23—
                     220.26
25-135   7-14-2025   TSO Table C
                     1018.01—
                     1018.09;
25-134   9-8-2025    1018.11;
                     1018.12;
                     1018.99;
                     1065.99
25-136   9-8-2025    TSO Table C
25-149   9-8-2025    TSO Table D
25-150   9-8-2025    TSO Table C
25-148   10-14-2025  TSO Table J
25-151   10-14-2025  TSO Table D
25-173   10-27-2025  260.28
25-166   11-10-2025  TSO Table H
25-183   11-10-2025  TSO Table E
                     1484.01—
25-161   11-24-2025  1484.13;
                     1484.99
25-167   11-24-2025  TSO Table E
25-177   11-24-2025  252.01—
                     252.041
25-187   11-24-2025  TSO Table D
25-188   11-24-2025  TSO Table D
25-175R2 12-8-2025   208.01
25-178   12-8-2025   884.01—
                     884.08
25-184   12-8-2025   TSO Table E
                     278.01—
25-189   12-8-2025   278.03;
                     278.05
25-190   12-8-2025   284.01—
                     284.04
25-191   12-8-2025   286.01—
                     286.04
25-196   12-8-2025   272.02—
                     274.04
25-197   12-8-2025   288.01—
                     288.04
25-206   12-8-2025   TSO Table F
                     220.04—
25-198R  12-15-2025  220.06;
                     220.11
                    
 
Avon Lake Regional Water Regulations
adopted by the
Board of Municipal Utilities
on December 3, 2007
Effective:  December 3, 2007
Last Revised:  January 16, 2019
Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
TITLE I - ADMINISTRATIVE
CHAPTER 1 - POWER AND AUTHORITY OF THE BOARD
Section 1.01   Power and Authority of the Board.
   Pursuant to Chapter IX, Section 45 of Avon Lake’s Charter, the Avon Lake
Board of Municipal Utilities (“Board”) has the responsibility to manage and
operate the City’s utilities, including but not limited to the Water Filtration
Plant and Water Pollution Control Center, and their related distribution and
collection systems along with all related appurtenances.  The Chief Utilities
Executive (“CUE”), at the direction of the Board, shall be responsible for the
collection of such equitable charges, in sufficient amounts, as is necessary
for the operations of the said facilities and performance of the needed
services, all as determined by the Board.
Section 1.02   The Board’s Responsibilities. 
   Avon Lake Regional Water is responsible for providing drinking water to the
residents of Avon Lake, Ohio (“City”) and providing means for safely managing
wastewater treatment.  Specifically, Avon Lake Regional Water oversees all
operations and maintenance of the Water Filtration Plant, the Water Pollution
Control Center, and all their appurtenances and related functions needed for
such operations.  Avon Lake Regional Water is also responsible for the fiscal
management of said operations.
Section 1.03   Authority to Enter into Contracts. 
   Pursuant to Chapter IX, Section 51 of the City’s Charter, together with
Sections 743.07 and 735.29 of the Ohio Revised Code, the Board has the
authority to enter into contracts on behalf of the Cityfor all purposes
necessary for the full and efficient management and construction of waterworks,
electric light, power, and gas plants, and such other similar public utilities
owned by the City. The CUE shall sign on behalf of the Board and in the name of
the City any and all contracts which are authorized by the Board.  The
signature of the CUE on contracts authorized by the Board shall be sufficient
evidence of the Board’s intent to be bound to such contract and, pursuant to
Chapter IV, Section 19 of the City’s Charter, no signature by the Mayor shall
be required on any such contract authorized by the Board.
Section 1.04   Regulations. 
   Every person, company, or corporation who has water and/or sanitary sewage
service to his or its premises, and every person, company, or corporation who
has water and/or sanitary sewage service to the premises of another owner after
having made formal application for said services to Avon Lake Regional Water,
shall be considered as having expressed his or its consent to be governed by
these Regulations.
Section 1.05   Authority for the Regulations. 
   Pursuant to Chapter IX, Section 51 of the City’s Charter, the Board may make
such by-laws and regulations, and appoint or employ such personnel as it may
deem necessary for the safe, economical and efficient management, operation and
protection of such works, plants and public utilities, and such by-laws and
regulations have the same validity as municipal ordinances when not repugnant
to the ordinances of the City, the Ohio Constitution and the City’s Charter.
   Pursuant to Chapter IX, Section 50 of the City’s Charter, a majority of the
members elected to the Board of Municipal Utilities shall constitute a quorum
to do business. On the passage of every by-law, regulation, motion, resolution,
or other matter coming before the Board, the vote shall be taken by a “yes” or
“no” vote of each member present which shall be entered into the meeting
minutes of the Board. No by-law, regulation, motion, resolution, or other
matter shall be passed without the concurrence of a majority of the members of
the Board who are present at the meeting at which a quorum of the Board is
present. (Rev. 12-3-13)
Section 1.06   Purposes of these Regulations. 
   These Regulations have been enacted by the Board to govern and regulate the
safe use of the water treatment and wastewater systems within the City of Avon
Lake.
Section 1.07   Further Information.
   Further information, please address inquiries to the Chief of Utility
Operations (“CUO”), Avon Lake Regional Water, 201 Miller Road, Avon Lake, Ohio
44012.  Phone 440-933-6226 Fax 440-933-8842.
CHAPTER 2 - DEFINITIONSCHAPTER 2 - DEFINITIONS
   As used in these Regulations, as amended by the Board from time to time, the
following terms shall have the meanings (such meanings to be equally applicable
to both the singular and plural forms of the terms defined) set forth below,
which shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of these Regulations: 
Section 2.01
   Act or the Clean Water Act shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended from time to time (33 U.S.C.
§§ 1251, et. seq.).
Section 2.02
   Administrative Fee means the charge assessed users to cover billing costs
(including meter reading) and laboratory costs.  Billing, laboratory and other
costs associated with industrial surcharges are not included in the
Administrative Fee.
Section 2.03
   Air Gap Separation means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water
to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
Section 2.04
   ANSI means the American National Standards Institute.
Section 2.05
   Avon Lake Water System means the public potable water supply system of Avon
Lake, Ohio and all systems, facilities and appurtenances thereto.
Section 2.06
   AWWA means the American Water Works Association. 
Section 2.07
   Backflow means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances
into the distributing pipes of a potable water supply from any source other
than the intended source of the potable water supply.
Section 2.08
   Backflow Prevention Device means any device, method, or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system.
Section 2.09
   Best Management Practices also known as (BMP) means schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to implement the prohibitions listed in Section 1.02 of Title IV.
BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices
to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or
drainage from raw materials storage.
Section 2.10
   Billable Water Consumption means the amount of potable water used during the
applicable billing period at the premises, as measured through a City water
meter, with the following exceptions:
   1.   The billable sewer consumption for an individual residential account
shall be determined in accordance with Title II, Section 2.19.
   2.   The billable sewer consumption for other than an individual residential
account shall be the amount of potable water consumed on the premises, unless
the Owner or other interested party of the premises can demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the CUE that a measurable portion of the water from all sources
consumed on said premises cannot and does not enter the public sewage system.
   3.   In the event of a malfunctioning meter or other similar circumstance
where a meter reading is not an accurate reflection of billable consumption,
the CUE shall be permitted to estimate billable consumption based on
consumption during a comparable period and other appropriate considerations.
   If the Owner of the affected premise disagrees with the estimate of billable
consumption under these circumstances, the Owner must present a clear and
convincing basis for determining that the CUE's estimate is unreasonable and
that a specified alternate estimate is appropriate.  Otherwise, the CUE's
estimate of billable consumption will be the basis of billing.
Section 2.11
   Biochemical Oxygen Demand or BOD shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matters under standard laboratory
procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade [20°C (68°F)],
expressed in parts per million [ppm (mg/l)] by weight, and in accordance with
procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
Section 2.12
   Board shall mean the duly elected Board of Municipal Utilities of Avon Lake,
Ohio.
Section 2.13
   Building Drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
sewer, which begins five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the innerface of the
building wall.
Section 2.14
   Building Sewer shall mean extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or place of disposal.
Section 2.15
   Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastes from any portion of the
wastewater treatment system.
Section 2.16
   Water Pollution Control Center and Sewer System Operating Fund (also known
as Sewer Fund) shall mean the general operating fund in which all sewer service
charge revenue is deposited.
Section 2.17
   CFR means Code of Federal Regulations as amended from time to time.
Section 2.18
   Chemical Oxygen Demand or COD shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in
the chemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures,
expressed in parts per million [ppm (mg/l)] by weight, and in accordance with
procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
Section 2.19
   Clerk means Clerk of the Board of Municipal Utilities of Avon Lake, Ohio.
Section 2.20
   Combined Sewer shall mean a sewer designed to carry sanitary sewage, storm
water, or industrial wastes, or any combination of the three.
Section 2.21
   Compatible Pollutants shall mean biochemical oxygen demand, suspended
solids, pH, and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified
in the NPDES permit if the WPCC was designed to treat such pollutants and, in
fact, does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree.
Section 2.22
   Consumer means the owner or person in control of any premises supplied by,
or in any manner connected to, a public water system.
Section 2.23
   Consumer’s Water System means any water system located on the consumer’s
premises which is supplied by, or in any manner connected to, a public water
system.  A household plumbing system is considered to be a consumer’s water
system.  For a pit (outside) meter location, it shall be from meter to the
premises, and for an inside meter, it shall be from the curb stop.
Section 2.24
   Consumption Charge (sanitary) means the charge assessed consumers to cover
the following costs:
   1.   The cost of transporting and treating normal strength domestic sewage,
including the operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the Water
Pollution Control Center, the Public Sanitary and Combined Sewer System, and
ancillary equipment and other appurtenances.
   2.   The repayment of any loans or bonded indebtedness, including principal,
interest, and related fees, for improvements (including equipment) to the Water
Pollution Control Center and the Public Sanitary and Combined Sewer System.
   3.   The contribution to the Sewer System Construction Subaccount Fund.
   4.   The contribution to the Sewer Debt Service Reserve Subaccount Fund.
   5.   The contribution to the Sewer Replacement Reserve Subaccount Fund.
   6.   Administrative costs, excepting those included in the Administrative
Fee and the Industrial Surcharge.
   7.   Other costs reasonably necessary and appropriate for the efficient and
proper operation, maintenance management, and administration of the Water
Pollution Control Center and the Public Sanitary and Combined Sewer System.
Section 2.25
   Contamination means an impairment of the quality of the water by sewage of
process fluids or waste to a degree which could create an actual hazard to the
public health through poisoning or through spread of disease by exposure.
Section 2.26
   Cooling Water means:
   1.   Uncontaminated: Water used for cooling purposes only which has no
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate, or final product and which
does not contain a level of contaminants detectably higher than that of the
intake water.
   2.   Contaminated: Water used for cooling purposes only which may become
contaminated either through the use of water treatment chemicals used for
corrosion inhibitors or biocides, or by direct contact with process materials
and/or wastewater.
Section 2.27
   Cross-connection means any arrangement whereby backflow can occur.
Section 2.28
   CUE shall mean the Chief Utilities Executive, who is the authorized person
appointed or employed by the Board having executive authority over the Avon
Lake sanitary/combined sewer system and water system.  Any and all references
to the CUE shall include the CUE or his authorized deputy, agent, or
representative.
Section 2.29
   CUO shall mean the Chief of Utility Operations, who is the authorized person
appointed or employed by the Board having supervision of the maintenance and
operation of the Avon Lake sanitary/combined sewer system and water system. 
Any and all references to the CUO shall include the CUO or his authorized
deputy, agent, or representative.
Section 2.30
   Daily Maximum means the maximum allowable discharge of pollutant during a
calendar day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in units of mass,
the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the day.
Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in terms of a concentration, the
daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant
concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.
Section 2.31
   Degree of Hazard is a term derived from an evaluation of the potential risk
to health and the adverse effect upon the potable water system.
Section 2.32
   Discharge Permit shall be the consumer’s or user’s authorization to
discharge to the sanitary sewers of the City as issued by the CUO.  The user
shall be subject to all standard conditions of the Discharge Permit (as set
forth in these Regulations) and to the specific discharge limits and monitoring
requirements of the particular user.
Section 2.33
   Double Check Valve Assembly means an assembly composed of two single,
independently acting, check valves, including tightly closing shutoff valves
located at each end of the assembly, and suitable connections for testing the
water-tightness of each check valve.
Section 2.34
   Environmental Protection Agency or EPA shall mean the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a
designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized official of said
agency.
Section 2.35
   Excess Pounds means the number of pounds discharged for a given wastewater
constituent above that allowed for normal strength domestic sewage.  It shall
be calculated in the following manner:
      [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
6d23a1c51ba5b25cc929e651b1869f834ddc0715/IMAGES/0-0-0-217.jpg]
      when:
      E =   Excess Pounds
      TC =   Total Concentration, i.e., the sum of the concentration for all
days in the billing period in which the defined concentration for normal
strength domestic sewage is exceeded
      D =   Number of days in the billing period that the concentration for a
given wastewater constituent exceeds the maximum concentrations
      MC=   Maximum Concentration for a given wastewater constituent which is
considered normal strength domestic sewage, and these concentrations are as
follows:
      BCD   =   365 mg/1
      COD   =   725 mg/1
      SS   =    400 mg/1
      F =   Average Daily Billable Water Consumption for the Billing Period
Section 2.36
   Garbage shall mean all putrescible wastes except human excreta, sewage, and
other water-carried wastes, including vegetable and animal offal and carcasses
of dead animals, and shall include all such substances from all public and
private establishments and from all residences in the municipality of Avon
Lake.
Section 2.37
   Grab Sample shall mean a sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-
time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without
consideration of time.
Section 2.38
   Health Hazard means any condition, device, or practice in a water system or
its operation that creates, or may create, a danger to the health and wellbeing
of users.  The word “severe” as used to qualify “health hazard” means a hazard
to the health of the user that could reasonably be expected to result in
significant morbidity or death.
Section 2.39
   Indirect Discharge shall mean the introduction of pollution into the WPCC
from any non-domestic source regulated under Section 307 (b), (c) or (d) of the
Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317).
Section 2.40
   Industrial Surcharge means the charge assessed users who contribute waste
which, by its strength or constituent pollutants is not considered normal
domestic strength sewage and is an allowable discharge under Part I of these
regulations.  The Industrial Surcharge shall recover the costs attributable to
the treatment of such wastes, including the disposal of sludge, above those
that would be incurred for treating normal domestic strength sewage.  The
Industrial Surcharge shall also include an administrative charge that covers
the billing, monitoring, sampling, analysis, and other non-treatment related
expenses associated with the Industrial Surcharge.
Section 2.41
   Industrial User or User shall mean a source of indirect discharge.
Section 2.42
   Industrial Waste shall mean any solid, liquid, or gaseous substance
discharged, permitted to flow, or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing,
commercial, or business establishment or process, or from the development,
recovery, or processing of any natural resource.
Section 2.43
   Interchangeable Connection means an arrangement or device that will allow
alternate, but not simultaneous, use of two sources of water.
Section 2.44
   Interference shall mean a discharge which alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, both:
   1.   inhibits or disrupts the WPCC treatment processes or operation or its
sludge processes, use, or disposal; and
   2.   therefore is a cause of a violation of any of the requirements of the
WPCC’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance
with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued
thereunder:  Section 405 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1345); the Solid
Waste Disposal Act (“SWDA”) including but not limited to Title II more commonly
referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (“RCRA”) and State
regulations contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to
Subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substance Control Act; and
the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
Section 2.45
   Monthly Average means the arithmetic mean of the values for effluent samples
collected during a calendar month or specified 30 day period (as opposed to a
rolling 30 day window).
Section 2.46
   Municipality or City shall mean Avon Lake, Ohio.
Section 2.47
   National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or Categorical Pretreatment
Standards shall mean any federal regulation containing pollutant discharge
limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307 (b) and (c) of the
Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which applies to a specific category of industrial
users.
Section 2.48
   National Pollution Discharge Elimination System Permit or NPDES Permit 
means a permit issued to the WPCC pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1342).
Section 2.49
   Normal Strength Domestic Sewage as defined for the purpose of determining
surcharge shall mean sewage having an average daily suspended solids
concentration of not more than 400 parts per million, an average daily BOD
concentration of not more than 365 parts per million, an average daily COD
concentration of not more than 725 parts per million, an average daily oil and
grease (freon soluble) concentration of not more than 10.0 parts per million,
and an average daily ammonia (measured as N) concentration of not more than
30.0 parts per million.
Section 2.50
   Operation and Maintenance (and sometimes O&M) means the costs incurred in
the act of keeping all water and sanitary facilities for distributing
collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing in a good state of repair and
functioning properly. Replacement is included within the definition of
Operation and Maintenance.
Section 2.51
   Operator means the person responsible for the overall operation of a
facility.
Section 2.52
   Owner means the person who owns a premises, building, or facility or a
portion thereof.
Section 2.53
   Pass-through shall mean the discharge of pollutants through the WPCC into
navigable waters in quantities or concentrations which are a cause of or
significantly contribute to a violation of any requirement of the WPCC’s NPDES
permit.
Section 2.54
   Person shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation, group, or a political subdivision, including any city or state.
Section 2.55
   pH shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions in moles per liter of solution.
Section 2.56
   Pollutant shall mean the dredged spoils, solid waste, incinerator residue,
wastewater, garbage, wastewater sludge, munitions, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, commercial,
domestic, and agricultural waste discharged into water.
Section 2.57
   Pollution means the presence of a pollutant or any foreign substance in
water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair
the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an
actual hazard to the public health, but which does adversely and unreasonably
affect such waters for domestic use.
Section 2.58
   Pollution Hazard means a condition through which an aesthetically
objectionable or degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the
public water system or a potable consumer’s water system.
Section 2.59
   POTW means the Public Owned Treatment Works of the City of Avon Lake, Ohio.
Section 2.60
   Potable Water means water which is satisfactory for drinking, culinary, and
domestic purposes and meets the requirements of the Ohio EPA.
Section 2.61
   Pretreatment shall mean the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise
introducing such pollutants into the WPCC.
Section 2.62
   Pretreatment Requirements shall mean any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a Categorical Pretreatment
Standard, imposed on an industrial user.
Section 2.63
   Pretreatment Standard shall mean National Categorical Pretreatment Standard
or other federal, state, or local standards, whichever are applicable.
Section 2.64
   Process Fluids means any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically, or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration
such as would constitute a health, pollution, or system hazard if introduced
into the public or a potable consumer’s water system.  This includes, but is
not limited to:
   1.   polluted or contaminated waters;
   2.   process waters;
   3.   used waters originating from the public water system which may have
deteriorated in sanitary quality;
   4.   cooling waters;
   5.   contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams, or
irrigation systems;
   6.   chemicals in solution of suspension;
   7.   oils, gases, acids, alkalis, and other liquid and gaseous fluids used
in industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes.
Section 2.65
   Public Records shall have the same definition as in Ohio Revised Code
Section 149.43, as amended from time to time.
Section 2.66
   Public Sanitary and Combined Sewer System means the system of sanitary and
combined sewers owned by the City of Avon Lake, including pump stations,
overflows and other appurtenances.  It does not include the system of storm
sewers owned by the City.
Section 2.67
   Public Sewers or Public Sewage System shall include all sewers which are
controlled by the Board.
Section 2.68
   Public Water System means any publicly or privately owned potable water
system subject to Chapters 6111 and 6109 of the Ohio Revised Code.
Section 2.69
   Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Device means a device
containing a minimum of two independently acting check valves, together with an
automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the
two check valves.  During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the
pressure between these two checks shall be less than the supply pressure.  In
case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by
discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between
the check valves at less than the supply pressure.  The unit must include
tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and each
device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks.
Section 2.70
   Replacement means the expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
are designed and constructed.
Section 2.71
   Sanitary Sewage shall mean the waste from water closets, urinals,
lavatories, sinks, bathtubs, showers, household laundries, cellar floor or
other inside drains, septic tanks, sump pumps, bars, soda fountains, cuspidors,
refrigerator drips, drinking fountains, stable floor drains, and other
waterborne waste not constituting an industrial waste.
Section 2.72
   Sanitary Sewer shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and industrial waste
and to which storm, surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
Section 2.73
   Service Connection means the terminal end of a service line from the public
water system.  If a meter is installed at the end of the service in a pit, then
the service connection means the downstream end of the meter, and with an
inside meter, it shall be from the curb stop.
Section 2.74
   Sewage shall mean a combination of the water carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with
such surface and ground water as may be present.
Section 2.75
   Sewage Treatment System means the Public Sanitary and Combined Sewer System,
pump stations, Water Pollution Control Center, including sludge disposal, and
all appurtenances thereto.
Section 2.76
   Sewer Service Charge means those wastewater charges identified in Chapter 1
of Title III.
Section 2.77
   Shall is mandatory; may is permissible.
Section 2.78
   Significant Industrial Use (“SIU”) means:
   1.   All discharges subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40
CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N; and
   2.   All noncategorical dischargers that,
      a.   in the opinion of the Board, have a reasonable potential to
adversely affect the POTW’s operation;
      b.   discharge or has the potential to discharge 25,000 gallons or more
of process water (excludes sanitary water, non-contact cooling water, and
boiler blowdown) in a day; or
      c.   that contribute a process wastestream which makes up five percent or
more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW. 
   3.   However, the Board need not designate as significant any noncategorical
Industrial User that, in the opinion of the CUE, has no potential for adversely
affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement.  Any noncategorical Industrial User designated as significant may
petition the Board to be deleted from the list of Significant Industrial Users
on the grounds that it has no potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s
operation or violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
Section 2.79
   Sludge shall mean any solid, semi-solid or liquid waste generated by a
municipal, commercial, or industrial wastewater treatment plant, water supply
treatment plant, or air pollution control facility or any other waste having
similar characteristics and effects as defined in standards issued under
Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342) and Section 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1345) and in the applicable requirements under Section 2001, 3004, and 4004
of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (PL 94-580; 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901- 6992k).
Section 2.80
   Slug or Slug Discharge shall mean any discharge of a non-routine, episodic
nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary
batch discharge that has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass
through, or in any other way violate the POTW’s regulations, local limits or
permit conditions.
Section 2.81
   Standard Methods shall mean the current edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater as published by the American Public Health
Association, American Water Works Association, and Water Pollution Control
Federation.
Section 2.82
   State means the State of Ohio and any of its employees or representatives.
Section 2.83
   Storm Sewer shall mean a sewer that carries storm, surface, and groundwater
drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes.
Section 2.84
   Storm Water shall mean water flowing from surface drainage, rain water from
roofs, sub-soil drainage, cistern overflow, water from condensers, cooling
systems, and other water which is free from sanitary sewage or industrial
wastes.
Section 2.85
   Suspended Solids shall mean solids that either float on the surface of or
are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering. Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be
made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
Section 2.86
   System Hazard means a condition posing an actual or potential threat of
damage to the physical properties of the public water system or a potable
consumer’s water system.
Section 2.87
   Toxic pollutant shall mean any pollutant or combination of pollutants which
is or can potentially be harmful to public health or the environment including
those listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the
EPA under the provisions of the Act.
Section 2.88
   Unimproved Land or Unimproved Real Property for these regulations means
property that does not have or need running water and/or wastewater services.
Section 2.89
   Upset shall mean an incident in which an industrial user unintentionally and
temporarily is in a state of noncompliance with the standards set forth in
these Regulations due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the user, and
excluding noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly
designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of
preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation thereof.
Section 2.90
   User Charge System (sanitary) means the system of charges assessed consumers
of the system to cover the consumer’s proportionate share of the cost of
operating and maintaining the sewage treatment system, including replacement. 
The User Charge System includes revenues generated by the Administrative Fee,
Operation, Maintenance, and Replacement Increment of the Consumption Charge,
the Industrial Surcharge Fee, and Industrial Surcharge Rate.
Section 2.91
   1.   User Class (sanitary) means the division of consumers or users of the
sewage system by waste characteristics. For the purpose of user charges, the
classes of users are as follows:
      a.   Non-Industrial Users.  Any user of the treatment works who
contributes primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary
conveniences and shall include the commercial, institutional/governmental, and
residential user classes.
      b.   Residential User. This class of users consists of households
including both single and multi-family dwellings.
      c.   Commercial User. This class of users consists of business
establishments that contribute wastes that are equivalent of normal strength
domestic sewage. Users in this class include, but are not necessarily limited
to, retail stores, banks, office buildings, hotels, restaurants, warehouses,
service stations, and dry process industrial establishments.
      d.   Governmental/Institutional. This class of users includes all
governmental facilities, such as office buildings, police and fire stations,
and municipal utility and service facilities.  It also includes schools, both
public and private, and community facilities such as churches, and recreational
and social facilities.
   2.   Industrial User.  A special class of users who generally contribute
waterborne trade or process wastes.  Users in this class are likely to have
wastes which, either by their constituent pollutants or by their concentration,
place demands on the treatment system in excess of those presented by Normal
Strength Domestic Sewage. Such wastes will be assessed a surcharge to cover the
additional treatment and other costs.
Section 2.92
   Used Water means any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public water
system to a consumer’s water system after it has passed through the service
connection and is no longer under the control of the water purveyor.
Section 2.93
   U.S.C.  means the United States Code as amended from time to time.
Section 2.94
   Wastewater shall mean the liquid and water-carried or domestic wastes from
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions,
together with any groundwater, surface water, and storm water that may be
present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed to or permitted to
enter the WPCC.
Section 2.95
   Water Pollution Control Center or WPCC means the wastewater treatment plant
owned and operated by Avon Lake Regional Water.  It includes the treatment
processes, solids handling and disposal facilities, equipment and support
facilities, laboratory and administrative offices, and all other facilities
related to wastewater treatment.
Section 2.96
   Water Purveyor means Avon Lake Regional Water.
Section 2.97
   Weekly Average means the arithmetic mean of the values for effluent samples
collected over a period of seven consecutive days.
CHAPTER 3 - PUBLIC RECORDSCHAPTER 3 - PUBLIC RECORDS
Section 3.01   Public Records Requests. 
   If any person desires to request copies of any documents from Avon Lake
Regional Water pursuant to Chapter 149 of the Ohio Revised Code, upon such
request, all Public Records responsive to such request shall be promptly
prepared and made available for inspection to any person at all reasonable
times during regular business hours of Avon Lake Regional Water, subject to
Section 149.43(B)(4)(8) of the Ohio Revised Code, as amended from time to
time.  Avon Lake Regional Water may request that a person put the request in
writing; however, subject to certain exceptions provided by law, Avon Lake
Regional Water shall first inform the requester that (i) such written request
would enhance Avon Lake Regional Water’s ability to identify, locate or deliver
the records sought, (ii) that a writing is not mandatory and (iii) that the
requestor has the right to decline.  Avon Lake Regional Water shall make copies
of the requested Public Records available at cost in accordance with
Schedule K, and within a reasonable period of time.  Additionally:
   In no event shall any person have the right to review any document which is
not a Public Record, which includes, but is not limited, to the following:
medical records, trial preparation records, confidential law enforcement
investigatory records, and intellectual property records or other proprietary
information.  If a Public Record contains information that is exempt from the
duty to permit public inspection or to copy the Public Record, Avon Lake
Regional Water shall make available all of the information within the Public
Record that is not exempt. When making that Public Record available for public
inspection or copying that Public Record, Avon Lake Regional Water shall notify
the requester of any redaction or make the redaction plainly visible.  A
redaction shall be deemed a denial of a request to inspect or copy the redacted
information, except if federal or State law authorizes or requires a public
office to make the redaction. 
   If a requester makes an ambiguous or overly broad request or has difficulty
in making a request for copies or inspection of Public Records under this
Section such that Avon Lake Regional Water cannot reasonably identify what
Public Records are being requested, Avon Lake Regional Water may deny the
request but shall provide the requester with an opportunity to revise the
request by informing the requester of the manner in which records are
maintained by Avon Lake Regional Water and accessed in the ordinary course of
Avon Lake Regional Water’s duties and responsibilities.
   If a request is ultimately denied, in part or in whole, Avon Lake Regional
Water shall provide the requester with an explanation, including legal
authority, setting forth why the request was denied.  If the initial request
was provided in writing, the explanation also shall be provided to the
requester in writing.  The explanation shall not preclude Avon Lake Regional
Water from relying upon additional reasons or legal authority in defending an
action commenced under Section 149.43(C) of the Ohio Revised Code.
Section 3.02   Destruction of Public Records. 
   Avon Lake Regional Water shall not destroy or transfer any of its Public
Records except in compliance with Chapter 149 of the Ohio Revised Code.  Prior
to the destruction or transfer of any of its Public Records, Avon Lake Regional
Water shall cause to be submitted to the State records program all applications
for records disposal or transfer and all schedules of records retention and
destruction.  Avon Lake Regional Water shall comply with all requests for
destruction or transfer of public records as approved by the State records
administrator and the State auditor.
CHAPTER 4 - GENERALCHAPTER 4 - GENERAL
Section 4.01   Avon Lake Regional Water Offices. 
   Applications, calls for service, and payment of charges shall be made at the
office of Avon Lake Regional Water at the following location. Office hours are
generally between 8:00 A.M.  and 4:30 P.M. weekdays and closed weekends and
holidays.
         Avon Lake Regional Water
         201 Miller Road
         Avon Lake, Ohio 44012
         Telephone Number: 440-933-6226
Section 4.02   Water Supply and Pressure. 
   Avon Lake Regional Water will endeavor to maintain a continuous supply of
water under full pressure.  When emergency or accident occasion need for
temporary interruption, there will be an attempt made to notify consumers of
such interruption.
Section 4.03   Compensation for Damages. 
   It is hereby made a condition precedent to the use of water or disposal of
wastewater that no damage or compensation shall be demanded of Avon Lake
Regional Water or the Board by any property owner or tenant for any injury,
damage, or loss caused by the breakage of any service pipe or service cock, by
the shutting off of water to repair or alter mains, or by the shutting off of
water for any other purpose, provided reasonable effort to notify has been
made, or for any injury, damage, or loss caused by any sewer backup.
Section 4.04   Repairs to Land Only. 
   The Board recognizes that, from time to time, the lawn repair is required
because of work done by Avon Lake Regional Water and is no fault of the
property owner and that watering the lawn to facilitate growth is a cost to
property owners.  Therefore, the Board hereby grants all property owners so
affected a deduction of 4,000 gallons from their next regular water bill after
the repair work is completed.
Section 4.05   Entrance to Premises. 
   The CUE, or any other duly authorized employee of Avon Lake Regional Water,
upon the presentation of proper credentials, may enter any property or premises
at reasonable times for inspecting, monitoring, reading, or repairing equipment
or records, sampling of water or discharges, or for any other purpose which
Avon Lake Regional Water may deem necessary for the proper operation and
maintenance of its systems. Under emergency circumstances, the permission to
enter shall be granted at any hour.  If the CUE or any other duly authorized
employee of Avon Lake Regional Water is denied entry upon any property during a
reasonable time, services to said property shall be discontinued until such
time that the request has been complied with to the satisfaction of the CUE.
Section 4.06   Reserve Supply. 
   Consumers whose operations require a constant and steady supply of water
should provide against interruptions in service by the installation of tanks or
other approved means sufficient to carry them over a period of interruption or
their own peak demand periods.
Section 4.07   Interruption of Service. 
   In the case of leaks or breaks and/or failure in mains, pumps, or other
equipment relating to the water supply or its distribution, Avon Lake Regional
Water will make an attempt to notify the affected consumers of the
interruption, but, in the case of any emergency, the supply of water may be
shut off without notice.
Section 4.08   Operation of Water System. 
   Only duly authorized agents of Avon Lake Regional Water shall operate any
valve, stop cock, or corporation stop or remove the cover from any curb box or
meter box located on the Avon Lake Water System.
Section 4.09   Turn-On Charges. 
   The water supply turn-on charges shall be as set forth on
Schedule A attached hereto, as established by the Board, from time to time.
Section 4.10   Pumping on Private Premises. 
   All pumps or other devices for the purpose of increasing the volume of flow
and/or pressure of water supplied by Avon Lake Regional Water in a private
water system shall be reported to and approved by the CUE.  Any installation
found to be causing excessive fluctuations in flow and/or pressure shall be
modified to an acceptable degree.
Section 4.11   Demolition of Existing Structures. 
   At the time of demolition of any existing structure which has water or
sanitary service, a demolition permit shall have been issued by Avon Lake
Regional Water.  Additionally, the CUO shall be given the opportunity to ensure
proper abandonment of the existing water and sanitary service connections to
said existing structure.  Cost for the demolition permit shall be as shown in
Schedule L.
   For the sanitary lateral, the pipe must be exposed and the open end properly
sealed by the property owner and inspected by the CUO or his designee.  The
sanitary lateral must be abandoned at a location such that the remaining pipe
does not contribute storm water infiltration to the sanitary sewer.  If video
inspection by the CUO discovers storm water drainage from the lateral, the
property owner shall be notified in writing that should the storm water
infiltration not be corrected within 30 days of notice, then a $200.00 per day
fine shall be imposed against the property owner until the drainage is
corrected to the satisfaction of the CUO.
   For the water service pipe, the person to whom the demolition permit was
issued shall notify the CUO prior to the start of work to request that the
water service be turned off and the meter removed.  If any portion of the pipe
line on the property is anticipated to be reused in the future, then all open
ends of the water service must be properly sealed, to the satisfaction of the
CUO, to prevent contamination of the water line.
   Any person who or entity which demolishes or causes the demolition of an
existing structure which has water or sanitary service without securing a
demolition permit from Avon Lake Regional Water shall subject the person or
entity to a $1000.00 fine.  (Eff. 5-5-08)
Section 4.12   No Guarantee of Pressure. 
   Avon Lake Regional Water does not guarantee a fixed or continuous pressure
of water, which is subject to the variable conditions which may arise in the
operation and maintenance of the Avon Lake potable water system.  Avon Lake
Regional Water shall not be liable for damage due to change in pressure.
Section 4.13   Water Quality Standards. 
   Potable water furnished by Avon Lake Regional Water will meet or exceed
United States Public Health Service and Ohio Environmental Protection Agency
standards for human consumption.  Avon Lake Regional Water does not guarantee
potable water quality furnished in excess of these standards.
Section 4.14   Validity. 
   If any provision, paragraph, word, section, or article of these Regulations
is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining
provisions, paragraphs, words, sections, and articles shall not be affected and
shall continue in full force and effect.
Section 4.15   Policy Regarding Gifts to Avon Lake Regional Water Employees. 
   The Board of Municipal Utilities in recognition of the service granted Avon
Lake Regional Water by its employees hereby permits the CUE or CUO to purchase
with funds of Avon Lake Regional Water items to give to employees honored at
the Employee Appreciation meeting, or other event, usually held yearly for such
recognition.
   A guideline for such purchase shall be for recognition in five (5) year
increments and the value of each five (5) year increment be graduated.
   In the event of a Special Recognition (such as extraordinary work effort,
work result, live saving, work efficiency, idea, etc.) the value of the gift
shall be determined based on the facts.
   It is expected the most valuable gift not exceed $200.00. Any amount over
this value must be approved by the Board of Municipal Utilities before the
purchase is made. (Eff. 9-15-08)
[END OF TITLE I]
TITLE II - WATER SYSTEMTITLE II - WATER SYSTEM
CHAPTER 1 - WATER USECHAPTER 1 - WATER USE
Section 1.01   Application for Service. 
   When a property owner wishes water service, he or his duly authorized agent
shall make written application therefor on forms provided at the office of Avon
Lake Regional Water. For new services, such application must be signed by the
owner of the property or his legal agent, giving location and lot number of the
property to be services, and shall show evidence of having procured a valid
building permit.
Section 1.02   Applicants to Agree to Regulation. 
   Applicants for water and sewer service shall pay such fees, charges, or
assessments as may be required and shall agree to these Regulations of said
services.
Section 1.03   Public Water Supply. 
   No water supplies or water pipes for public use shall be constructed or
operated within the limits of Avon Lake except as approved by Avon Lake
Regional Water.
   “Public Use” shall signify the use of distribution of industrial or potable
waters when applied to the needs of two (2) or more separate consumers.
   Restrictions provided herein shall not apply to the development and use of
water for industrial purposes by The Illuminating Company or by any other
corporation as may be specifically exempted by appropriate action, provided
water supplies developed by them be devoted to their own particular use.
Section 1.04   Defraying of Expenses. 
   Any expense to Avon Lake Regional Water incidental to the approval of water
supplies or to the installation of water pipes as provided shall be defrayed by
the party or parties initiating the improvement, and said party or parties
shall make such arrangements as are acceptable for defraying such expense.
Section1.05   Connecting to the Public Water Supply. 
   No person or persons, or firm, corporation, or employees thereof, shall tap
any water pipe belonging to Avon Lake Regional Water nor place any service
connection therefor in any street, road, or public way, except under permit by
Avon Lake Regional Water.
Section 1.06   Pool Filling. 
   Customer requests for the filling of swimming pools shall be scheduled with
Avon Lake Regional Water for such times as Avon Lake Regional Water personnel
are available and shall be charged on a time and material basis.
Section 1.07   Tampering with the Water System. 
   No person or persons shall tamper with, injure, or operate any water pipe,
pump, motor, valve, hydrant, or water meter, or any part of appurtenances of
the water supply or water treatment plant, or any equipment or property of Avon
Lake Regional Water except as properly authorized so to do.
Section 1.08   Pollution of Public Water Supply. 
   No person shall deposit, or cause to be deposited, any matter or material in
any reservoir or tank of the water system or into any water pipe, nor shall he
use the water services of Avon Lake Regional Water in such manner as to permit
the entry of polluting matter into the water supply thereof.
Section 1.09   Connecting to Other Water Supplies. 
   The Water Distribution System of the City shall not be connected with pipes
supplied with water from other sources, except as may be particularly permitted
by written authorization of the Board and the Ohio EPA.
Section 1.10   Operation of Fire Hydrants. 
   Fire hydrants shall be operated exclusively by the Avon Lake Fire Department
and Avon Lake Regional Water personnel only.  Any other use is strictly
prohibited.
   Permitted uses other than firefighting are determined by the CUO or his
designee.  Any water used shall be charged to the user at the current rate plus
Avon Lake Regional Water’s costs (including but not limited to costs of water
used, special equipment fees, and labor) and shall be determined by a hydrant
meter.  No non-firefighting water shall be taken from a hydrant without a
hydrant meter obtained from Avon Lake Regional Water.
   All hydrants shall be operated with a properly designed hydrant wrench, and
the hydrant valve shall not be throttled for regulation of discharge.  Should
the discharge need regulation, a valve shall be placed at the connection to the
hydrant, and the hydrant valve shall be completely opened when used.  Any
damage to property, both public and private, shall be the responsibility of the
permittee.
Section 1.11   Access to Fire Hydrants. 
   No person shall obstruct, or in any way prevent or interfere with,
continuous free access to any fire hydrant, except by written permission of
Avon Lake Regional Water.
Section 1.12   Use of Privately Owned Fire Hydrants. 
   Private hydrants (which are those fire hydrants installed on private
property and not in or on Avon Lake City property, right-of-way, or easement),
must be on a service line to the private property which has a fire detector
check valve with meter or a full flow meter which measures the entire flow
through the service line.
   In the case of the fire detector check valve with meter, no use of the
service line (i.e., use of water) from the fire detector check valve to hydrant
or terminus is permitted except for firefighting or use by the Avon Lake Fire
Department.
   If the flow on the detector meter is due to a leak, the private hydrant
owner will be notified by the CUO in writing, and the owner will be expected to
find and repair said leak immediately upon notice.  Failure to correct the
leakage will result in shutoff of the fire line and notification of same to the
Avon Lake Fire Department.
   If the detector meter does not indicate a leak but shows usage, the private
hydrant owner will be notified in writing of the illegal use of the fire line. 
Should illegal use of the private hydrant reoccur after the first notice, the
remedies identified in Title V of these Regulations will be enforced.
   If a full flow meter is employed on the service line, then water use from
this line will be measured and billed on a monthly or quarterly basis.  For
billing purposes, the minimum bill shall be based on the size of the compound
meter and not on the size of the service line.
Section 1.13   Cross Connections. 
   No person shall install, create, or allow a cross-connection or
interconnection with any other supply of water when not approved by Avon Lake
Regional Water.  This shall include installation of pipe and fixtures such that
a possibility of backflow or backsiphonage exists in the opinion of the CUO.
   In accordance with the requirements of the Ohio EPA, Ohio Administrative
Code Section 3745-95, all backflow prevention devices installed on a property’s
water service and required by these regulations must be approved Avon Lake
Regional Water.
   Only the backflow prevention devices so required by Avon Lake Regional Water
shall be monitored by the Utilities for proper installation and annual testing.
Backflow prevention devices not specifically required by Avon Lake Regional
Water regulations will not be monitored nor shall Avon Lake Regional Water
assume any responsibility or liability for their operation. (Amended 10-6-08)
Section 1.14   Service Line Changes. 
   All additions and alterations in or about a property’s service line shall be
reported to and approved by Avon Lake Regional Water.
Section 1.15   Entrance to Premises. 
   No person shall refuse authorized Avon Lake Regional Water  personnel
reasonable and safe entrance to premises for the purpose of inspection of
piping or reading, inspection, installation, maintenance, or removal of a
meter.
Section 1.16   Repairs to Service Lines. 
   A property owner, upon receiving notification from CUO, shall promptly
repair any leak discovered within his service line.
Section 1.17   Temporary Service. 
   Whenever a building or premises receiving temporary service has been
completed, to the extent that a meter could be reasonably protected, Avon Lake
Regional Water shall be notified that the meter can be installed.
Section 1.18   Vacancy. 
   Unless arranged beforehand, water to a vacant property may be turned off and
the meter removed if, in the opinion of Avon Lake Regional Water, damage may be
caused to the building or contents.
Section 1.19   In-Ground Sprinkler System. 
   All in-ground sprinkler systems require backflow preventers.  Atmospheric
pressure type vacuum break is an approved device, however it must be testable,
i.e. have test ports.  A reduced pressure type backflow preventer is also
acceptable.  All backflow preventers used shall be listed and approved by the
CUO.  All backflow preventers must be tested every year by a person certified
by either the Operator Training Committee of Ohio (OTCO) or the Department of
Commerce to perform such tests.  Failure to test as required will result in
shut-off of water to the sprinkler system or user if they are not separate. 
Reinstatement of water service will be at the standard, Board approved, turn-on
fee.  Owners or users of such systems will be notified by mail each year during
or before  April regarding the required inspection and are expected to provide
a test report on an approved form to Avon Lake Regional Water from a State
certified tester by July 1st.  Should no reply regarding this matter be
received by Avon Lake Regional Water by that date, a penalty (see
Schedule N) will be applied to the account. Additionally, a letter will be
mailed indicating the report was not received and that if not received by the
first work day after July 15th, water service will be terminated.
   Immediately upon connection of an in-ground lawn sprinkling system to the
Avon Lake potable water system, the required backflow prevention device must be
in place and tested and approved for operation by a certified backflow
prevention person.  Such person shall have either an OTCO or Department of
Commerce certification.  Failure to provide such test and certification of same
with ten (10) days of the activation of the system may result in a $500.00 fine
and possible loss of water service.  It is the property owner’s responsibility
to assure that such certification is received by the required time.  No pump
shall be connected to an in-ground sprinkler system either to increase pressure
or to purge the sprinkler system.  If a pump or air compressor is used to purge
the system, the backflow preventer must be removed and the sprinkler line shut
off.
   Continued noncompliance with this regulation subjects the offender to an
immediate fine of $500.00 to $1,000.00 and termination of water service or loss
of backflow testing certification, which the CUE shall determine.
CHAPTER 2 - WATER RATES AND CHARGESCHAPTER 2 - WATER RATES AND CHARGES
Section 2.01   Basis of Water Charges. 
   In order to provide for the costs and expense of the management, protection,
and operation of the Avon Lake Water System and Water Treatment Plant and the
maintenance thereof, there is hereby established a water service charge which
shall be paid to Avon Lake Regional Water for the use of the Water Distribution
System and the Water Filtration Plant by every person whose premises are served
by a connection to the said system. 
Section 2.02   Water Turn-On Charges. 
   The water supply turn-on charges shall be as set forth on
Schedule A attached hereto, as established by the Board, from time to time.
Section 2.03   Water to be Metered. 
   The use of all water supplied by Avon Lake Regional Water shall be metered,
unless otherwise exempted in these Regulations, and shall be charged for
according to the rate schedules published from time to time by the Board.
Section 2.04   Meter Rates. 
   The meter rates shall be as set forth on
Schedule B attached hereto, as established by the Board, from time to time.
Section 2.05   Minimum Rates. 
   Whenever the water service is turned on, regardless of whether the meter is
set or any water was used, the minimum charge for both water and sewer will go
into effect in accordance with
Schedule B attached hereto, as determined by the Board, from time to time.
Section 2.06   Water Outside Corporation Limits. 
   All water sold outside the corporation limits of Avon Lake shall be charged
according to the rates set forth on
Schedule B, plus 10%.
Section 2.07   Billing Periods. 
   Bills for water consumed and the sewage service charge shall be payable on
the first day of January, April, July and October of each year for customers
billed quarterly.  The water and sewer service charges for large volume users
(generally 500,000 gallons of billable consumption per month) will be billed
monthly and will be due on the first day of the succeeding month. Large volume
users under 500,000 gallons per month can request monthly billing by letter to
the CUE.
Section 2.08   Notification of Charges. 
   Avon Lake Regional Water will undertake to deliver bills by depositing same
in the U.S. Post Office or, if requested, by email, only as a matter of
convenience to the owner or consumer.  The failure to receive such notice shall
not release the obligation of the Owner of such property to pay the said water
and sewer service charges, and said charges shall be payable whether notice be
received or not.
Section 2.09   Payment and Penalties. 
   Water service charges are due as of the date of the invoice or bill being
issued.  If not paid by the 20th day of the month of the invoice or bill issue,
they are subject to a penalty of ten percent (10%).  Should the 20th day of the
month that said charges are due fall on a weekend or holiday, then said charges
are due on the next business day.
Section 2.10   Third Party Payment Processor. 
   The property owner is solely responsible to assure the timely payment of all
Avon Lake Regional Water billing charges.  No consideration shall be given for
the failure of a third party bill processor used by the property owner should
payment not be received by the bill’s due date.  All penalty charges including
late fees and turn-off and reinstatement charges shall be assessed and paid
regardless of the payment authorization date given by the property owner to the
third party processor if payment is not received at Avon Lake Regional Water's
billing office by the due date.
   All charges for water and sewer service are assessed against the property to
which the service is rendered and are a lien against such property, collectible
as other liens and taxes are collected.
   If not paid when due, the CUE shall have the authority to certify said
charges to the Auditor of Lorain County, Ohio, to be placed on the tax
duplicate, with interest and penalty allowed by law, and be collected as other
taxes are collected.
Section 2.11   Property Owner/Tenant Agreement. 
   It is the property owner’s responsibility after having been notified of fees
and charges due Avon Lake Regional Water to assure their timely payment.  A
property owner may arrange to have a tenant or lessee pay the water and sewer
charges, but such arrangement shall not relieve the owner of responsibility for
payment of any delinquencies that may occur for the said property.  If special
arrangements are needed for payment, it is the owner’s responsibility to
contact the CUE of the need before service is terminated.
Section 2.12   Charges Paid in the Order Contracted. 
   Charges for water and sewer service must be paid in the order in which they
are contracted.  Accordingly, payments received will be applied first to
delinquent charges when there is a previous delinquent charge against the same
property.
Section 2.13   Charges Based on Water Meter Readings. 
   Billings for water and sewer service charges, except as exempt in Title I,
Section 2.09, shall be made in accordance with the water meter readings.  The
accuracy of these readings may be appealed as provided in Title V of these
Regulations.
Section 2.14   Adjustment of Bills. 
   Claims for allowances because of errors in meter readings, faulty
registration of meters, and clerical errors will be allowed, upon proper
evidence, and the bill adjusted accordingly.
   No adjustment to the water consumption charge portion of a bill will be
allowed for a claim because of leaks in the consumer’s lines or fixtures.  The
CUE, upon proper evidence, may adjust the sewer service charge of a bill for a
leak when the consumer can show that the excess water did not enter the
sanitary sewer system, but the amount of water registered by any meter shall be
charged and paid in full, irrespective of whether such water, after having been
registered, was lost by leakage, accident, or otherwise.
Section 2.15   Reporting Excessive Bills. 
   In an effort to eliminate waste and excessive bills, Avon Lake Regional
Water will assist a consumer in attempting to discover the cause of waste,
provided the consumer requests such assistance.
Section 2.16   Deduction for Fire Protection. 
   A deduction to the water and sewer service charge may be made for metered
water used to put out or prevent the spread of fire, provided that such use is
reported to Avon Lake Regional Water in writing.
Section 2.17   Estimated Bills. 
   When it is not possible for meter readers to gain entrance to a premises for
the purpose of reading the meter, a card will be left or sent to the premises
for the purpose of allowing the consumer to record his own meter reading.  The
said card, if returned in the specified period with the required information,
may be used in the determination of the water and sewer charges. For all
accounts for which Avon Lake Regional Water cannot get a reading of the water
meter, the water and sewer service charges will be estimated on past use on the
premises in comparable periods and a bill submitted for this amount.
   If Avon Lake Regional Water fails to gain access to a premises for the
purpose of reading the meter on four (4) successive billing periods, the CUO
may require that an outside meter be installed as specified by Avon Lake
Regional Water.
Section 2.18   Final Bill. 
   Consumers wishing to terminate their water and sewer service may do so by
contacting Avon Lake Regional Water's office. On the requested date, a final
meter reading will be taken and a final bill prepared showing all outstanding
charges and fees for the account.
   In the case of the sale of property, to avoid having the water service
turned off at the time of the final meter reading, the name of the new owner
must be given at the time the final is requested.
Section 2.19   Summer Billing Adjustment. 
   Individual residential accounts during the third billing quarter will have
the sewer service charge adjusted to allow for summer sprinkling.  The
adjustment to the sewer service charge will be based on the average of the
water used during the first two quarters of the year.
   The summer billing adjustment shall only apply to individual residential
accounts (single family residences). No adjustment shall be made for apartment,
condominium, commercial, industrial, or governmental accounts, or consumers
with sprinkling meters.
Section 2.20   New Line Charges. 
   All new water line installations shall be subject to Avon Lake Regional
Water’s charges as shown in
Schedule I.
Section 2.21   Water Impact Fee. 
   A Water Impact Fee shall be collected from the owner of Undeveloped Land at
the time of their connection to the Municipal Water System or from developed
land upon their request to up-size their existing water connection for the
purpose of constructing improvements to the municipal water system. The fee is
meant for each new connection to pay an amount equivalent to the connection’s
share of the replacement value of the water distribution system within Avon
Lake to cover distribution system costs expended to provide service.
   The Water Impact Fee shall be calculated in accordance with the definitions
and formula as set forth below:
“Equivalent Residential Connection (ERC)” is a unit of measure to equate
connections of any size to an equivalent number of residential units and is
based upon water meter size. Both 5/8” and 3/4” meters equate to an ERC of 1.
Larger water meters can pass more water and equate to more ERCs, based upon the
following table:
Meter Size ERCs
Meter Size   ERCs
5/8 inches   1
3/4 inches   1
1 inch       1.8
1-1/2 inches 4
2 inches     7
3 inches     16
4  inches   28.5
6 inches     64
8 inches     114
10 inches    178
12 inches    256
 
   To determine the Water Impact Fee, multiply the WIF/ERC by the ERCs.
   If multiple meters are requested, the cumulative ERCs must be multiplied by
the WIF/ERC.
   The Water Impact Fee per Equivalent Residential Connection shall be as set
forth in
Schedule K attached hereto and such fee shall be adjusted annually in
accordance with the first published Cleveland Construction Cost Index in
Engineering News Record after January 1 of each year.
   The Water Impact Fee may be paid at any time prior to the improvements of
Unimproved Land but shall be paid prior to occupancy and shall be a condition
of the issuance of an occupancy permit. Such fees shall apply to all
improvements on Unimproved Lands regardless of whether such improvements are
connected to the municipal water system. In the case of a request to up-size an
existing water connection such fees shall be payable at the time of the
request. (Rev. 1-4-12)
CHAPTER 3 - TAPS AND SERVICE CONNECTIONSCHAPTER 3 - TAPS AND SERVICE
CONNECTIONS
Section 3.01   Application for Tap and Service Connection. 
   Any property owner requesting the installation of a tap and service
connection shall make written application therefor on forms provided at the
office of Avon Lake Regional Water.  Such application must be signed by the
property owner or his legal agent, giving location and lot number of the
property to be served, and shall show evidence of having procured a valid
building permit except as may be waived by the Board.
Section 3.02   Taps and Service on Existing Mains. 
   Taps on all water mains owned and operated by the City of Avon Lake shall be
installed by Avon Lake Regional Water or its authorized agent.
   Cost of taps and service connections installed by Avon Lake Regional Water
shall be as determined by the Board and as shown in
Schedule G.
   Avon Lake Regional Water, for 3/4” and 1” taps, shall install the service
connection to the meter which will include the installation of the curb stop,
meter vault, and meter.
   For all taps 1-1/2” or larger, Avon Lake Regional Water shall make the tap,
and the owner requesting the tap shall be responsible for buying and installing
the vault complete to Avon Lake Regional Water specifications, install piping
in the vault including a bypass, and set the meter as provided by Avon Lake
Regional Water.
Section 3.03   Taps and Services on New Main Installations. 
   All taps and services on new contractor installed water mains shall be the
responsibility of the contractor to install. Once installed, Avon Lake Regional
Water will set the meter vault and meter.  For all new water line installations
in the City, Avon Lake Regional Water will perform the following tasks at the
costs set forth on the New Line Testing Fee Schedule attached hereto as
Schedule C as amended from time to time by the Board.
   1.   One trip to initially fill the new line.
   2.   Two trips on consecutive days for the purpose of flushing and sampling
the new line for the required bacteria testing.
   3   One trip to flush and sample for the bacteria check sample after
successful completion of the hydrostatic test.
   4.   The setup and analysis of the above bacteria samples on three separate
days by Avon Lake Regional Water laboratory.
   5.   Upon acceptance of the line, one trip to open the valves to put the new
line in service.
   Any additional manpower, testing, review, or consultation beyond that
specified above will be billed on a time and material basis plus 100% of the
labor costs.  All such additional costs shall be billed to the project’s owner
on all private projects and to the prime contractor on all public projects and
are due upon receipt.
Section 3.04   Meter Vault Location. 
   All new water services shall have the meter vault located immediately inside
the property line.
Section 3.05   Radio Read Meters. 
   All new water services shall be installed with radio read meters.
Section 3.06   Payment for Taps and Services. 
   All costs associated with the tap and service connection charges must be
paid in full before actual installation of the said tap and services will be
done.
   Once installed, it shall be the owner’s responsibility for maintenance of
all plumbing from the curb stop through the building.  All costs of repair or
replacement shall be at the owner’s expense.
   Repairs to the tap and service connection from the main to the curb stop, on
inside meters and to the meter on outside (pit) installations, on one-inch (1”)
and smaller in size, shall be the responsibility of Avon Lake Regional Water,
unless the repairs are necessary because of work done by or for the owner, in
which case the owner shall pay the full cost thereof.
   When it has been determined by Avon Lake Regional Water that it would be
more beneficial to replace rather than repair a service connection of one-inch
(1”) or smaller, the service from tap to the curb stop will be replaced at no
cost to the owner.  At the time of the replacement Avon Lake Regional Water may
replace the inside meter with an outside (pit) installation.  If an owner
requests that a service connection be replaced and Avon Lake Regional Water has
determined that replacement is not warranted, the owner will be charged for the
replacement on a time and material basis.
   For larger service connections, Avon Lake Regional Water shall repair the
tap and service connection to the shut-off valve ahead of the meter.  The owner
shall be responsible for all plumbing from the first shut-off valve.
Section 3.07   Damage to Taps and Service Connections. 
   Should a tap or service connection be damaged by an individual, contractor,
or other utility, the full cost or repairs plus 100% of labor shall be charged
to those responsible for the damage in accordance with
Schedule D attached hereto as determined by the Board from time to time.
Section 3.08   Minimum Frontage for Service. 
   Requests for service shall only be granted to such properties that have a
buildable frontage per City of Avon Lake lot size requirements that borders on
a water main owned by the City.  No tap and service connection shall be
installed to any property not meeting this requirement except as may be
permitted by the Board.
Section 3.09   Multiple Services. 
   No multiple services from a single meter shall be allowed except in the case
of apartments and duplexes, provided that none of the units is individually
owned, or condominiums where there is a residents’ agreement on the payment of
the charges. Should there be a question of separate ownership of any of these
units and there is no proof of a legal residents’ agreement for the payment of
charges, then each unit shall be required to have a separate service connection
and meter.
   Under no condition shall multiple single family homes be permitted to be
serviced from a single meter.
Section 3.10   Connection to Service Line. 
   No person or persons shall tap or make any connection to a service line
between the meter and the water main, except as approved by Avon Lake Regional
Water.
CHAPTER 4 - METERSCHAPTER 4 - METERS
Section 4.01   All Services to be Metered. 
   All water services that have a direct connection with the Avon Lake Water
System shall be metered unless specifically exempted by the Board.
Section 4.02   Ownership of Meters. 
   Avon Lake Regional Water shall supply and retain ownership of all meters
used on the Avon Lake Water System and may replace any existing meter that Avon
Lake Regional Water deems necessary.
   Broken or damaged meters and/or meter vaults will be repaired or replaced by
Avon Lake Regional Water, but the cost of such repairs or replacements shall be
charged to the owner of the property where the meter is located except as
determined by Avon Lake Regional Water to be ordinary wear.
Section 4.03   Installation of Meters. 
   All meters on the Avon Lake Water System shall be installed by Avon Lake
Regional Water except in service connections of 1-1/2” and larger, and the
property owner shall be responsible for the installation of a meter to be
supplied by Avon Lake Regional Water.
Section 4.04   Removal of Meters. 
   Meters shall be removed only by authorized employees of Avon Lake Regional
Water.
Section 4.05   Meter Testing. 
   Meters may be tested at the instigation of Avon Lake Regional Water or the
consumer.  If requested by the consumer, such request shall be in writing and
shall be accompanied by a deposit in the amounts as stated on
Schedule E attached hereto as determined by the Board from time to time.
   Should any Avon Lake Regional Water customer request his meter be tested for
accuracy, such test will be done by Avon Lake Regional Water or its agents.  If
the meter so tested for accuracy does not meet AWWA water meter accuracy
standards, then there will be no charge to the customer requesting such test. 
If, however, the meter tests accurate by the same AWWA standards, then all
costs associated with such testing procedure plus a 10% administrative fee
shall be billed to the customer.  If said bill is not paid in 30 days from the
date of billing, it shall become part of the next water bill and as such shall
be subject to all existing collection policies of Avon Lake Regional Water.
   The customer or customer’s agent may be present to witness said test. 
Failure of the customer to witness the test at a mutually agreed upon time
shall not relieve the customer of any expense incurred by Avon Lake Regional
Water in preparation for said test.
Section 4.06   Remote Vault Meter Conduit Installation or Damage. 
   To complete the connection between the meter in the vault and the remote
read device on the building, the property owner is responsible for installing a
½ inch, clean, undamaged, plastic, continuous conduit from the meter pit to the
driveway side of the building, and must leave approximately 4 feet of tubing at
that point for installation of the remote read device on the building by Avon
Lake Regional Water.  Failure to install said conduit will result in a written
notification of same to the property owner requesting that said conduit be
installed within 30 days or arrangements made for such installation
satisfactory to the CUE.  Any damage to the conduit shall be repaired by the
property owner within 30 days after notification by Avon Lake Regional Water of
such damage and necessary repair.
CHAPTER 5 - WATER MAIN EXTENSIONSCHAPTER 5 - WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS
Section 5.01   Submittal of Plans. 
   All plans for new water main extensions shall be submitted to Avon Lake
Regional Water for review. Plans shall be of a suitable scale and showing the
location of the proposed mains together with sizes and depths, location of
fittings and hydrants, and the points of connection with existing mains, along
with all standard design details.  After correction of needed changes, the
plans may be approved by the Board or its designee.
Section 5.02   Minimum Size of Main. 
   All new water mains in Avon Lake shall be at least eight inches (8”) in
size, unless exempted by Avon Lake Regional Water.
   In cases where mains must be larger than eight inches (8”) to also perform
the function of trunk mains, the contractor shall install the size main, as
determined by Avon Lake Regional Water, that is required.  Avon Lake Regional
Water will then reimburse the contractor for that portion of the pipe cost that
is equal to the difference between the installed size and eight inches (8”). 
The amount to be paid for the oversizing of the main shall be determined by
Avon Lake Regional Water.
Section 5.03   Minimum Standards. 
   All material used in water main extensions, along with all methods of
installation, shall meet the latest revision of its AWWA Standard as a minimum
requirement and be acceptable to the CUE.
Section 5.04   Pipe. 
   All water mains shall be constructed of one of the following:
   1.   Ductile Iron – Class 52 cement line conforming to ANSI/AWWA Standards
C104/A21.4-03 and Cl 51/A21.51-02, Polyethylene Encasement ANSI/AWWA C105/A21-
5.
   2.   Reinforced Concrete Pressure Pipe – Steel cylinder type ANSI/AWWA C300-
04.
   3.   Polyvinyl Chloride Pipe (PVC) – Molecularly oriented – ANSI/AWWA C-909-
09.
Section 5.05   Fittings and Valves. 
   All fittings and valves on new installations shall meet the latest revised
AWWA Standard.
      Fittings – ANSI/AWWA C110/A21.10-03 or ANSI/AWWA C153/A21.53-06
      Gate Valves – ANSI/AWWA C500-02
      Butterfly Valves – ANSI/AWWA C504-06
   All valves shall be Mueller or Darling or an approved equal. Gate valves
shall be a double disc type or resilient seated gate valve.  Butterfly valves
shall be used for all installations 16” and larger.
   In addition, all bolts on buried water line fittings and valves shall
receive an approved bitumastic coating, and then the entire fitting or valve
shall be double wrapped with a 6-mil polyethylene cover.
Section 5.06   Fire Hydrants. 
   Approved fire hydrants for the Avon Lake Water System shall be American
Darling Hydrant No. B-84-8 with standard City threads or Mueller Centurion A-
423 with 5-1/4” valve opening, and all shall be installed with a 6” watch valve
and box.  Hydrants shall be installed approximately every 300+ feet along the
main.  In addition, any main installations that terminate at a dead end shall
have a hydrant or approved blow-off installed at the terminus.
Section 5.07   Location. 
   All water main installations shall be located off the paved area of any
roadway and sidewalk within the right-of-way.  The water main shall be
installed on the opposite side of the roadway from any sanitary sewer and shall
be uniform in location as to the side of the roadway it is installed for any
additional streets in a subdivision.
Section 5.08   Installation. 
   The installation of all water main pipe, valves, fittings, and hydrants
along with alignment and grade, trench construction, backfilling, and
hydrostatic testing shall conform to ANSI/AWWA C600-05 Specifications or latest
edition.
   Special care shall be taken to prevent damage to the protective coating and
lining of the main and to protect pipe openings from the introduction of
foreign material.
   The water main shall be backfilled with #57 limestone to a depth of six
inches on all sides of the pipe and shall be thoroughly compacted before final
backfilling. Under no conditions shall any water main backfill contain any slag
screenings or crushed concrete.
Section 5.09   Service Connections. 
   On new subdivision installations, the contractor shall be responsible for
making the taps to all properties having frontage on the water main.  Taps and
extension of the service line shall be in a manner, including materials,
approved by Avon Lake Regional Water and be shown on the contractor’s plans.
   The contractor shall be responsible for tapping the main, installing the
corporation cock (Farnan Brass or equal), and extending the service line
(minimum 3/4” “K” copper) a distance of at least five feet into the property
line.  At a distance of seven feet from the property line or as specified by
Avon Lake Regional Water, the contractor shall install on the service line a
curb stop along with its service box and adjust the said box to final grade. On
existing water mains or new mains installed by Avon Lake Regional Water, new
service connections shall be made by Avon Lake Regional Water.
Section 5.10   Water Line Inspection Fee. 
   Water mains which are installed on private property and become the City’s
property, shall be subject to an inspection fee based on
Schedule F attached hereto as determined by the Board from time to time.
Section 5.11   Tap Charges. 
   Once the contractor has installed the tap and service connection, the meter
and meter vault may be set.  An application for service shall be filed with
Avon Lake Regional Water Office and payment of fees for the size service
received according to
Schedule G attached hereto as determined by the Board from time to time.
   For all services 1-1/2” and larger, the contractor shall buy and install a
vault complete to Avon Lake Regional Water specifications, install the piping
in the vault including a bypass, and set a meter that shall be provided by Avon
Lake Regional Water.
   All service line extensions within the property shall be installed with a
remote meter-read-device or a radio read meter as determined by Avon Lake
Regional Water in accordance with
Chapter 3 of this Title II.
Section 5.12   Water for Construction. 
   Once the water main or a portion thereof is complete and approved, the
contractor requesting water for construction shall be required to have a tap
and meter installed.  The use of a fire hydrant for supply of construction
water is strictly prohibited.
Section 5.13   Testing. 
   All hydrostatic testing, pressure, and leakage shall conform to ANSI/AWWA
C600-05 or latest edition and shall maintain a pressure of 150 PSI for at least
a four (4) hour duration with any measurable pressure loss within AWWA
specifications.  Installations failing to meet the testing shall be repaired by
the contractor and the testing repeated to the satisfaction of Avon Lake
Regional Water.  All hydrostatic testing shall be witnessed by a duly
authorized representative of Avon Lake Regional Water as a condition of
approval.
Section 5.14   Disinfecting Water Lines. 
   Before any new water line installation is approved and put into operation,
the contractor shall disinfect the line to Ohio EPA and Avon Lake Regional
Water standards. The approved method of disinfection shall be as specified in
ANSI/AWWA-C651-05 or latest edition.
   When the contractor feels that the water main has been disinfected and is
ready for bacteria testing, the contractor shall contact Avon Lake Regional
Water for sampling.  A representative of Avon Lake Regional Water shall
determine when the main has been sufficiently flushed and take the needed
samples.
   Approval shall be based on two acceptable bacteria tests, taken on
consecutive days and a post hydrostatic test check sample as performed by Avon
Lake Regional Water’s Water Lab.
Section 5.15   Guarantee on New Water Mains. 
   For all new water mains installed by Avon Lake Regional Water, prior to
acceptance, the contractor shall supply to Avon Lake Regional Water a
Maintenance Bond in the amount of 100% of the construction cost of the said new
water main.  The Maintenance Bond shall be used as a guarantee of the water
main installation for a period of one (1) year, after which time Avon Lake
Regional Water shall inspect the said installation and the CUO shall notify the
contractor of the results.  All needed repairs and replacements, as noted by
the CUO, shall be completed by the contractor at his expense, to the
satisfaction of the CUO, before the water main receives final acceptance and
the contractor’s maintenance bond is released.
   The maintenance bond shall be based on the total cost of construction as
determined by valid construction cost estimates supplied by the contractor and/
or an amount determined by Avon Lake Regional Water based on current
replacement costs and shall be for 100% of the said costs.
CHAPTER 6 - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROLCHAPTER 6 - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
   Avon Lake Regional Water is responsible for protection of the public water
system of Avon Lake from contamination due to backflow of contaminants through
the water service connection.  If, in the judgment of the CUE, a potential
source of backflow and/or contamination exists, he shall give notice to the
consumer to install such approved backflow prevention device(s) at each service
connection to the premises. The consumer shall immediately install such
approved devices at his expense; and failure, refusal, or inability on the part
of the consumer to install the said devices immediately shall constitute
grounds for the discontinuing of water service to the premises until said
devices are installed.
Section 6.01   Prohibited Connections. 
   No person, firm, or corporation shall establish, or permit to be
established, or maintain, or permit to be maintained, any connection whereby a
private, auxiliary, or emergency water supply other than the regular public
water supply of Avon Lake may enter the supply of distribution system of said
municipality, unless such private, auxiliary, or emergency water supply and the
method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the CUE
and the Ohio EPA.
Section 6.02   Surveys and Investigations. 
   Avon Lake Regional Water shall conduct, or cause to be conducted, periodic
surveys and investigations of industrial and other properties served by the
Avon Lake Water System where actual or potential cross-connections to the
public water system may exist and through which contaminants or pollutants
could backflow into the public water system.
   The CUE or his duly authorized representative shall have the right to enter,
at any reasonable time, any property served by a connection to the public water
supply or distribution system of Avon Lake for the purpose of making surveys or
investigations of water use practices within the premises. Upon request, the
owner, lessees, or occupants of any property so served shall furnish the CUE or
his representative any information requested regarding the piping system(s) or
water use on such property.  The refusal of such information when requested
shall, at the discretion of the CUE, be deemed evidence of the presence of
improper connections.
   Surveys and investigations by Avon Lake Regional Water shall not relieve the
consumer of the responsibility or liability for conducting periodic surveys of
water use practices on his/its premises to determine whether there are actual
or potential cross-connections in the consumer’s water system through which
contaminants or pollutants could backflow into the public water system or the
consumer’s potable water system.
Section 6.03   Where Backflow Protection is Required.
   1.   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer’s water system serving premises where, in the
judgment of the CUE or the Ohio EPA, actual or potential hazards to the public
water system exist.
   2.   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer’s water system serving premises where the following
conditions exist:
      a.   Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary
supply is accepted as an additional source by the CUE and the source is
approved by the Ohio EPA.
      b.   Premises on which any substance is handled in such a fashion as to
create an actual or potential hazard to the Avon Lake Water System.  This shall
include premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or water
originating from the public water system which are no longer under the sanitary
control of Avon Lake Regional Water.
      c.   Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment of
the CUE, are not correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it
impractical to determine whether or not cross-connections exist.
      d.   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross-connection survey.
      e.   Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being
established or re-established.
      f.   Others as may be specified by the CUE or the Ohio EPA.
   3.   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer’s water system, but not necessarily limited to, the
following types of facilities, unless the CUE or the Ohio EPA determines that
no actual or potential hazard to the Public Water System exists.
      a.   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes;
      b.   Laboratories;
      c.   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities;
      d.   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, or storm water
pumping stations;
      e.   Food or beverage processing plants;
      f.   Chemical plants;
      g.   Metal plating industries;
      h.   Petroleum processing or storage plants;
      i.   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors;
      j.   Car wash facilities;
      k.   Other specified by the CUE or the Ohio EPA.
   4.   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed at any point
of connection between the Avon Lake Water System and an auxiliary water supply
unless such auxiliary supply is accepted as an additional source by the CUE and
the Ohio EPA.
Section 6.04   Type of Protection Required.
   1.   The type of protection required under Section 6.03, subparagraphs 1, 2,
or 3, of Title II of these Regulations shall depend on the degree of hazard
which exists as follows:
      a.   An approved air gap separation shall be installed where the public
water system may be contaminated with substances that could cause a severe
health hazard.
      b.   An approved air gap separation or reduced pressure principle
backflow prevention device shall be installed where the public water system may
be contaminated with a substance that could cause a system or health hazard.
      c.   An approved air gap separation, reduced pressure principle device,
or double check valve assembly shall be installed where the public water system
may be polluted with substances that could cause a pollution hazard not
dangerous to health.
   2.   The type of protection required under Section 6.03, subparagraph 4, of
Title II of these Regulations shall be an approved air gap separation or an
approved interchangeable connection.
   3.   Where an auxiliary water supply is used as a secondary source of water
for a fire protection system, the provisions of this Section 6.04 may not be
required providing:
      a.   At premises where the auxiliary water supply may be contaminated
with substances that could cause a system or health hazard, the public water
system shall be protected against backflow by the installation of an approved
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device.
      b.   At all other premises, the public water system shall be protected
against backflow by installation of either an approved reduced pressure
principle device or double check valve assembly.
      c.   The Avon Lake Water System shall be the primary source of water for
the fire protection system.
      d.   The fire protection system shall be normally filled with water from
the public water system.
      e.   The water in the fire protection system shall be used for fire
protection only with no regular use of water from the system downstream from
the approved backflow prevention device.
      f.   The water in the fire protection system shall contain no additives.
Section 6.05   Backflow Prevention Devices.
   1.   Any backflow prevention device required by these Regulations shall be
of a model or construction approved by the CUE and the Ohio EPA and shall
comply with the following:
      a.   An air gap separation to be approved shall be at least twice the
diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically above the top rim of the
vessel, but in no case less than one inch.
      b.   A double check valve assembly or reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention device shall be approved by the CUE and shall appear on the current
“List of Approved Backflow Prevention Devices” of the Ohio EPA.
      c.   To be approved, an interchangeable connection shall be either a
swing type connector or a four-way valve of the lubricated plug type that
operates through a mechanism which unseals the plug, turns it ninety degrees
and reseats the plug. Four-way valves shall not be used as stop valves, but
must have separate stop valves on each pipe connected to the valve.  The
telltale port on the four-way valve shall have no piping connected and the
threads or flange on this port shall be destroyed so that a connection cannot
be made.
   2.   Existing backflow prevention devices approved by the CUE or the Ohio
EPA at the time of installation and properly maintained shall, except for
inspection and maintenance requirements, be excluded from Section 6.04 above
provided the CUE is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the public
water system. Whenever the existing device is moved from its present location
or requires more than minimum maintenance, or when the CUE finds that the
maintenance of the device constitutes a hazard to health, the device shall be
replaced by a backflow prevention device meeting the requirements of these
regulations.
Section 6.06   Installation.
   1.   Backflow prevention devices required by these Regulations shall be
installed at a location and in a manner approved by the CUE and shall be
installed by and at the expense of the water consumer.  In addition, any
backflow prevention device required by these Regulations shall be installed at
a location and in a manner approved by the Ohio EPA as required by Chapter 6109
of the Ohio Revised Code or as required by Avon Lake Regional Water.  (Rev. 2-
5-13)
   2.   Backflow prevention devices installed on the service line to a
consumer’s water system shall be located on the consumer’s side of the water
meter, as close to the meter as is reasonably practical, and prior to any other
connection.
   3.   Pits or vaults shall be of water-tight construction, be so located and
constructed as to prevent flooding, and shall be maintained free from standing
water by means of only a non-water powered sump pump or a suitable drain. Such
sump pump or drain shall not connect to a sanitary sewer nor permit flooding of
the pit or vault by reverse flow from its point of discharge.  An access ladder
and adequate natural or artificial lighting shall be provided to permit
maintenance, inspection, and testing of the backflow prevention device.
Section 6.07   Inspection and Maintenance.
   1.   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow
prevention devices required by these regulations are installed to have
inspection, test, and overhaul made in accordance with the following schedule
or, more often, where inspections indicate a need:
      a.   Air separation shall be inspected at the time of installation and at
least every twelve months thereafter.
      b.   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested for
tightness at the time of installation and at least every twelve months
thereafter. They shall be dismantled, inspected internally, cleaned, and
repaired whenever needed and at least every thirty months.
      c.   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall be
inspected and tested for tightness at the time of installation and at least
every twelve months thereafter. They shall be dismantled, inspected internally,
cleaned, and repaired whenever needed and at least every five years.
      d.   Interchangeable connections shall be inspected at time of
installation and at least every twelve months thereafter.
   3.   Inspections, tests, and overhaul of backflow prevention devices shall
be made at the expense of the water consumer and shall be performed by Avon
Lake Regional Water or a person as approved by the CUE as qualified to inspect,
test, and overhaul the said device.
   4.   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the
consumer without delay.
   5.   The water consumer shall maintain a complete record of each backflow
prevention device from purchase to retirement.  This shall include a
comprehensive listing that includes a record of all test, inspections, and
repairs. Records of the same shall be made available to Avon Lake Regional
Water upon request.
   6.   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed, or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the
CUE.
Section 6.08   Booster Pumps.
   1.   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cut-off
device designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service
line on the suction side of the pump drops to ten pounds per square inch gauge
or less.
   2.   It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low pressure
cut-off device improper working order and to certify to the CUE, at least once
a year, that the device is operable.
Section 6.09   Backflow Testing Falsification. 
   If an Ohio Department of Commerce or Operator Training Committee of Ohio
(Ohio EPA) backflow certificate holder is found to have falsified test report
documents, penalties will be enforced as outlined below:
   1.   Falsification of records includes but is not limited to:
      a.   Claiming to have tested devices that were not tested.
      b.   Signing off on tests that an uncertified person has conducted.
      c.   Fixing devices without testing them.
   2.   Penalties for any form of falsification include:
      a.   1st Offense:  Backflow certification will be suspended for twelve
(12) months. The Building Department and the Agency that issued the certificate
will be notified either by U.S. Mail or the Internet.
      b.   2nd Offense:  Certificate holder will be terminated from Avon Lake
Regional Water Backflow Program for life. The Building Department and the
Agency that issued the certificate will be notified either by U.S. Mail or the
Internet. (Eff. 10-6-08)
Section 6.10   Water-Powered Sump Pumps.
   Water-powered sump pumps pose a contamination risk to customers who install
them and to Avon Lake Regional Water’s public water system. They are therefore
not permitted to be connected to any water service supplied by Avon Lake
Regional Water. Whenever Avon Lake Regional Water becomes aware of a water-
powered sump pump connected to an Avon Lake Regional Water Service, the
property owner or his agent shall be notified to remove said connection within
30 days. Failure or refusal to remove said connection within 30 days after
notice or to provide a schedule for said removal approved by the CUE shall
subject said property owner to an immediate fine of $200.00 for each day
thereafter until said connection is removed. Continued failure to remove said
connection may result in additional enforcement or prosecution pursuant to
Title V of these Regulations. (Eff. 2-5-13)
[END OF TITLE II]
TITLE III - SEWERSTITLE III - SEWERS67
CHAPTER 1 - ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION OF SEWER SERVICE CHARGECHAPTER 1 -
ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION OF SEWER SERVICE CHARGE
Section 1.01   Basis of Sewer Service Charge. 
   In order to provide for the costs and expense of the management, protection
and operation of the public sewer system and the Water Pollution Control
Center, and the maintenance thereof, there is hereby established a Sewer
Service Charge which shall be paid to Avon Lake Regional Water for the use of
the public sewer system and the Water Pollution Control Center by every person
whose premises are served either directly or indirectly by a connection to the
public sewer system.
Section 1.02   Sewer Service Charge.
   1.   The Sewer Service Charge billed monthly or quarterly shall be the sum
of the following, as applicable to a given user:
a. Administrative Fee        times MBP
b. Consumption Charge        times BC
c. Industrial Surcharge Fee  times MBP
d. Industrial Surcharge Rate times EDP
  When
    MBP = Months in Billing period
    BC  = Billable Consumption
    EDP = Excess Pounds Discharge
 
   2.   The Sewer Service Charges are identified in
Schedule H attached hereto as established by the Board from time to time.
   3.   When a user’s service begins after the fifteenth day of the month or
ends before the fifteenth day of the month, that month’s service shall not be
included in the Administrative Fee.
Section 1.03   Alternate Billing.
   1.   None of the alternative means of determining billable flow defined in
this Section 1.03 may be used without the prior approval of the Board.
   2.   The Board shall not grant approval unless the Section 1.03(3)’s
prerequisite demonstration, that significant amounts of consumed water that
would otherwise be billable consumption are not discharged into the public
sewage system, is made and it is also demonstrated, to the satisfaction of the
Board, that the means of measurement, including the measuring device(s)
themselves, their placement, arrangement, number, operation, and maintenance
and any other relevant factors, is adequate to ensure an accurate determination
of billable consumption.
   3.   The Board may require that any alternate means of determining billable
flow be verified prior to granting approval, and the CUE has the authority to
inspect or require verification at any time subsequent to the granting of
approval.  The CUE can also require that repairs or other steps be made to
ensure an accurate determination of billable consumption.
   4.   The Board may withdraw its approval at any time it is no longer assured
that the alternate means it has approved represents an accurate method of
determining billable consumption, providing that the Owner of the affected
premises, or other interested party, be given notice of the proposed withdrawal
and be provided an opportunity for a hearing.
   When the Board deems it appropriate to withdraw its approval of an alternate
means of determining billable consumption, billable consumption shall be as it
would have otherwise been, as defined in this Section 1.03, unless the Board
determines that some means other than those referenced in Section 1.03 should
be used in lieu of the means for which approval has been withdrawn.
   When the Board withdraws its approval for an alternate means of determining
billable consumption, the means determined to be appropriate in subparagraph 2
of this Section shall be used effective as of the billing period during which
notice of the withdrawal of approval was given.  The Board may also
retroactively modify past billings in a similar fashion for as long as a period
of time that the alternate means has not provided an accurate determination of
billable consumption.
   The Board shall give notice of the proposed withdrawal of its approval of an
alternate means of determining billable consumption, including the adjustments
made to the billings to the affected user(s), and provide an opportunity for an
informal hearing.  The proposed withdrawal and corresponding action regarding
adjustment in billing shall be approved unless the Owner of the affected
premises, or other interested party, presents a clear and convincing basis for
determining that the proposed action is not warranted.
   The Board has broad discretion in protecting its interest in an accurate
determination of billable consumption and is not limited to these means
identified above, in determining whether an accurate determination has been, is
being, or will be made.
   In all circumstances, the burden of demonstrating that a particular
alternate measure represents an accurate means of measurement falls upon the
Owner of the premises, or other interested party, who is proposing the
alternative method.
Section 1.04   Billing Period. 
   The Sewer Service Charge shall be payable on the first day of January,
April, July, and October of each year for customers billed quarterly.  The
Sewer Service Charge for large volume users (generally 500,000 gallons of
billable consumption per month) will be billed monthly and will be due on the
first day of the succeeding month. Users can request monthly billing.
Section 1.05   Obligation of Property Owner. 
   The failure to receive such notice shall not release the obligation of the
Owner of such property to pay such Sewer Service Charge, and such Sewer Service
Charge shall be payable whether notice be received or not.
Section 1.06   Penalties. 
   Sewer Service Charges are due as of date of issue.  If not paid by the 20th
day of the month of issuing the invoice or bill, they are subject to a penalty
of ten percent (10%).  Should the 20th day of the month that said charges are
due fall on a weekend or holiday, then said charges are due on the next
business day.
Section 1.07   New Line Charges. 
   All new sewer line installations shall be subject to Avon Lake Regional
Water’s charges as shown in
Schedule C.
CHAPTER 2 - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONSCHAPTER 2 - BUILDING SEWERS AND
CONNECTIONS
Section 2.01   Authorization. 
   No person, entity, firm, corporation, or employee thereof, shall uncover,
make any connection with, or open into, use, alter, or disturb any public
sanitary or combined sewer or appurtenance thereto, except upon the
authorization of the CUE.
Section 2.02   Inspection Permit and Fee. 
   Any person, entity, firm, corporation, or employee thereof desiring a
connection to a public sanitary or combined sewer shall make written
application therefor on forms provided by the Board.  Such application must be
signed by the owner of the property or his legal agent, giving location and lot
number of the property to be served, and the applicant shall show evidence of
having procured a valid building and/or street opening permit.  No inspection
permit will be issued if no valid building permit has been issued.  The
application shall be accompanied by any plans, specifications, or other
information required by these Regulations.  A permit and inspection fee,
determined in accordance with
Schedule H attached hereto, shall be paid to Avon Lake Regional Water at the
time the application is filed.  This permit signed by the CUE shall be the
person’s authority to use the public sewer and shall be valid until revoked.
Section 2.03   Owner’s Responsibility. 
   All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection, and
maintenance of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.  The owner shall
defend, indemnify, and hold Avon Lake Regional Water, the Board, and its
representatives and employees harmless from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation or operation of a
building sewer.
Section 2.04   Separate Sewers. 
   A separate and independent building sanitary sewer shall be provided for
every building.  Only upon a written consent of the Board of Municipal
Utilities may two (2) or more buildings use the same sewer.
Section 2.05   Existing Building Sewers. 
   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found, on examination and tested by the CUO, to meet all the
requirements of these Regulations.
Section 2.06   New Building Sewers. 
   All new sanitary sewers to new buildings shall be installed into the area to
be occupied by the building, and stubbed up at least 2 feet above the proposed
floor level.  In the case of plastic sewer pipe, a cap shall be glued on the
stub, or, in the case of iron pipe, a plug must be leaded in place.  This will
prevent debris and clean water from entering the sanitary sewer.
   Once the sump pump for the building is installed and functioning, the plug
or cap may be removed for completion of the plumbing.  If the plumbing is
extended prior to this, no outlet shall be left open below a two foot level
above the floor of the sewer’s entry into the building.  All openings not
meeting this criteria shall be capped or plugged per the aforesaid manner.  In
no event shall the plug or cap be removed or the pipe broken and left without
immediate repair.
   Should it be found that the building sanitary sewer was broken or opened
contrary to this requirement, the general contractor or person acting in this
capacity shall be responsible for a $200.00 fine payable immediately.
Section 2.07   Connecting to a Combined Sewer. 
   All new building sewers installed where only a combined sewer is available
shall install separate storm and sanitary sewers from the building to the
City’s right-of-way.  At that point, the sanitary sewer shall be connected to
the storm sewer by way of a wye and the sewer extended and a single tap made to
the combined sewer.  The building sanitary sewer shall be installed with an
inspection tee, and the storm sewer shall have a three way trap-cleanout, all
as approved by the CUO. 
Section 2.08   Sewer Size and Material. 
   The building sewer shall be of the size and material as required by the Avon
Lake Building Code and these Regulations.
   1.   Sanitary.  The sanitary outlet from any building requiring sanitary
facilities shall not be less than 4 inch cast iron, 5 inch extra strength
vitrified clay sewer pipe, 6 inch asbestos cement pipe, Class 3,300, 6 inch
ABS-CS270, or 6 inch ASTM-D-3034 (SDR35) Type PSM polyvinylchloride (PVC) sewer
pipe.
   2.   Storm.  All sewers which receive storm drainage or drainage from
subsoil or the building storm drain shall be not less than 4 inch cast iron
pipe, or 6 inch asbestos-cement, concrete, ABS, PVC, vitrified clay or other
approved pipe.  All underground downspout piping and fittings shall not be less
than 4 inch, shall be constructed of PVC and conform to ASTM-D3034 (SDR35) or
ASTM-F789Z46.
Section 2.09   Excavation and Backfill. 
   All excavations required for the installation of the building sewer shall be
open trench work unless otherwise approved by CUO.  The sewer connection pipe
shall be laid straight, properly aligned with proper bedding and backfill.  All
pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with the American
Society for Testing Materials (“ASTM”).  No backfill shall be placed until the
installation has been inspected.
   All excavation for building sewers shall be adequately guarded with
barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazards.
Section 2.10   Proper Grade and Elevations.
   1.   Sanitary Sewers.  The grade for sanitary sewer connections from the
main sewer in the street to the building foundation shall be a minimum of one-
percent (one foot fall vertical per one hundred feet horizontal) to assure a
minimum scouring velocity of two feet per second.  The elevation of the flow
line invert of sanitary sewer connections at the building foundation shall be a
minimum of one foot above the inside top of the sanitary sewer main in the
street.
   2.   Combined Sewers.  No connection to a combined sewer shall be permitted
from either a footer drain, a basement floor or any habitable floor below
finish grade which depends on gravity flow.  Should connections from these
areas be desired, they shall be made in a manner approved by the CUO and with
the use of a sump pump.  The grade for such connections from the combined main
sewer in the street to the building foundation shall be a minimum of one-
percent.
Section 2.11   Connection to Main Sewer. 
   The building sanitary sewer shall connect only to a sanitary or combined
sewer system. Sanitary connections to a storm sewer or, the connection of storm
drains to a sanitary sewer is prohibited. No building sanitary sewer connection
shall be made to a strictly sanitary sewer main until the property’s storm
sewer for the footers, roof and surface water is completely operational.
   The connection of the building sanitary sewer into the public sewer shall be
made at the way branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. 
Where no properly located wye is available in sewers of the following diameter,
8”, 10”, 12”, 15”, a wye branch shall be installed.  For sewers 18” and over, a
neat hole may be cut into the main sewer at the location specified by the CUE
at the highest point possible on the side.  A smooth, neat joint shall be made
and the connection made secure and water tight, by encasement in concrete. 
Special fittings may be used for the connection when approved by the CUO.
Section 2.12   Inspection. 
   The applicant for the building sanitary sewer permit shall notify the CUO
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer.  The connection shall be made under the supervision of the CUO, within
the twenty-four (24) hours after notice is given that the installation is
ready.  The applicant must give his sewer permit number when requesting an
inspection.  All inspections must be scheduled by noon of the day the
inspection is requested.
Section 2.13   Restoration of Public Property. 
   Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the
course of the installation of a building sewer shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the Municipal Engineer.
Section 2.14   Downspout/Clean Water Connection Removal from Sanitary Sewers. 
   Whenever Avon Lake Regional Water becomes aware of a clean water connection
to an existing sanitary sewer, such as a downspout or other surface water
connection to the existing sanitary sewer, the property owner or his agent
shall be notified to remove and seal said connection within 30 days. Failure or
refusal to remove and seal said connection within 30 days after notice or to
provide a schedule for said removal and sealing approved by the CUE shall
subject said property owner to an immediate fine of $200.00 for each day
thereafter until said connection is removed and sealed. Continued failure to
remove and/or seal said connection may result in additional enforcement or
prosecution pursuant to Title V of these Regulations.
   Avon Lake Regional Water may perform regular and periodic inspections to
assure there are no clean water connections existing on private property. The
property owner or his agent shall allow reasonable and safe entrance to
property and premises for the purpose of inspecting for clean water connections
such as basement sumps, downspouts, and/or yard drains. Failure to allow access
for inspection by an authorized Avon Lake Regional Water representative within
30 days following Avon Lake Regional Water’s written request, mailed to the
property owner of the premises, subject the property owner of the premises to a
fine of $200.00 per day until such access is granted. (Rev. 11-7-11)
Section 2.15   Foundation Drain.
   Foundation drain systems, also referred to as footer tiles, that provide
drainage to a structure and are connected to the Avon Lake sanitary sewer
system are considered a nuisance because they negatively affect public health
and the environment. Excessive clean water entering the sanitary sewer can lead
to sewer surcharge, basement backups, and discharges to Lake Erie. Foundation
drains must be disconnected from the sanitary sewer when any work is performed
to maintain, modify, repair or improve in any way any portion of the foundation
drain system. Maintenance, modifications, repairs or improvements shall include
but not be limited to (a) the maintenance, modification and/or repair of the
existing basement walls of the structure, (b) any expansion of the foundation
drain system, (c) any maintenance or repairs to the foundation drain system
including cleaning, repairing, or replacing any part of the foundation drain
system, (d) the placement of gravel or other bedding or filtration material
around or over any part of the foundation drain system, (e) the performance of
any work related to the improvement of drainage of storm or ground water into
the foundation drain system or the sanitary sewer system, or (f) any
modification to the sanitary lateral.  At such time, all connections between
that foundation drain system and the Avon Lake sanitary sewer system by which
ground and/or storm water may be conveyed from the foundation drain system to
the Avon Lake sanitary sewer system shall be removed and permanently sealed by
the property owner to prevent all such ground and/or storm water from the
property from entering the Avon Lake sanitary sewer system.  The property owner
shall then take such action as may be required to convey all ground and/or
storm water from the property to an Avon Lake storm sewer via a sump pump or
gravity sewer line. For the purposes of this section “Foundation Drain” shall
be defined as a gravity or direct connection. Any foundation drains that
discharge to the sanitary sewer by use of a pump or other means shall be
subject to the requirements of
Title III, Section 2.14 of these Regulations.
   All work required to make these changes shall be verified by Avon Lake
Regional Water upon notification and purchase of a foundation drain separation
permit by the property owner or his agent. Cost for the foundation drain
separation permit shall be as shown in
Schedule M.    
   Any person who or entity which performs or causes the work described in this
section to be performed without securing a foundation drain separation permit
from Avon Lake Regional Water may be subject up to a fine up to $1,000.00. 
Should the work described in this section be discovered to have been performed
without properly and permanently sealing all connections between the foundation
drain system and the Avon Lake sanitary sewer system, the property owner shall
be notified in writing that a $200.00 per day fine may be imposed against the
property owner if disconnection is not completed to the satisfaction of the CUO
within a predetermined period.  (Eff. 5-19-08, Rev. 9-20-10, Rev. 5-2-11, Rev.
4-16-12)
CHAPTER 3 - SANITARY SEWER CONSTRUCTIONCHAPTER 3 - SANITARY SEWER CONSTRUCTION
Section 3.01   Submittal of Plans. 
   All plans for new sanitary sewer construction shall be submitted to the
Board for review.  After correction of needed identified areas of
noncompliance, the plans may be approved by the Board or its designee.
Section 3.02   Testing New Sanitary Sewers. 
   After all pipe and fittings have been connected in place, they shall be
tested under a low pressure air test and/or a water exfiltration test. For the
water exfiltration test, water shall be filled to a minimum of two (2) feet
below the top of the upstream manhole.  The exfiltration will be measured by
determining the amount of water required to maintain the initial water
elevation for a period of one (1)-hour from the start of the test.  Additional
water shall be metered by an approved means.  The maximum allowable leakage
outward (exfiltration) shall not exceed 100 gallons per inch of pipe diameter
per mile of pipe per day.
   All testing shall be made in the presence of the CUO or his authorized agent
and shall be continued until the acceptability of the installed piping has been
demonstrated to the CUO’s satisfaction.  The Contractor shall furnish all
necessary pumps, gauges, bulkheads, material, and labor.
Section 3.03   Slope. 
   All sewers shall be designed and constructed to give mean velocities when
flowing full of not less than 2.0 feet per second.
Section 3.04   Depth. 
   Sanitary sewers shall be installed to a sufficient depth to allow a gravity
flow of sewage from basement floor drains.
Section 3.05   Alignment. 
   Sewers shall be laid with a straight alignment between manholes and shall be
checked by either a laser beam or lamping.
Section 3.06   Location of Manholes. 
   Manholes shall be installed at distances not to exceed 400 feet along the
length of the sewer.  A manhole shall also be installed at any upstream
terminus to facilitate the cleaning and testing of the entire sewer.  No
sanitary manholes shall be permitted in driveways or sidewalks. 
Section 3.07   Installation. 
   Installation of sanitary sewers shall be performed in a manner acceptable to
the CUO, and said installation will be witnessed by an inspector for Avon Lake
Regional Water and/or the City Engineering Department.
   1.   Trenching.  The width of the trench shall be ample to allow the pipe to
be laid and jointed in the proper bedding and to allow backfill to be placed
and compacted    as needed.  The trench sides shall be kept as nearly vertical
as possible, and rocks and other debris shall be removed.
   2.   Bedding. Bedding material of #57 limestone or limestone screening as
per O.D.O.T. Item 304 shall be placed to a depth of 6 inches below and above
the pipe and 4 inches along the sides of the pipe.  The bedding shall be
thoroughly compacted in 6 inch layers to grade.  All bedding under the pipe
shall be shaped for pipe bells to allow full support along the entire length of
the pipe.  No blocking of any kind shall remain under the pipe.  Crushed
concrete shall not be accepted.
   3.   Backfill. Backfill shall be of suitable material removed from the
excavation except where other material would be required as specified by Avon
Lake Regional Water or City Engineering Departments.  Stones, debris, or other
unstable material shall not be used within two feet of the top of the pipe.
   4.   Deflection Test.  All flexible sanitary sewer shall be deflection
tested not less than 30 days after final full backfill has been placed.  The
test shall be run by the use of rigid balls or mandrels having diameters equal
to 95% of the inside diameter of the pipe.  The test shall be performed without
mechanical pulling devices and no pipe shall exceed a deflection of 5%.
Section 3.08   Location Information. 
   Upon request for a “locate”, the person requesting same shall complete Form
No. SL1 indicating the exact nature of his interest.  Avon Lake Regional Water,
after reviewing all pertinent data and as-built drawings will, on the request
Form No. SL1 indicate the location of that requested.  The information provided
shall not be guaranteed nor shall Avon Lake Regional Water assume any
responsibility for accuracy of this information.  All related sewer lateral
records will be available for public viewing at Avon Lake Regional Water
offices from 8:00 AM to 4:30 PM Monday thru Friday excepting holidays.
Section 3.09   Materials. 
   All materials used in the installation of new sanitary sewers shall meet the
requirements and be approved by the CUO.
Section 3.10   Sanitary Sewer Pipe and Connections. 
   No new sanitary sewer installed in the City shall be less than 8 inches in
diameter. Larger diameter pipe may be required for the installation servicing a
large area, if determined by the CUO.
   1.   Materials.  All new sanitary sewers shall be one of the following: Type
PSM polyvinylchloride (PVC) pipe, ASTM-D-3034 (SDR 35); premium joint vitrified
clay pipe, ASTM 0200; or concrete pipe, ASTM C14.
   2.   Building Connections.  At the time of the sewer installation, wye
branches shall be installed for all serviced properties and the building
lateral extended to a distance of ten (10) feet beyond the right-of-way.  The
wye shall be installed at the highest point possible on the side of the sewer
and the lateral extended at a minimum of a 1% grade.  If the lateral is
terminated below grade, it must be capped  with an acceptable watertight plug.
   3.   Location.  The sanitary sewer shall be installed at least 10 feet
horizontally from any water main.  If the sanitary sewer is to be located off
the paved area of the roadway, it will be so located as to be between the
roadway and the storm sewer.  Sewers crossing water mains shall be laid to
provide a minimum vertical distance of 18 inches between the outside of the
water main and the outside of the sewer.  The crossing shall be arranged so
that the sewer joints will be as far as possible from the water main joints.
Section 3.11   Manholes. 
   Manholes on new sanitary sewers shall be precast, reinforced concrete
conforming to ASTM-0-478 and shall be of a minimum of 48 inch diameter.
   1.   All joints shall be of the O-ring type ASTM-C-443 and, when installed
shall have a bitumastic compound added to the joint and to a width of 12 inches
on the outside of the manhole for water tightness.
   2.   Inlet and outlet pipes shall be joined to the manhole with a gasketed
flexible, water tight connection such as Price Bros. Co. Kor-N-Seal or approved
equal.
   3.   The lower section of the manhole shall be set in concrete, and concrete
fill shall be shaped and sloped to the sewer to create a flow channel.
   4.   Manhole steps shall be spaced at 12 inch intervals and shall be Neenah
1980-D or approved equal.  The first step shall be 25” from the final rim
elevation.
   5.   Grade adjustments shall be made with cast-in-place or precast concrete
adjusting collars not to exceed 9 inches in height.
   6.   Manhole covers shall be set in a base of mortar and shall be Neenah R-
1642 Type C or approved equal.  If it is determined by the CUO that, due to the
final grade of the manhole or for other reasons the manhole cover, during wet
conditions, allows water filtration, the Contractor shall be required to supply
an approved device or method to correct the infiltration.
Section 3.12   Flow to Existing Sewer System. 
   To prevent the inflow of non-sanitary waste into the existing sanitary
sewer, any connection between the existing sewer and any new sewer installation
shall be plugged until such time as the new sewer has been tested and approved
by the CUO and accepted by the City.  If the contractor should wish to have the
sewer approved and accepted in a step arrangement, those sections not approved
and accepted shall be plugged, but at no time shall any flow be allowed in the
existing sanitary sewer system from a new sewer that has not been approved and
accepted.
Section 3.13   Guarantee on New Sewers. 
   Prior to acceptance of any new sewer installations, the Contractor shall
supply to the Board a maintenance bond in the amount of 100% of the
construction cost of the said new sewer.  The maintenance bond shall be used as
a guarantee of the sewer installation for a period of one (1) year after which
time the CUO shall inspect the said installation, and the CUO shall notify the
Contractor of the results.  All needed repairs or replacements, as noted by the
CUO, shall be completed by the Contractor at his expense to the satisfaction of
the CUO before the sewer receives final acceptance and the Contractor’s
maintenance bond is released.
   The maintenance bond shall be based on the total cost of construction as
determined by valid construction cost estimates supplied by the Contractor and/
or an amount determined by the Board based on current replacement costs and
shall be for 100% of the said costs.
CHAPTER 4 - TRUNK SANITARY SEWER CONSTRUCTIONCHAPTER 4 - TRUNK SANITARY SEWER
CONSTRUCTION
Section 4.01   Capacity Fee Charge on Unimproved Land. 
   The capacity fee charge shall be as set forth on
Schedule K attached hereto and as determined by the Board from time to time,
and shall only apply to presently Unimproved Real Property upon which buildings
are not constructed, to Unimproved Real Property upon which buildings are
currently under construction but without an occupancy permit having been
issued, or to developed land upon a change in use that will then generate
wastewater.  The fee charges set forth herein shall apply regardless of whether
such are connected to a sewer or not. 
Section 4.02   Capacity Fee Charges on Construction.
   1.   Residential.  All unimproved residential real property in Avon Lake
shall, upon development of the property, pay a trunk sanitary sewer capacity
fee charge of $810.00 per dwelling unit. Should there be more than one dwelling
unit per building or lot, the capacity fee charge of $810.00 shall be charged
for each dwelling unit.  Lots of less than 15,000 square feet in area shall pay
this fee on the basis of 5.4 cents per square foot of lot area.
   2.   Commercial and Industrial.  All unimproved commercial and industrial
real property in Avon Lake shall, upon development of the property, pay a trunk
sanitary sewer capacity fee charge of 5.4 cents per square foot of lot area
with a minimum charge of $810.00.
   3.   Publicly Owned.  No publicly owned building or unimproved real property
shall pay a trunk sanitary sewer capacity fee provided that the development
being constructed is for a public purpose. 
Section 4.03   Determination of Fee Charges. 
   The fee charges, set forth in Section 4.02 above, are based upon
construction costs, and in order that these charges be kept current, the Board
shall adjust them from time to time, provided that such changes shall be
effective as set by the Board or on the subsequent calendar month through the
application of the following formula:
      New Fee = Fee x ENR
            4847.04
      When:
      Fee   =   $810.00   per residential dwelling unit;
            5.4¢   fee charge for residential lots less than 15,000 square foot
of lot area;
            $810.00   minimum for commercial and Industrial property;
            5.4¢   fee charge per square foot of lot area for commercial and
industrial real property;
      ENR   =   The most current Engineering News Record Construction Cost
Index for Cleveland published at the time of adjustment.
      4847.04   =   1984 Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index for
Cleveland, published in December, 1983.
   The calculated new charges shall be rounded up to the nearest dollar amount.
Section 4.04   Fee Charge Payment. 
   The fee charges as determined by this Chapter 4 may be paid at any time
prior to the improvement of such real property but shall be paid prior to
occupancy and as such is made a condition of the issuance of an occupancy
permit.
Section 4.05   Additional Trunk Sanitary Sewer Charges. 
   Upon construction of the trunk sanitary sewers, there shall be additional
front foot charges and connection charges for same, to be set by the Board, to
be charged against all adjoining real property which benefits from such
improvements and which has frontage on said trunk sanitary sewer line.  The
additional charges shall be based upon the cost of an eight inch sanitary sewer
and building lateral at the time of their construction.  These additional
charges shall also apply to all real property within the City which are
encumbered with covenants running with the land requiring payment for sanitary
sewers upon their installation and construction.
[END OF TITLE III]
TITLE IV - DISCHARGE PERMITSTITLE IV - DISCHARGE PERMITS
CHAPTER 1 - PROHIBITED DISCHARGESCHAPTER 1 - PROHIBITED DISCHARGES
Section 1.01   General Discharge Prohibitions.
   1.   It shall be unlawful to discharge sewage, industrial wastes, or other
wastes to any sewer within the jurisdiction of the Board without having first
complied with the terms of these Regulations.
   2.   Industrial wastes shall not be discharged into a storm sewer but may be
discharged into a sanitary sewer if the waste is of such character as not to be
detrimental to the sewer system or to the WPCC. Where such waste is detrimental
to the sewer system or the WPCC, it shall be otherwise disposed of in a
satisfactory manner or so improved in character as not to be detrimental to the
sewer system or WPCC.
   3.   Surface water, rain water from roofs, subsoil drainage, building
foundation drainage, cistern overflow, clean water from condensers, waste water
from water motors and elevators, and any other clean and unobjectionable waste
water shall be discharged into a storm water or combined sewer and in no case
into a sanitary sewer.
   4.   Sewage, including wastes from water closets, urinals, lavatories,
sinks, bathtubs, showers, laundries, cellar floor drains, garage floor drains,
bars, soda fountains, cuspidors, refrigerator drips, drinking fountains, stable
floor drains, and other objectionable wastes shall be discharged into a
sanitary or combined sewer and in no case into a storm sewer.
   5.   Industrial wastes entering sewers not connected to the WPCC shall be of
such characteristics as not to be detrimental to the public sewage system or to
the receiving stream, according to the standards determined by the Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency or the CUO.
   6.   Sanitary sewage shall be discharged into a sanitary sewer whenever a
sanitary sewer is reasonably accessible.  If such sanitary sewer is not
reasonably accessible, then sanitary sewage shall be discharged into a combined
sewer.
   7.   Where the public sewage system is reasonably accessible to the
property, no privy shall be constructed, maintained, or used, and any person
owning property in Avon Lake on which there is a privy where the public sewage
system is reasonably accessible, shall have sixty (60) days after notification
by the Board to do away with such privy or be subject to the penalties provided
in these Regulations.
   8.   Connection with a cesspool or a privy vault shall not be made into a
sanitary, combined, or storm sewer.
   9.   No person shall discharge into a building sewer or tap a public sewer
for the purpose of discharging into it any waste or drainage water prohibited
by the provisions of this Section.  Any existing connection in violation of the
provisions of this Section shall be abandoned and removed.
   10.   No person shall access the sewer system or POTW for any activity
including discharge of hauled septic or industrial wastes except at locations
and at times as designated by the CUO.  Any removal of manhole lids, or other
access to the sewer system for the purpose of discharging wastes at times and/
or locations other than those designated by the CUO, or without the expressed
permission of the CUO, shall be considered a violation and shall be subject to
enforcement action including fines and penalties allowed under these
Regulations.
Section 1.02   Specific Discharge Prohibitions.
   Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer:
   a.   Having a temperature higher than 104 degrees F (40 degrees C);
   b.   Containing more than 10 ppm by weight of fats, oils, or grease;
   c.   Containing any garbage that has not been ground by household type or
other suitable garbage grinders;
   d.   Containing any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch, manure, or any other solids
or viscous substances capable of causing obstructions or other interferences
with proper operation of the sewer system;
   e.   Having a pH lower than 5.0 or higher than 11.0, or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazards to structures,
equipment, or personnel of the sewer system;
   f.   Containing toxic or poisonous substances in sufficient quantity to
injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, to constitute
hazards to humans or animals, or to create any hazard in waters which receive
treated effluent from the sewer system treatment plant.  Toxic wastes shall
include, but are not limited to wastes containing cyanide, chromium, Cadmium,
mercury, copper, and nickel ions;
   g.   Containing noxious or malodorous gases or substances capable of
creating a public nuisance, including pollutants which result in the presence
of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the sanitary sewers or WPCC in a
quantity that may cause acute worker health or safety problems.
   h.   Containing solids of such character and quantity that special and
unusual attention is required for their handling;
   i.   Containing any substance which may affect the WPCC’s effluent and cause
violation of the NPDES permit requirements;
   j.   Containing any substance which would cause the WPCC to be in
noncompliance with sludge use, recycle or disposal criteria pursuant to
guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. §
1345), the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances
Control Act or other regulations or criteria for sludge management and disposal
as required by the State;
   k.   Containing color which is not removed in the treatment processes;
   l.   Containing any medical or infectious wastes;
   m.   Containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes;
   n.   Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the sanitary
sewers or WPCC, including but not limited to wastestreams with a closed cup
flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Centigrade using
the test method specified in 40 CFR §261.21;
   o.   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil
origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through; or
   p.   Containing any pollutant released at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which would cause interference with the treatment plant.
Section 1.03   Interceptors. 
   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the CUO, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing
grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes containing grease in
excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, and other harmful
ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private
quarters or dwelling units. Where installed, all grease, oil, and sand
interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuous
and efficient operation at all times while being used.
Section 1.04   Enforcement.
   1.   The CUO may issue Orders to any industrial user to insure compliance
with any requirements under these Regulations including applicable National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards, other discharge limits, and reporting
requirements. Such Orders shall be in the form of a Permit signed by the CUO
and may include but shall not be limited to a list of pollutants to be
monitored, location of sampling points, type of sample, frequency of sampling,
and compliance schedules to meet discharge limits.
   2.   If any wastewater or water being discharged to the WPCC has any of the
characteristics mentioned in
Section 1.02 above or exceed the limits established in this Chapter 1, the CUO
may:
      a.   Reject the wastewater or water.
      b.   Require the user to pretreat or modify the wastewater or water to
acceptable condition before discharging into a public sewer.
   3.   If any wastewater or water being discharged to the WPCC exceeds the
limits established in Section 2.02 (b), the CUO may:
      a.   Require the user to pretreat or modify the wastewater or water to
meet the appropriate limits before discharging into a public sewer.
      b.   Require the user to pay the additional cost or expense incurred by
the WPCC for handling and treating the additional load imposed on the treatment
system.
   4.   If the volume of any proposed discharge(s) or increased actual or
proposed volume of an existing discharge exceeds the capacity of the receiving
sewer or exceeds the volume of the flow that the WPCC can treat under the terms
and condition of its NPDES permit, then the CUO shall have the authority to
limit or prohibit said discharge(s).
Section 1.05   Specific Pollutant Limitations.
   1.   Toxic Pollutant Limitations
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into a public sewer wastes
which contain any of the pollutants contained in the following list of toxic
pollutants unless the person is issued a permit by the CUO which allows the
discharge of such pollutants.  In the absence of such specific permits, no
person shall discharge any of the following toxic pollutants  except as such
pollutants may occur and only in the concentrations such pollutants may occur
in the water supply to their premises. Discharge of such pollutants allowed by
a permit shall not exceed the following maximum daily and 30-day average
concentrations:
                  ug/l
Parameter         Max. Daily Concentration 30 Day Average
Cadmium (total)   260                      150
Chromium (total)  2300                     1710
Copper (total)    2070                     1500
Cyanide (total)   652                      650
Lead (total)      430                      430
Mercury (total)   0.0                      ----
Nickel            2380                     1100
Silver            240                      100
Zinc (total)      1500                     1480
Arsenic           290                      ----
Chromium (HEX)    252                      ----
 
The CUO may develop BMPs and such BMPs shall be considered local limits and
pretreatment standards for the purpose of this rule.
   2.   Compatible Pollutant Limitations
No wastewater shall be discharged which exceeds the maximum daily concentration
established for the following compatible pollutants without permission from the
CUO and payment of the appropriate surcharge:
                  mg/l
Parameter         Max. Daily Concentration
BOD                  365
COD                  725
SS                   400
Ammonia Nitrogen     30
Oil & Grease         10
Phosphorous          10
Dissolved Solids     3500
Section 1.06   National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
   National Categorical Pretreatment Standards as promulgated by the EPA
pursuant to the Act shall be met by all dischargers of the regulated industrial
categories.  An application for modification of the National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards may be considered for submittal to the Regional
Administrator by the CUO, when the WPCC achieves consistent removal of the
pollutants. “Consistent Removal” shall mean the reduction in the amount of a
pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater
treatment plant to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent provided that
the plant meets the NPDES permit limits established for that pollutant and the
sludge meets all the applicable requirements for the preferred method of
disposal.
Section 1.07   State Requirements. 
   State requirements and limitations on discharges to the WPCC shall be met by
all users which are subject to such standards in any instance in which they are
more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this or
any other applicable Regulation.
Section 1.08   Right of Revision. 
   The Board reserves the right to amend these Regulations to provide for more
stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the WPCC where deemed
necessary to comply with the objectives set forth in these Regulations.
Section 1.09   Dilution. 
   No user shall increase the use of potable or process water in any way nor
mix separate waste streams for the purpose of diluting a discharge as a partial
or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the
standards set forth in these Regulations.
Section 1.10   Prevention of Accidental Discharges.
   1.   Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge or
prohibited or regulated materials or substances established by these
Regulations.  Any direct or indirect connection or entry point for persistent
or deleterious wastes to the user’s plumbing or drainage system shall be
eliminated. Where such action is impractical or unreasonable, the user shall
appropriately label such entry points to warn against discharge of such wastes
in violation of this Regulation. Where necessary, facilities to prevent
accidental discharge of prohibited material shall be provided and maintained at
the user’s expense.
      (a)   Detailed plans, known as the Spill Prevention Control and
Countermeasure (SPCC) Plan, showing facilities and operating procedures to
provide this protection shall be submitted to the CUO for review and shall be
approved by the CUO before construction of the facility.
      (b)   The SPCC Plan shall include the following:
         (i)    Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
         (ii)   Description of stored chemicals;
         (iii)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of slug
discharges, including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under
Section 1.02 of Title IV, with procedures for follow-up written notification
within five days;
         (iv)   If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from
accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas,
handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control
of wastewater discharge, worker training, building of containment structures or
equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including
solvents), or measures and equipment for emergency response.
      (c)   Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall
not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify this facility as
necessary to meet the requirements of these Regulations.
   2.   In order that employees of users be informed of City requirements,
users shall make available to their employees copies of these Regulations
together with such other wastewater information and notices which may be
furnished by the City from time to time directed toward more effective water
pollution control.  A notice shall be furnished and permanently posted on the
user’s bulletin board advising employees whom to call in case of an accidental
discharge in violation of these Regulations.
   3.   The CUO shall be notified immediately of a facility that has an
accidental discharge which exceeds the limitations of these Regulations.  A
report stating the date, time and cause of the accidental discharge, the
quantity and characteristics of the discharge, and measures taken to prevent
future discharges shall be filed within five (5) days of the occurrence of the
accident.
   4.   The CUO shall be notified at least 30 days in advance if a facility
anticipates a substantial change in its wastewater quantity or quality. The
substantial change may be due to production rate, scheduled maintenance or
operations, scheduled bypass, etc.
Section 1.11   Operating Upsets. 
   Any permittee that experiences an upset in operations that places the
permittee in a temporary state of noncompliance with the provisions of these
Regulations shall inform the CUO within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset
at Avon Lake Regional Water offices.
   A written follow-up report of the upset shall be filed by the permittee with
the CUO within five (5) days.  The report shall specify:
      1.   Description of the upset, the cause(s) thereof, and the upset’s
impact on the permittee’s compliance status;
      2.   Duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of
noncompliance, and, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is
expected to continue; and
      3.   All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
recurrence of such an upset.
   The report must also demonstrate that the treatment facility was being
operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner.
   A documented and verified operating upset shall be an affirmative defense to
any enforcement action brought against the permittee for violations
attributable to the upset event.
CHAPTER 2 - PERMIT ADMINISTRATIONCHAPTER 2 - PERMIT ADMINISTRATION
Section 2.01   Industrial Pretreatment Permit Requirements. 
   1.   All non-domestic users must notify the CUO of the nature and
characteristics of their wastewater prior to commencing their discharge.  The
CUO is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose.
   2.   It shall be unlawful for significant industrial users to discharge
wastewater, either directly or indirectly, into the City’s sanitary sewer
system without first obtaining an industrial user pretreatment permit from the
CUO.  Any violation of the terms and conditions of an industrial user
pretreatment permit shall be deemed a violation of these Regulations. Obtaining
an industrial user pretreatment permit does not relieve a permittee of its
obligation to obtain other permits required by federal, state, or local law.
   3.   The CUO may require that other industrial users obtain industrial user
pretreatment permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of these
Regulations.
   4.   Existing Connections: Any significant industrial user which discharges
non-domestic waste into the sanitary sewer system prior to the effective date
of these Regulations except in accordance with a permit issued by the CUO.
   5.   New Connections: Any significant industrial user proposing to begin or
recommence discharging non-domestic wastes into the sanitary sewer system must
obtain a pretreatment permit prior to beginning or recommencing such
discharge.  An application for this permit must be filed at least ninety (90)
days prior to the anticipated start-up date.
Section 2.02   Permit Application.
   1.   In order to be considered for a pretreatment permit, all industrial
users required to have a permit must submit the following information on an
application form approved by the CUO:
      a.   Name, address, and location (if different from the address);
      b.   Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code of both the industry
as a whole and any processes for which federal categorical standards have been
promulgated;
      c.   Wastewater constituents and characteristics including any federal,
state, or local standards. Sampling and analysis will be undertaken in
accordance with 40 CFR Part 136;
         (1)   Sampling shall be representative of daily operations
         (2)   When BMPs apply, documentation must be submitted to determine
compliance with the standard
      d.   Time and duration of the discharge;
      e.   Daily maximum, daily average, and monthly average wastewater flow
rates, including daily, monthly, and seasonal variations, if any;
      f.   Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the
premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used at the
facility which are or could accidentally or intentionally be discharged to the
POTW;
      g.   The site plans, floor plans, and mechanical and plumbing plans and
details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location,
and elevation;
      h.   Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate
of production;
      i.   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per
day);
      j.   Number and type of employees and hours of operation, and proposed or
actual hours of operation of the pretreatment system;
      k.   A list of other environmental control permits;
      l.   Whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the user to meet all applicable federal, state,
and local standards.  If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to
meet the standards, then the industrial user shall indicate the shortest time
schedule necessary to accomplish installation or adoption of such additional
treatment and/or O&M.  The completion date in this schedule shall not be longer
than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. 
The following conditions apply to this schedule:
         (1)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to
meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include hiring an
engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing
contracts for major components, commencing construction, completing
construction, beginning operation, and conducting routine operation). No
increment referred to in (a) above shall exceed nine (9) months nor shall the
total compliance period exceed eighteen (18) months;
         (2)   No later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the
schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress
report to the CUO including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps
being taken by the user to return to the established schedule.  In no event
shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the
CUO.
   2.   Any other information as may be deemed by the CUO to be necessary to
evaluate the permit application.
   3.   All plans required in
Section 2.03 must be certified for accuracy by a State registered professional
engineer.
   4.   All applications shall contain the certification statement required by
Section 3.03 of Title IV.
   5.   All applications shall be signed as required by
Section 3.04 of Title IV.
   6.   Industrial users with categorical standards that require compliance
with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative shall submit documentation to
determine compliance with the standard when submitting baseline reports.
Section 2.03   Pretreatment Permit Contents.
   1.   Pretreatment permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably
deemed necessary by the CUO to prevent pass-through or interference, protect
the quality of the water body receiving the POTW’s effluent, protect worker
health and safety, facilitate POTW sludge management and disposal, protect
ambient air quality, and protect against damage to the POTW collection system
or plant. Permits may contain (but are not be limited to) the following:
      a.   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, and/or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      b.   Limits on the average and/or maximum concentration, mass, or other
measure of identified wastewater constituents or properties;
      c.   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology or
construction of appropriate containment devices, etc., designed to reduce,
eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works;
      d.   Development and implementation of spill control plans or other
special conditions including additional management practices necessary to
adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or routine discharges (see
Section 1.10 of Title IV);
      e.   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
      f.   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities;
      g.   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling
locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests, and
reporting schedules;
      h.   Compliance schedules;
      i.   Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports;
      j.   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to
wastewater discharge as specified by the CUO and affording the CUO or his
representatives, access thereto;
      k.   Requirements for notification of any new introduction of wastewater
constituents or of any substantial change in the volume or character of the
wastewater being introduced into the POTW, including the listed or
characteristic hazardous wastes for which the user has submitted initial
notification under 40 CFR 403.12 (P);
      l.   Requirements for the notification of any change in the manufacturing
and/or pretreatment process used by the permittee;
      m.   Requirements for notification of excessive, accidental, or slug
discharges;
      n.   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the CUO to ensure
compliance with these Regulations and State and federal laws, rules, and
regulations;
      o.   A statement that compliance with the permit does not relieve the
permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal
pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term
of the permit.
Section 2.04   Permit Issuance Process.
   1.   Permit Duration.  Permits shall be issued for a specified time period,
not to exceed five (5) years.  A permit may be issued for a period less than
five (5) years, at the discretion of the CUO.
   2.   Permit Appeals.  The CUO will provide notice of final permit decisions.
Upon notice by the CUO, the industrial user may petition to appeal the terms of
the permit within thirty (30) days of the notice.
      a.   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be
a waiver of the appeal.
      b.   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the permit
provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative
condition, if any, it seeks to be placed on the permit.
      c.   The effectiveness of the permit shall not be stayed pending a
reconsideration of the Board.  If, after considering the petition and any
arguments put forth, the CUO or the Board determines that reconsideration is
proper, it shall remand the permit back to the CUO for reconsideration and
possible re-issuance.  Those permit provisions being reconsidered by the CUO
shall be stayed pending re-issuance.
      d.   The Board’s decision not to reconsider a final permit shall be
considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial review.
      e.   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final Control
Authority action must do so by filing a complaint with the court of competent
jurisdiction.
   3.   Permit Action.  The CUO may modify the permit for good cause including,
but not limited to, the following:
      a.   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
      b.   Material or substantial alterations or additions to the discharger’s
operation processes or discharge volume or character which were not considered
in drafting the effective permit.
      c.   A change in any condition in either the industrial user or the POTW
elimination of the authorized discharge;
      d.   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to the Avon Lake collection and treatment systems, POTW personnel, or the
receiving waters;
      e.   Violation of any terms or conditions of the permit;
      f.   Misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in
the permit application or in any required reporting;
      g.   Revision of or a grant of variance from such categorical standards
pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; or
      h.   To correct typographical or other errors in the permit;
      i.   To reflect transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a
new owner/operator;
      j.   Upon request of the permittee, provided such request does not create
a violation of any applicable requirements, standards, laws, rules, or
regulations.
      The filing of a request by the permittee for a permit modification,
revocation and re-issuance, or termination, or a notification of planned
changes or anticipated noncompliance, does not stay any permit condition.
   4.   Permit Transfer.  Permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new
owner and/or operator with prior approval of the CUO:
      a.   The permittee must give at least thirty (30) days advance notice to
the CUO;
      b.   The notice must include a written certification by the new owner
which:
         (1)   States that the new owner has no immediate intent to change the
facility’s operations and processes;
         (2)   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur;
         (3)   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
permit.
   5.   Permit Termination.  Pretreatment permits may be terminated for the
following reasons:
      a.   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
      b.   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
      c.   Refusing to allow timely access to the facility premises and
records;
      d.   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
      e.   Failure to pay fines;
      f.   Failure to pay sewer charges;
      g.   Failure to meet compliance schedules.
   6.   Permit Re-issuance.  The user shall apply for permit re-issuance by
submitting a complete permit application a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to
the expiration of the user’s existing permit.
   7.   Continuation of Expired Permits.  An expired permit will continue to be
effective and enforceable until the permit is re-issued if:
      a.   The industrial user has submitted a complete permit application at
least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration date of the user’s existing
permit;
      b.   The failure to re-issue the permit, prior to expiration of the
previous permit, is not due to any act or failure to act on the part of the
industrial user.
   8.   Special Agreements.  Nothing in these Regulations shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the POTW and any user
whereby wastewater of unusual strength or character is accepted into the POTW
and specially treated and subject to any payment or user chargers, as may be
applicable. However, no discharge which violates pretreatment standards will be
allowed under the terms of such special agreements.  If, in the opinion of the
CUO, the wastewater may have the potential to cause or result in any of the
following circumstances, no such special agreement will be made:
      a.   Pass-through or interference;
      b.   Endanger municipal employees or the public.
Section 2.05   Significant Industrial User (“SIU”). 
   Notwithstanding any other provision of these Regulations, Significant
Industrial Users shall be subject to the following requirements:
   1.   New connections and existing connections that subsequently become
subject to these Regulations shall install and start-up any pretreatment
technology prior to discharge and achieve compliance within 90 days after the
commencement of discharge.
   2.   Users subject to subparagraph 1 above shall have ninety (90) days after
commencement of discharge to submit a Compliance Report to the CUO updating the
permit application, required by Title IV with actual production, flow, and
pollutant data.  The forms for this report will be supplied by the CUO.
   3.   The CUO, in accordance with Section 403.6 (c) (2) and (5) and (6) of
the Federal Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR §403), may convert categorical
limits based on mass per unit of production to equivalent mass per day or
concentration limits. Users subject to a production based standard shall then
be required to comply with the equivalent limits in lieu of the promulgated
standards.
   4.   A determination of significant noncompliance shall automatically
institute the appropriate enforcement and penalty actions as outlined in Title
V of these Regulations.
   5.   All significant industrial users shall be required to submit to the CUO
Compliance Reports on the user’s self-monitoring on a quarterly basis.  The
deadline for submittal shall be a part of each users specific permit
conditions. Industrial users with categorical standards that require compliance
with BMP or pollution prevention alternative shall submit documentation to
determine compliance with the standard when submitting quarterly self-
monitoring reports.
CHAPTER 3 - STANDARD CONDITIONS FOR DISCHARGE PERMITSCHAPTER 3 - STANDARD
CONDITIONS FOR DISCHARGE PERMITS
   All dischargers to the public sewers that are subject to the permit
requirements of these Regulations shall also be subject to the following
standard conditions and shall have them incorporated as a portion of their
formal discharge permit.
Section 3.01   General Conditions.
   1.   Severability.  The provisions of a discharge permit are severable, and,
if any provision of the permit or the application of any provision of the
permit to any circumstance is held invalid, the application of such provision
to other circumstances and the remainder of the permit shall not be affected
thereby.
   2.   Duty to Comply.  The permittee must comply with all conditions of the
permit. Failure to comply with the requirements of the permit may be grounds
for administrative action or enforcement proceedings including civil or
criminal penalties, injunctive relief, and summary abatements:
   3.   Duty to Mitigate.  The permittee shall take all reasonable steps to
minimize or correct any adverse impact to the public treatment plant or the
environment resulting from non-compliance with the permit, including such
accelerated or additional monitoring as necessary to determine the nature and
impact of the non-complying discharge.
   4.   Permit Modifications.  The discharge permit may be modified in
accordance with
Chapter 2 of Title IV.
   5.   Permit Termination.  The discharge permit may be terminated pursuant to
the conditions of
Chapter 2 of Title IV.
   6.   Permit Appeals.  The permittee may petition to appeal the terms of the
permit within thirty (30) days of the notice.
   This petition must be in writing; failure to submit a petition for review
shall be deemed to be a waiver of the appeal.  In its petition, the permittee
must indicate the permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this
objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to be placed in the
permit.
   The effectiveness of the permit shall not be stayed pending a
reconsideration by the Board.  If, after considering the petition and any
arguments put forth by the CUO, the Board determines that reconsideration is
proper, it shall remand the permit back to the CUO for reconsideration and
possible reissuance.  Those permit provisions being reconsidered by the CUO
shall be stayed pending reissuance.
   The Board’s decision not to reconsider a final permit shall be considered
final administrative action for purposes of judicial review.  The permittee
seeking judicial review of the Board’s final action must do so by filing a
complaint with the court of competent jurisdiction.
   7.   Permit Transfer.  Permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new
owner and/or operator upon the written consent of the CUO in accordance with
Chapter 2 of Title IV.
   8.   Duty to Reapply.  If the permittee wishes to continue an activity
regulated by the permit after the expiration date of the permit, the permittee
must submit an application for a new permit at least 90 days before the
expiration date of the existing permit.
   9.   Continuation of Expired Permits.  An expired permit will continue to be
effective and enforceable in accordance with
Chapter 2 of Title IV.
   10.   Property Rights.  The issuance of a permit does not convey any
property rights of any sort or any exclusive privileges, nor does it authorize
any injury to private property or any invasion of personal rights, nor any
violation of federal, state, or local laws or regulations.
   11.   Dilution.  The permittee shall not increase the use of potable or
process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute an effluent as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the
limitations contained in the permit.
   12.   General Discharge Prohibitions.  The permittee shall comply with all
the general prohibitive discharge standards in these Regulations.
   13.   Compliance with Applicable Pretreatment Standards and Requirements. 
Compliance with the permit does not relieve the permittee from its obligations
regarding compliance with any and all applicable local, state, and federal
pretreatment standards and requirements including any such standards or
requirements that may become effective during the term of the permit.
Section 3.02   Certification Requirements. 
   All applications, reports, or information submitted to the CUO must contain
the following certification statement:
“I certify under penalty of perjury and other applicable law that this document
and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in
accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly
gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the
person or persons who manage the system or those persons directly responsible
for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”
Section 3.03   Signatures on Applications and Reports. 
   All applications, reports, or other documents required by these Regulations
and submitted to Avon Lake Regional Water shall be signed by an authorized
representative of the industrial user. An authorized representative may be:
   1.   A responsible corporate officer, if the Industrial User submitting the
reports is a corporation. For the purpose of this paragraph, a responsible
corporate officer means
      (a)   Either a president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy- or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
      (b)   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation
facilities, provided the manager:
         (i)   Is authorized to make management decisions that govern the
operation of the regulated facility, including having explicit or implicit duty
of making major capital investment recommendations, and of initiating and
directing other comprehensive measures, to assure long-term environmental
compliance with environmental laws and regulations;
            (ii)   Can ensure that the necessary systems are established or
that the necessary actions are taken to gather complete and accurate
information for control mechanism requirements; and
            (iii)   Is assigned or delegated the authority to sign documents in
accordance with corporate procedures.
   2.   A general partner or proprietor if the Industrial User submitting the
reports is a partnership or sole proprietorship respectively;
   3.   The principal executive officer having responsibility for the overall
operation of the discharging facility if the Industrial User submitting the
reports is a federal, state, or local governmental entity, or its agents; or
   4.   By a member or manager if the applicant is a limited liability company.
Section 3.04   Operation and Maintenance of Pollution Controls.
   1.   Proper Operation and Maintenance.  The permittee shall at all times
properly operate and maintain all facilities and systems of treatment and
control and related appurtenances which are installed or used by the permittee
to achieve compliance with the conditions of the permit. Proper operation and
maintenance includes but is not limited to: effective performance, adequate
funding, adequate operator staffing and training, and adequate laboratory and
process controls, including appropriate quality assurance procedures.  This
provision requires the operation of back-up or auxiliary facilities or similar
systems only when necessary to achieve compliance with the conditions of the
permit.
   2.   Duty to Halt or Reduce Activity.  Upon reduction of efficiency of
operation or loss or failure of all or part of the treatment facility, the
permittee shall, to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with its
permit, control its production or discharges or both until operation of the
treatment facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is
provided.  This requirement applies, for example, when the primary source of
power of the treatment facility fails or is reduced.  It shall not be a defense
for a permittee in an enforcement action that it would have been necessary to
halt or reduce the permitted activity in order to maintain compliance with the
conditions of this permit.
   3.   Bypass of Treatment Facilities.
      a.   Bypass is prohibited unless it is unavoidable to prevent loss of
life, personal injury, or severe property damage, or no feasible alternatives
exist.
      b.   The permittee may allow bypass to occur which does not cause
effluent limitations to be exceeded but only if it is also for essential
maintenance to assure efficient operation.
      c.   Notification of bypass:
         (1)   Anticipated bypass.  If the permittee knows in advance of the
need for a bypass, it shall submit prior written notice, at least ten (10) days
before the date of the bypass to the CUO,
         (2)   Unanticipated bypass. The permittee shall immediately notify the
CUO and submit a written notice to the POTW within five (5) days after the
bypass.  This report shall specify:
            (i)   A description of the bypass, its cause and duration;
            (ii)   Whether the bypass has been corrected; and
            (iii)   The steps being taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate,
and prevent a reoccurrence of the bypass.
   4.   Removed Substances.  Solids, sludges, filter backwash, or other
pollutants removed in the course of treatment or control of wastewaters shall
be disposed of in accordance with Section 405 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1345) and Subtitles C and D of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (40
CFR Parts 260-279).
Section 3.05   Monitoring and Records.
   1.   Monitoring Facilities.  If so required by its/his permit, a user shall
be required to provide and operate a suitable monitoring location and/or
equipment to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the
discharge. Such monitoring locations and/or equipment shall be accessible and
safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by
the CUO.  The monitoring location and/or equipment shall be installed by the
user at his expense and shall be maintained by the user so as to be safe and
accessible at all reasonable times.
   2.   Representative Sampling.  Samples and measurements taken as required
herein shall be representative of the volume and nature of the monitored
discharge.  All samples shall be taken at the monitoring points specified in
the permit and, unless otherwise specified, before the effluent joins or is
diluted by any other wastestream, body of water, or substance.  All equipment
used for sampling and analysis must be routinely calibrated, inspected, and
maintained to ensure its accuracy. Monitoring points shall not be changed
without notification to and the approval of the CUO.
   3.   Flow Measurements.  If flow measurement is required by the permit, the
appropriate flow measurement devices and methods consistent with approved
scientific practices shall be selected and used to ensure the accuracy and
reliability of measurements of the volume of monitored discharges.  The devices
shall be installed, calibrated, and maintained to ensure that the accuracy of
the measurements are consistent with the accepted capability of that type of
device.  Devices selected shall be capable of measuring flows with a maximum
deviation of less than ten percent (10%) from true discharge rates throughout
the range of expected discharge volumes.
   4.   Analytical Methods to Demonstrate Continued Compliance.  All sampling
and analysis required by the permit shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques prescribed in 40 CPR Part 136 and amendments thereto, otherwise
approved by EPA, or as specified in the permit.
      a.   Grab samples shall be taken for pH, hexavalent chromium, cyanide,
total phenols, oil and grease, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds. All
other pollutants are done by flow proportional sampling and are representative
of discharge.
      b.   Using protocols (including appropriate preservations) specified in
40 CFR 136 and appropriate US EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected
during a twenty-four-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as
follows: for hexavalent chromium, cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides, the
samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile
organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory.
   5.   Additional Monitoring by the Permittee.  If the permittee monitors any
pollutant more frequently than required by the permit, using test procedures
identified in these Regulations, the results of this monitoring shall be
included in the permittee’s self-monitoring reports.
   6.   Inspection and Entry.  The permittee shall allow the CUO or an
authorized representative, upon the presentation of credentials and other
documents as may be required by law, to:
      a.   Enter upon the permittee’s premises where a regulated facility or
activity is located or conducted, or where records must be kept under the
conditions of the permit;
      b.   Have access to and copy, at reasonable times, any records that must
be kept under the conditions of the permit;
      c.   Inspect at reasonable times any facilities, equipment (including
monitoring and control equipment), practices, or operations regulated or
required under the permit;
      d.   Sample or monitor, for the purposes of assuring permit compliance,
any substances or parameters at any location; and
      e.   Inspect any production, manufacturing, fabricating, or storage area
where pollutants, regulated under the permit, could originate, be stored, or be
discharged to the sewer system.
   7.   Retention of Records.
      a.   The permittee shall retain records of all monitoring information,
including all calibration and maintenance records and all original strip chart
recordings for continuous monitoring instrumentation, copies of all reports
required by the permit, and records of all data used to complete the
application for the permit, for a period of at least three (3) years from the
date of the sample, measurement, report or application.  This period may be
extended by request of the CUO at any time.
      b.   All records that pertain to matters that are the subject of special
orders or any other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the Board
shall be retained and preserved by the permittee until all enforcement
activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and
all appeals have expired.
   8.   Record Contents.  Records of sampling and analyses shall include:
      a.   The date, exact place, time, and methods of sampling or
measurements, and sample preservation techniques or procedures;
      b.   Who performed the sampling or measurements;
      c.   The date(s) analyses were performed;
      d.   Who performed the analyses;
      e.   The analytical techniques or methods used;
      f.   The results of such analyses; and
      g.   The documentation showing chain of custody.
   9.   Falsifying Information.  Knowingly making any false statement on any
report or other document required by this permit or knowingly rendering any
monitoring device or method inaccurate, is a crime and may result in the
imposition of criminal sanctions and/or civil penalties.
Section 3.06   Additional Reporting Requirements.
   1.   Planned Changes.  The permittee shall give notice to the CUO 90 days
prior to any facility expansion, production increase, or process modifications
which results in new or substantially increased discharges or a change in the
nature of the discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous
wastes for which the permittee has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR
403.12 (P).
   2.   Anticipated Noncompliance.  The permittee shall give a 30 day advance
notice to the CUO of any planned changes in the permitted facility or activity
which may result in noncompliance with permit requirements.
   3.   Automatic Resampling.  If the results of the permittee’s wastewater
analysis indicates a violation has occurred, the permittee must notify the CUO
within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation and repeat the sampling and
pollutant analysis and submit, in writing, the results of this repeat analysis
within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. Where the control
authority has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial
user, the control authority shall perform the repeat sampling and analysis
unless it notifies the user of the violation and requires the user to perform
the repeat analysis.
   4.   Duty to Provide Information.  The permittee shall furnish to the CUO
within 30 days any information which the CUO may request to determine whether
cause exists for modifying, revoking, re-issuing, or terminating the permit, or
to determine compliance with the permit.  The permittee shall also, upon
request, furnish to the CUO within thirty (30) days copies of any records
required to be kept by the permit.
   5.   Operating Upsets.  Any permittee that experiences an upset in
operations that places the permittee in a temporary state of noncompliance with
the provisions of the permit shall inform the CUO within 24 hours of becoming
aware of the upset.
      A written follow-up report of the upset shall be filed by the permittee
with the CUO within five (5) days.  The report shall specify:
      a.   Description of the upset, the cause(s) thereof, and the upset’s
impact on the permittee’s compliance status;
      b.   Duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of
noncompliance, and if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is
expected to continue; and
      c.   All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
recurrence of such an upset.
      The report must also demonstrate that the treatment facility was being
operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner.
      A documented and verified operating upset shall be an affirmative defense
to any enforcement action brought against the permittee for violations
attributable to the upset event.
   6.   Annual Publication.  A list of all industrial users which during the
previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance of applicable
Pretreatment Standards or other Pretreatment Requirements shall, at least,
annually be published by the CUO in a daily newspaper within the service area. 
Significant noncompliance shall be determined in accordance with Title V of
these Regulations.
   7.   Recovery of Costs Incurred.  In addition to civil and criminal
liability, the permittee violating any of the provisions of a permit or these
Regulations or causing damage to or otherwise inhibiting the City of Avon Lake
wastewater disposal system shall be liable to the City for any expense, loss,
or damage caused by such violation or discharge.  The CUO shall bill the
permittee for the costs incurred by the City for any cleaning, repair, or
replacement work caused by the violation or discharge.
   8.   Confidential Information.  Any information and/or data supplied by the
user in reports, questionnaires, monitoring programs, and inspections may be
made available to the public or other governmental agencies unless the user
requests and demonstrates that such information should be kept confidential. 
Any information submitted by the user claimed as confidential must be in
accordance with 40 CFR Part 2 (Public Information). Such information may be
made available to the federal, state, or local authorities during a judicial
review or enforcement proceeding involving the user.
      Information and data having to do with the quality and quantity of the
wastewater discharges of a user shall not qualify as confidential.
[END OF TITLE IV]
TITLE V - ENFORCEMENTTITLE V - ENFORCEMENT
CHAPTER 1 - PENALTIES AND DEFENSECHAPTER 1 - PENALTIES AND DEFENSE
Section 1.01   Judicial Remedies. 
   If any person or entity violates any provision of Title II-Water System,
Title III-Sewers or Title IV-Discharge Permits, or discharges sewage,
industrial wastes, or other wastes into the public sewer system contrary to any
of the provisions of these Regulations or any order or permit issued hereunder,
the CUE may commence an action against such person or entity for appropriate
legal and/or equitable relief in the Common Pleas Court for Lorain County.
Section 1.02   Injunctive Relief. 
   Whenever a person or entity violates any provision of Title II-Water System,
Title III-Sewers or Title IV-Discharge Permits, or violates or continues to
violate any of the provisions of these Regulations or any permit or order
issued hereunder, the CUE may petition the Court for the issuance of a
preliminary or permanent injunction or both, as may be permitted by the Ohio
Revised Code, which restrains or compels the activities on the part of the
person or entity. 
Section 1.03   Civil Penalties.
   1.   Any person or entity violates any provision of Title II-Water System,
Title III-Sewers or Title IV-Discharge Permits, or violates or continues to
violate any of the provisions of these Regulations or any order or permit
issued hereunder, shall be liable to Avon Lake Regional Water for a civil
penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, to be
assessed by the CUE, plus actual damages incurred by Avon Lake Regional Water,
for as long as the violation continues.  In addition to the above described
penalty and damages, Avon Lake Regional Water may recover attorney’s fees,
court costs, and all other expenses associated with all such enforcement
activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
   2.   Avon Lake Regional Water shall take all action necessary to recover all
such penalties, damages, fees, and costs.  In determining the amount of the
penalty to be assessed and damages to be recovered, Avon Lake Regional Water
shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited
to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of
the violation, any economic benefit gained through the violation, corrective
actions by the person or entity, the compliance history of the person or
entity, and any other factor as justice requires.
Section 1.04   Criminal Penalties.
   1.   Violations.
      a.   Any person or entity who violates any provision of these Regulations
or any orders or permits issued hereunder shall, upon conviction, be guilty of
a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than one year or
both.
      b.   In the event of more than one conviction described in Subparagraph 1
(a) above, the person or entity shall be punished by a fine not to exceed three
thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per violation per day or imprisonment for not more
than three years or both.
   2.   Falsifying Information.
      a.   Any person or entity who knowingly makes any false statements,
representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or
other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to these
Regulations, or wastewater permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly
renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under these
Regulations shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or imprisonment for not more than
one year or both.
      b.   In the event of more than one conviction described in subparagraph
(1) above, the person or entity shall be punished by a fine not to exceed three
thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per violation or imprisonment for not more than
three years or both.
Section 1.05   No Waiver. 
   The Board, the CUE, or the CUO may refer any person or entity to the
appropriate officials for the initiation of investigation, prosecution, or
other proceedings for a criminal violation under these Regulations without
commencing enforcement proceedings outlined in this Chapter.  The failure or
delay by the Board to enforce any of these Regulations shall not operate as a
waiver or otherwise preclude the Board’s enforcement of these Regulations at a
later time, subject to the applicable statute of limitations.  Additionally, no
waiver shall be enforceable against the Board unless such waiver is in writing
and signed by a duly authorized person.
Section 1.06   Affirmative Defenses.
   1.   Treatment Upsets.
      a.   Any industrial user which experiences an upset in operations that
places it in a temporary state of noncompliance, which is not the result of
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper
operation, shall inform the CUO thereof immediately upon becoming aware of the
upset. Where such information is given orally, a written report thereof shall
be filed by the user within five days after the upset.  The report shall
contain:
         (1)   A description of the upset, its cause(s), and impact on the
discharger’s compliance status
         (2)   The duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times
of noncompliance, and if the noncompliance is continuing, the time by which
compliance is reasonably expected to be restored.
         (3)   All steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
recurrence of such an upset.
      b.   An industrial user which complies with the notification provisions
of this Section in a timely manner shall have an affirmative defense to any
enforcement action brought by the CUE for any noncompliance with these
Regulations or an order or permit issued hereunder by the user which arises out
of violations attributable to and alleged to have occurred during the period of
the documented and verified upset.
   2.   Treatment Bypasses.
      a.   A bypass of the treatment system is prohibited unless all of the
following conditions are met:
         (1)   The bypass of the treatment system is prohibited unless all of
the following conditions are met:
         (2)   There was no feasible alternative to the bypass, including the
use of auxiliary treatment or retention of the wastewater; and
         (3)   The industrial user properly notified the CUO as described in
subparagraph b below.
      b.   Industrial users must provide immediate notice to the CUO upon
discovery of an unanticipated bypass.  If necessary, the CUO may require the
industrial user to submit a written report explaining the cause(s), nature, and
duration of the bypass, and the steps being taken to prevent its recurrence.
      c.   An industrial user may allow a bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it is for
essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation of the treatment system. 
Industrial users anticipating a bypass must submit notice to the CUO at least
10 days in advance.  The CUO may only approve the anticipated bypass if the
circumstances satisfy those set forth in this Section.
Section 1.07   Notification of Violation.
   1.   Whenever the CUE or the CUO finds that any person or entity has
violated or is violating any provision of Title II-Water System, Title III-
Sewers or Title IV-Discharge Permits, or violates or continues to violate any
of the provisions of these Regulations or any permit or order issued under
these Regulations, the Chief Utilities Executive shall serve upon said person
or entity a written Notice of Violation by U.S. Certified Mail, return receipt
requested.  The Notice of Violation shall include a detailed description of the
alleged violation for which action may be commenced by the Board, and an
explanation of the recipient’s required actions pursuant to these Regulations.
   2.   Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the notice, the notified
person or entity shall submit in writing to the CUE, an explanation of the
cause of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and
prevention thereof, including specific required actions and time schedules for
completing the same.
   3.   Submission of the plan in no way relieves the person or entity of
liability for any violation occurring before or after receipt of the Notice of
Violation.
   4.   A Notice of Violation containing any violation of Chapter 3734 of the
Ohio Revised Code shall also comply with the requirements of Section 3734.101
(B) of the Ohio Revised Code, including a copy of the Notice of Violation shall
be sent by U.S. Certified Mail to the Director of the Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency and the Ohio Attorney General.
Section 1.08   Show Cause Hearing.
   1.   Any person who or entity which has been cited for a violation and upon
whom the CUO has recommended enforcement actions be imposed shall, upon written
request to the Board made within thirty (30) days of receipt of the Notice of
Violation, have the opportunity to show cause, in an evidentiary hearing before
the Board, why the enforcement actions should not be imposed (“Show Cause
Hearing”).  Should the person or entity fail to make a written request for a
Show Cause Hearing within thirty (30) days after receipt of the Notice of
Violation, and the person or entity shall be deemed to have waived any right to
a Show Cause Hearing, and the Board shall impose such fine or penalty against
such person or entity as it deems appropriate under the facts.
   2.   Following the Board’s receipt of a timely written request by the cited
person or entity for a Show Cause Hearing, the Board shall cause a notice of
the Show Cause Hearing to be served on the person or entity cited personally or
by certified mail (return receipt requested).
   3.   The notice of the Show Cause Hearing shall be served at least ten (10)
days prior to the hearing and shall include the date, time, and place of the
hearing, the proposed enforcement action, and the reasons for such actions. The
duly notified person or entity wishing to appear at and participate in the
Hearing must so notify the CUO not less than five (5) days prior to the date of
the hearing.  The Show Cause Hearing shall be tape recorded, and the Board
shall maintain the recording of the Show Cause Hearing as required by these
Regulations and law.  All witnesses at the Show Cause Hearing shall testify
under oath.  The person or entity requesting the Show Cause Hearing may be
represented by counsel, may confront and examine all witnesses, and may present
all evidence concerning the alleged violation.
   4.   After the Show Cause Hearing, the Board shall promptly inform the cited
person or entity, by written notice, of the determination of the Board
regarding the cited violation and the enforcement action, if any, to be taken
including the assessment of any fine or penalty.
Section 1.09   Consent Orders.
   1.   In order to assure correction of a violation, the CUE may enter into a
Consent Order with the person or entity responsible for the noncompliance.
   2.   The Consent Order will be a written agreement between the parties that
assures voluntary compliance and will include specific action to be taken by
the person or entity in violation to correct the noncompliance within a
specified period of time.  The Consent Order may contain such other provisions
or conditions reasonably determined by the CUE.
Section 1.10   Compliance Orders.
   1.   When the CUE finds that a person or entity has violated or continues to
violate these Regulations or a permit or order issued hereunder, he may issue a
Compliance Order to the responsible person or entity directing that, following
a specific time period, sewer or water service shall be discontinued unless
adequate correction to the noncompliance has been completed. Such Orders may
contain any requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to
address the noncompliance, including the installation of a pretreatment
technology or the implementation of additional self-monitoring and management
practices.
   2.   All Compliance Orders shall include the opportunity for the appropriate
person or entity to show cause in accordance with this Chapter.
   3.   All Compliance Orders shall be served on the person or entity who has
violated or continues to violate these Regulations personally or by certified
mail (return receipt requested).
Section 1.11   Cease and Desist Orders. 
   When the CUE finds that a person or entity has violated or continues to
violate these Regulations or any permit or order issued hereunder, the CUE may
issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct the person or
entity in noncompliance to:
   1.   Comply with these Regulations immediately; and
   2.   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to
properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and terminating the discharge.
Section 1.12   Emergency Suspensions.
   1.   The CUE shall have the authority to require or, when circumstances so
dictate, cause the cessation of any discharge into the City’s wastewater
treatment and public sewer system which either significantly endangers the
health or welfare of the public or environment, or poses a significant threat
to the effective operation of the Water Pollution Control Center. The CUO shall
give notice, if possible, to the owner, lessor, occupant, agent, officer, or
authorized representative of the user prior to causing the cessation of the
discharge. The emergency cessation shall be accomplished using reasonable
measures under the circumstances.
   2.   The CUE shall have the authority to terminate the service of any person
or entity who refuses reasonable access to the user’s premise by
representatives of the City for the purpose of inspection or monitoring. Such
termination shall take place no sooner than 24 hours after notice of proposed
termination has been delivered and provided that reasonable access continues to
be refused.
   3.   The CUE shall have the authority to terminate the service of any user
who makes a new connection to the public sewer system without authorization by
the CUE or his designee.  Such termination shall take place no sooner than 24
hours after written notice of the proposed termination to the user.
   4.   After taking any of the actions described in subparagraphs (1), (2), or
(3) of this Section, the CUE shall give the affected user a written notice of
violation and, either concurrently or in a separate writing, of the
precondition, including the payment of fines, for restoration of service. These
notifications shall be made as soon as practicable. Any affected user can
request an opportunity to show cause in accordance with this Chapter as to why
the preconditions for the restoration of service should not be enforced.
   5.   If a user upon whom the notice prescribed by this Section refuses to
receive said notice, then written notice shall not be required, provided that
notice is given to the extent possible under the circumstances. For the
purposes of subparagraphs (2) and (3) of this Section, the time of notice shall
be the time receipt of notice was refused.
Section 1.13   Termination of Service.
   1.   If an Order referenced in these Regulations is not complied with in
accordance with its terms, then the CUE shall terminate service to that person
within 24 hours of notice given to the affected user regarding the scheduled
termination.  Notice shall be given in accordance with this Chapter.
   2.   Service terminated in accordance with subparagraph (1) of this Section
shall not be restored until the above referenced Order is complied with and the
appropriate reconnection charge and applicable fine, if any, are paid, or as
the Board may direct in a subsequent Order.
   3.   The decision issued by the Board pursuant to this Chapter shall
constitute a final action from which an appeal may be made to a court of
competent jurisdiction.
Section 1.14   Annual Publication of Significant Violations. 
   The CUO shall publish, at least annually, in the daily newspaper circulated
in the service area, a description of those industrial users which were found
to be in significant noncompliance, as defined below, with any provisions of
these Regulations or any permit or order issued hereunder during the period
since the previous publication.
   For industrial users which do not fall under the category of a Significant
Industrial User, a Significant Noncompliance (“SNC”) shall be determined by
meeting the criteria in Section 1.14 items 1.c, 1.d, or 5 below.
   For significant Noncompliance (“SNC”) shall be determined by the following:
   1.   Violations of Discharge Limits:
      a.   Chronic Violations – Sixty-six percent (66%) or more of the
measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit or the same average limit or
instantaneous limit in a six-month period (any magnitude exceeding the limit)
for the same pollutant parameter. Chronic violations are applicable to any
permitted monitoring point.
      b.   Technical Review Criteria (TRC) Violations – Thirty-three percent
(33%) or more of the measurements for each pollutant parameter exceed the same
daily maximum, the same average limit, or instantaneous limit by more than the
TRC in a six-month period. TRC violations are applicable to any permitted
monitoring point.
      Group 1 for Compatible Pollutants (BOD, TSS, Fats, Oil and Grease): TRC =
1.4 or 40% over the Limit
      Group 2 for all other Pollutants (all other pollutants, except pH):  TRC
= 1.2 or 20% over the Limit
      c.   Any other violation of a discharge limit (average or daily max.)
that the CUO believes has caused, alone or in combination with other
discharges, interference (e.g., slug loads) or pass-through or endangered the
health of Avon Lake Regional Water personnel or the public.
      d.   Any discharge of a pollutant which has caused imminent endangerment
to human health, welfare, or the environmentor has resulted in Avon Lake
Regional Water’s exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a
discharge.
   2.   Violations of compliance schedule milestones for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance by ninety (90) days or
more after the schedule date.
   3.   Failure to provide reports for compliance schedules, self-monitoring
data, or categorical standards (baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance
reports, etc.) within thirty (30) days from the due date.
   4.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
   5.   Any other violation or group of violations (including violations of
BMPs) that the CUO determines will adversely affect the operation or
implementation of the Avon Lake Pretreatment Program.
   A determination of significant noncompliance shall automatically be cause
for the Board’s commencing the appropriate enforcement and penalty actions as
outlined in this Title V.
CHAPTER 2 - AMNESTY POLICY CHAPTER 2 - AMNESTY POLICY
Section 2.01   Amnesty Program for In-ground Lawn Sprinkling Systems. 
   To encourage compliance with these Regulations, and for the purpose of
bringing the public water and sewer systems in Avon Lake into full compliance
with these Regulations and applicable laws and to assure the safety, health and
welfare of Avon Lake residents, the Board may offer an amnesty program in April
of each year to persons who have violated
Section 1.19 of Title II of these Regulations.  The amnesty program shall last
no longer than 31 days and offer no more than a forgiveness of the $1,000 fine
if the system becomes registered within the amnesty program period.  To
announce such amnesty program, the Board shall include with the April billing a
notification stating the terms and conditions of the amnesty program, including
but not limited to persons eligible for the amnesty program and the dates the
amnesty period begins and ends.  Upon written request, the CUE for good cause
shown may extend the amnesty program period for a specified period of time not
to exceed 30 days. (Amended 4-6-09)
Section 2.02   Amnesty Program for Delinquent Accounts. 
   To encourage users to pay on past-due Avon Lake Regional Water accounts and
to increase the revenue of Avon Lake Regional Water, the Board may offer an
amnesty program no more often than every other calendar year in even numbered
years to persons who have past due water and/or sewer charges.  Such amnesty
program for delinquent accounts shall be on terms and conditions as determined
by the Board, which terms and conditions shall be advertised in a newspaper of
general circulation serving Avon Lake.
Section 2.03   Other Amnesty Programs. 
   To encourage compliance with these Regulations and to assure the safety,
health, and welfare of Avon Lake residents, the Board may offer any other
amnesty program for violators of these Regulations as the Board determines
reasonable and necessary to promote bringing the public water and sewer systems
in Avon Lake into full compliance with these Regulations and applicable laws;
provided, however, that an amnesty program may be offered no more often than
every other calendar year to persons who have outstanding violations.  Such
amnesty program shall be on terms and conditions as determined by the Board,
which terms and conditions shall be advertised in a newspaper of general
circulation serving Avon Lake.
CHAPTER 3 - COLLECTION ACTIONS CHAPTER 3 - COLLECTION ACTIONS
Section 3.01   Collection of Charges. 
   Any water charge, sewer charge, fee, cost (including all legal costs),
payment, penalty or fine which has been incurred, assessed or is otherwise due
and payable by any person or entity pursuant to these Regulations to the Board
of Municipal Utilities (“Charge”), shall be subject to collection pursuant to
these Regulations.  Should a Charge remain unpaid thirty (30) days after
notification as required by
Section 3.02 below or after the termination of any timely appellate proceedings
relating thereto which might be commenced pursuant to Chapter 2506 and Section
2505.07 of the Ohio Revised Code, whichever is later, then the CUE may (a)
commence an action against such person or entity for appropriate legal and/or
equitable relief in the Court of Common Pleas for Lorain County, and/or (b)
certify said Charge to the County Auditor who shall place the certified Charge
amount on the real property tax list and duplicate as a lien against the
property owned by the designated person or entity, to be collected in the same
manner as taxes.  The lien shall be released immediately upon payment in full
of the certified amount.
Section 3.02   Notice Required. 
   Collection action for payment of any Charge may not begin until thirty (30)
days after the CUE has mailed a statement of said Charge to the person or
entity at the last known address of the person or entity. 
Section 3.03   Remedies Non-Exclusive. 
   The rights and remedies set forth in this Chapter 3 of Article V shall be in
addition to all other rights and remedies available to the Board in connection
with the collection of any Charge (as defined in
Section 3.01 of Article V hereof).
[END OF TITLE V]
TITLE VI - FINANCIAL MANAGEMENTTITLE VI - FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
   Section 5705.09 of the Ohio Revised Code requires that each city in Ohio
establish separate and distinct funds for its money, and  Section 743.06 of the
Ohio Revised Code requires that each city in Ohio deposit its revenue derived
from waterworks operations into a separate and distinct fund. Accordingly, the
Board believes that it is in the best interest of the electors of the City of
Avon to protect and preserve the monies of the Board by adopting the following
Regulations relating to its revenues and expenditures.
CHAPTER 1 - FINANCIAL MANAGEMENTCHAPTER 1 - FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
Section 1.01   Separate Funds. 
   There is hereby created and established and ordered to be maintained in the
custody of the Director of Finance as separate accounts, each of which shall be
maintained solely for the benefit of the operation and maintenance of the
utilities owned and/or operated by the City:
   1.   Establishment of Municipal Utilities Water Fund. There is hereby
created and established and ordered to be maintained in the custody of the
Director of Finance as a separate account a “Municipal Utilities Water Fund”
which shall be maintained solely for the benefit of the operation and
maintenance of the water lines and appurtenances thereto owned and/or operated
by the City.  All monies received in connection with the operation and
maintenance of the water lines and appurtenances thereto owned or operated by
the City shall be deposited in the Municipal Utilities Water Fund in compliance
with these Regulations.  All costs, liabilities and obligations relating to or
arising from the maintenance or operation of the City’s water lines and
appurtenances thereto shall be paid from deposits made into the Municipal
Utilities Water Fund. 
   2.   Establishment of Municipal Utilities Sewer Fund. There is hereby
created and established and ordered to be maintained in the custody of the
Director of Finance as a separate account a “Municipal Utilities Sewer Fund”
which shall be maintained solely for the benefit of the operation and
maintenance of the sewer lines and appurtenances thereto owned and/or operated
by the City.  All monies received in connection with the operation and
maintenance of the sewer lines and appurtenances thereto owned or operated by
the City shall be deposited in the Municipal Utilities Sewer Fund in compliance
with these Regulations.  All costs, liabilities and obligations relating to or
arising from the maintenance or operation of the City’s sewer lines and
appurtenances thereto shall be paid from deposits made into the Municipal
Utilities Sewer Fund. 
   3.   Establishment of Municipal Utilities Maintenance, Operation and Repair
Fund. There is hereby created and established and ordered to be maintained in
the custody of the Director of Finance as a separate account a “Municipal
Utilities Maintenance, Operation and Repair Fund” which shall be maintained
solely for the benefit of the operation and maintenance of pumping station
systems, including appurtenant water and sewer lines, constructed, financed and
operated for the benefit of an identified consortium of governmental entities
and managed by the City (each being a “Transmission System”).  All monies
received in connection with the Transmission System shall be deposited in the
Municipal Utilities Maintenance, Operation and Repair Fund in compliance with
these Regulations.  All costs, liabilities and obligations relating to or
arising from the Transmission System and appurtenances thereto shall be paid
from deposits made into the Municipal Utilities Maintenance, Operation and
Repair Fund. 
   4.   Establishment of Subaccounts.  The Board may, from time to time,
establish subaccounts within any of the Municipal Utilities Water Fund or the
Municipal Utilities Sewer Fund or the Municipal Utilities Maintenance,
Operation and Repair Fund for the purpose of maintaining as separate
subaccounts certain funds, revenues, monies or deposits relating to the
operation and maintenance of the City-owned utilities and infrastructure and
related systems therefor.  Each such subaccount may be established by the
Board, the Chief Utilities Executive or the Chief of Utilities Operations in a
writing to the Director of Finance identifying the source or use of funds,
revenues, monies or deposits to be segregated into a separate subaccount,
provided that each subaccount shall be maintained as a separate subaccount
within the Municipal Utilities Water Fund, the Municipal Utilities Sewer Fund
or the Municipal Utilities Maintenance, Operation and Repair Fund in accordance
with these Regulations. 
      a.   In addition to those subaccounts established from time to time,
there shall be the following subaccounts within the Municipal Utilities Water
Fund:
         i.   Waterworks Construction Subaccount.  There is hereby created a
subaccount within the Municipal Utilities Water Fund entitled “Waterworks
Construction Subaccount” to be maintained in the custody of the Director of
Finance as a separate subaccount.  All revenues (including loan proceeds)
received by the Director of Finance and designated by the Board for the
acquisition, construction and installation of water lines and systems shall be
deposited and maintained in the Waterworks Construction Subaccount until such
time as the Director of Finance is authorized to transfer such monies or
amounts thereof in accordance with the Regulations duly passed by the Board and
as authorized by vouchers approved by the CUE.
         ii.   Waterworks Construction ETL-2 Subaccount.  There is hereby
created a subaccount within the Municipal Utilities Water Fund entitled
“Waterworks Construction ETL-2 Subaccount” to be maintained in the custody of
the Director of Finance as a separate subaccount.  All revenues (including loan
proceeds) received by the Director of Finance and designated by the Board for
the acquisition, construction and installation of water lines and systems
(“Waterworks”) relating to the ETL-2 Transmission System shall be deposited and
maintained in the Waterworks Construction ETL-2 Subaccount until such time as
the Director of Finance is authorized to transfer such monies or amounts
thereof in accordance with the Regulations duly passed by the Board and as
authorized by vouchers approved by the CUE.
         iii.   Water Surplus Subaccount.  There is hereby created a subaccount
within the Municipal Utilities Water Fund entitled “Water Surplus Subaccount”. 
All revenues received by the Director of Finance and designated by the Board as
surplus revenue from water fees charged by the Board shall be deposited and
maintained in the Water Surplus Subaccount until such time as the Director of
Finance is authorized to transfer such monies or amounts thereof in accordance
with the Regulations duly passed by the Board and as authorized by vouchers
approved by the CUE.
         iv.   Water Debt Service Subaccount.  There is hereby created a
subaccount within the Municipal Utilities Water Fund entitled “Water Debt
Service Subaccount”.  All revenues received by the Director of Finance and
designated by the Board for the purpose of repayment of debt incurred in
connection with the water services provided by Avon Lake Regional Water shall
be deposited and maintained in the Water Debt Service Subaccount until such
time as the Director of Finance is authorized to transfer such monies or
amounts thereof in accordance with the Regulations duly passed by the Board and
as authorized by vouchers approved by the CUE.
         v.   Water Debt Service Reserve Subaccount.  There is hereby created a
subaccount within the Municipal Utilities Water Fund entitled “Water Debt
Service Reserve Subaccount”.  All revenue received by the Director of Finance
and designated by the Board for future payment of debt incurred in connection
with acquisition, construction and installation of Waterworks shall be
deposited and maintained in the Water Debt Service Reserve Subaccount until
such time as the Director of Finance is authorized to transfer such monies or
amounts thereof in accordance with the Regulations duly passed by the Board and
as authorized by vouchers approved by the CUE.
         vi.   Water Impact Fee Subaccount.  There is hereby created a
subaccount within the Municipal Utilities Water Fund entitled “Water Impact Fee
Subaccount”.  All revenues received by the Director of Finance and designated
by the Board as revenue resulting from fees charged for tying into the City’s
water lines shall be deposited and maintained in the Water Impact Fee
Subaccount until such time as the Director of Finance is authorized to transfer
such monies or amounts thereof in accordance with the Regulations duly passed
by the Board and as authorized by vouchers approved by the CUE.
         vii.   Water Interest Earned Subaccount.  There is hereby created a
subaccount within the Municipal Utilities Water Fund entitled “Water Interest
Earned Subaccount”.  All revenues received by the Director of Finance from
interest earned on any funds deposited in the Municipal Utilities Water Fund or
any subaccount within the Municipal Utilities Water Fund shall be deposited and
maintained in the Water Interest Earned Subaccount until such time as the
Director of Finance is authorized to transfer such monies or amounts thereof in
accordance with the Regulations duly passed by the Board and as authorized by
vouchers approved by the CUE.
      b.   In addition to those subaccounts established from time to time,
there shall be the following subaccounts within the Municipal Utilities Sewer
Fund:
         i.   Sewer System Construction Subaccount.  There is hereby created a
subaccount within the Municipal Utilities Sewer Fund entitled “Sewer System
Construction Subaccount” to be maintained in the custody of the Director of
Finance as a separate subaccount.  All revenues (including loan proceeds)
received by the Director of Finance and designated by the Board for the
acquisition, construction and installation of sewer lines and systems shall be
deposited and maintained in the Sewer System Construction Subaccount until such
time as the Director of Finance is authorized to transfer such monies or
amounts thereof in accordance with the Regulations duly passed by the Board and
as authorized by vouchers approved by the CUE.
         ii.   Trunk Sanitary Sewer Subaccount.  There is hereby created a
subaccount within the Municipal Utilities Sewer Fund entitled “Trunk Sanitary
Sewer Subaccount”.  All revenues received by the Director of Finance and
designated by the Board as revenue resulting from trunk sanitary sewer charges
assessed by the Board shall be deposited and maintained in the Trunk Sanitary
Sewer Subaccount until such time as the Director of Finance is authorized to
transfer such monies or amounts thereof in accordance with the Regulations duly
passed by the Board and as authorized by vouchers approved by the CUE.
         iii.   Sewer Debt Service Reserve Subaccount.  There is hereby created
a subaccount within the Municipal Utilities Sewer Fund entitled “Sewer Debt
Service Reserve Subaccount”.  All revenue received by the Director of Finance
and designated by the Board for future payment of debt incurred in connection
with acquisition, construction and installation of sewer lines, systems and
appurtenances thereto shall be deposited and maintained in the Sewer Debt
Service Reserve Subaccount until such time as the Director of Finance is
authorized to transfer such monies or amounts thereof in accordance with the
Regulations duly passed by the Board and as authorized by vouchers approved by
the CUE.
         iv.   Sewer Replacement Reserve Subaccount.  There is hereby created a
subaccount within the Municipal Utilities Sewer Fund entitled “Sewer
Replacement Reserve Subaccount”.  All revenues received by the Director of
Finance and designated by the Board for future replacement of sewer lines,
systems and appurtenances thereto, shall be deposited and maintained in the
Sewer Replacement Reserve Subaccount until such time as the Director of Finance
is authorized to transfer such monies or amounts thereof in accordance with the
Regulations duly passed by the Board and as authorized by vouchers approved by
the CUE. 
         v.   Sewer Interest Earned Subaccount.  There is hereby created a
subaccount within the Municipal Utilities Sewer Fund entitled “Sewer Interest
Earned Subaccount”.  All revenues received by the Director of Finance from
interest earned on any funds deposited in the Municipal Utilities Sewer Fund or
any subaccount within the Municipal Utilities Sewer Fund shall be deposited and
maintained in the Sewer Interest Earned Subaccount until such time as the
Director of Finance is authorized to transfer such monies or amounts thereof in
accordance with the Regulations duly passed by the Board and as authorized by
vouchers approved by the CUE.
      c.   In addition to those subaccounts established from time to time,
there shall be the following subaccounts within the Municipal Utilities
Maintenance, Operation and Repair Fund:
         i.   MOR - ETL 1 Subaccount.  There is hereby created a subaccount
within the Municipal Utilities Maintenance, Operation and Repair Fund entitled
“MOR - ETL 1 Subaccount” to be maintained in the custody of the Director of
Finance as a separate subaccount.  All revenues received by the Director of
Finance and designated by the Board as revenue received from water charges
assessed by the Board relating to the ETL 1 Transmission System shall be
deposited and maintained in the MOR - ETL 1 Subaccount until such time as the
Director of Finance is authorized to transfer such monies or amounts thereof in
accordance with the Regulations duly passed by the Board and as authorized by
vouchers approved by the CUE.
         ii.   MOR - ETL 2 Subaccount.  There is hereby created a subaccount
within the Municipal Utilities Maintenance, Operation and Repair Fund entitled
“MOR - ETL 2 Subaccount” to be maintained in the custody of the Director of
Finance as a separate subaccount.  All revenues received by the Director of
Finance and designated by the Board as revenue received from water charges
assessed by the Board relating to the ETL 2 Transmission System shall be
deposited and maintained in the MOR - ETL 2 Subaccount until such time as the
Director of Finance is authorized to transfer such monies or amounts thereof in
accordance with the Regulations duly passed by the Board and as authorized by
vouchers approved by the CUE.
   5.   Investment of Deposits.  The Director of Finance as custodian for the
Board may from time to time, invest, for the benefit of the Board, temporarily
idle funds in such a manner as to maximize income while limiting risk to a
nominal exposure provided that (1) the Director of Finance complies with
Resolution No. 2008-02 as adopted on May 5, 2008; and (2) the Director of
Finance follows the guidelines set forth in the Ohio Uniform Depository Law as
contained in Ohio Revised Code Chapter 135. 
   6.   Transfers of Deposits.  No money on deposit in the Municipal Utilities
Water Fund, the Municipal Utilties Sewer Fund or the Municipal Utilities
Maintenance, Operation and Repair Fund (collectively, the “Avon Lake Regional
Water Funds”), and/or any subaccounts of any of Avon Lake Regional Water
   7.   Funds, shall be transferred or assigned to any person, city or fund,
including to another City fund, unless and until all of the following has been
accomplished:
      a.   The Board, by a majority vote, has authorized such transfer or
expenditure.
      b.   The CUE has signed an invoice or a voucher evidencing (i) the
Board’s authorization to transfer such money, (ii) the exact amount of money to
be transferred, (iii) the account or subaccount from which to make the
transfer, and (iv) the person or entity to whom the transfer is to be made.
   8.   Recordkeeping of Deposits.  The Director of Finance is hereby directed
to maintain custody and accurate records of all deposits and transfers made to
and from each of Avon Lake Regional Water Funds and all subaccounts of each of
Avon Lake Regional Water Funds in accordance with those recordkeeping policies
established by the City.  Additionally, the Director of Finance shall
immediately report to the CUO each transfer not in compliance with this
Resolution made from any of Avon Lake Regional Water Funds or any subaccount in
any of Avon Lake Regional Water Funds so that any errors may be immediately
corrected.  The Director of Finance’s recordkeeping shall include at least the
following reports, which shall be made available to the Board immediately upon
request:
      a.   To be finalized within sixty (60) days after the end of each
calendar year, the annual budget report.
      b.   To be finalized within thirty (30) days after the end of each
calendar quarter, the quarterly budget report.
      c.   Within seven (7) calendar days after the end of each calendar month,
the monthly transaction report.  (Amended 5-5-08)
Section 1.02   Fund Transfers.
   1.   The CUE shall have the authority to make payments to the Replacement
Reserve Fund, the Sanitary and Combined Sewer Improvement Fund, and/or the Debt
Service Reserve Fund earlier than the scheduled February transfer date. Should
an early transfer be made to either of these funds, the February payment shall
be for the balance necessary to meet the required annual transfer payment.
   2.   Payments to any of funds referenced in the preceding paragraph can be
delayed or temporarily withdrawn with the approval of the Board to respond to
an emergency or other extraordinary situation, provided that provision is made
to restoring the fund(s) to its proper balance.
Section 1.03   Budget Submittal And Rate Review.
   During the first calendar quarter of each year, the CUE shall prepare a
budget for that calendar year.  The budget document shall contain the following
information:
   1.   Actual expenses for the preceding year, including debt payments, fund
transfers, and revenue received.
   2.   Projected expenses, including debt, fund transfers, and fund
repayments, if any, and projected revenue.
   3.   Recommendations for rate adjustments, including adjustments to the
increments which constitute the consumption charge, either to insure adequate
revenue from any rate, increment, maintain proportionality among user classes,
disposition of surpluses in excess of normal operating reserves, and/or
replenish any fund transfers.
Section 1.04   Accounting System.
   The Board shall establish, and the CUE shall implement, an accounting system
sufficient to implement the policies and provisions of this Chapter.
Section 1.05   Investment of Deposits.
   The Director of Finance may, from time to time, invest, on behalf and for
the benefit of the Board, temporarily idle funds in such a manner as to
maximize income while limiting risk to a nominal exposure.  The Ohio Uniform
Depository Law as contained in Ohio Revised Code Chapter 135 shall be used as a
guideline.  Additionally: 
   1.   All investments should be limited to no more than one year except in
unusual circumstances, and then only when the investment can be prematurely
liquidated without prepayment penalty or loss of principal.
   2.   Certificates of deposit in the full service commercial banks and U.S.
Treasury Bills shall be the primary investment instruments of the City for the
benefit of all Municipal Utilities.  Pledging of collateral as required by the
Ohio Revised Code shall be required of all the commercial banks.  Depository
contracts shall be in effect before any certificate of deposit is purchased.
U.S. Treasury Bills shall be delivered to the City's custody and safekeeping
receipts issued by the custodian showing clear evidence of ownership by the
City are required.
   Provided, however, that:
      a.   No transfer shall be made from any bond or note fund, except that
the unexpended balance of such fund no longer needed for the purpose for which
said fund was created shall be transferred to the fund from which said bonds or
notes are to be paid.
      b.   No transfer shall be made of monies raised or appropriated for the
payment of any bond or note of the Board, until all indebtedness, interest and
other obligations which can lawfully be paid from such monies have been paid. 
Section 1.06   Transfers of Deposits.
   No money on deposit in the Municipal Utilities Water Fund, the Municipal
Utilities Sewer Fund or the Municipal Utilities Maintenance, Operation and
Repair Fund (collectively, the “Avon Lake Regional Water Funds”), and/or any
subaccounts of any of Avon Lake Regional Water Funds, shall be transferred or
assigned to any person, city or fund, including to another City fund, unless
and until all of the following has been accomplished:
   1.   The Board, by a majority vote, has authorized such transfer or
expenditure.
   2.   The CUE has signed an invoice or a voucher evidencing (i) the Board’s
authorization to transfer such money, (ii) the exact amount of money to be
transferred, (iii) the account or subaccount from which to make the transfer,
and (iv) the person or entity to whom the transfer is to be made.
Section 1.07   Recordkeeping of Deposits.
   The Director of Finance is hereby directed to maintain custody and accurate
records of all deposits and transfers made to and from each of Avon Lake
Regional Water Funds and all subaccounts of each of Avon Lake Regional Water
Funds in accordance with those recordkeeping policies established by the City. 
Additionally, the Director of Finance shall immediately report to the CUO each
transfer not in compliance with this Resolution made from any of Avon Lake
Regional Water Funds or any subaccount in any of Avon Lake Regional Water Funds
so that any errors may be immediately corrected.  The Director of Finance’s
recordkeeping shall include at least the following reports, which shall be made
available to the Board immediately upon request:
   1.   To be finalized within sixty (60) days after the end of each calendar
year, the annual budget report.
   2.   To be finalized within thirty (30) days after the end of each calendar
quarter, the quarterly budget report.
   3.   Within seven (7) calendar days after the end of each calendar month,
the monthly transaction report.
[END OF TITLE VI]
TITLE VII -  CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTSTITLE VII -  CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
CHAPTER 1 - COMPETITIVE BIDDINGCHAPTER 1 - COMPETITIVE BIDDING
Section 1.01   Generally.
   1.    When any expenditure in excess of Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars
($25,000) is to be made by the Board for the construction, demolition,
alteration, repair or reconstruction of an improvement by contract, the
contract shall be in writing with the lowest and best responsible bidder, as
determined by the Board.
   2.    All bids shall include a bid guaranty or other such requirements as
the Board shall specify in the advertisement to bidders or the specifications.
   3.    The Board may include in the specifications liquidated damages for
each day of delay beyond a specified date.
   4.    If the work bid embraces both labor and material, the Board may
specify whether such items shall be separately stated with the price thereof in
the specifications.
   5.    None of the Ohio Revised Code provisions relating to competitive
bidding shall apply to the competitive bidding process to be followed by the
Board in awarding a public works contract to be entered into by the City
through the Board, unless such provisions are specifically and affirmatively
incorporated by the terms of these Regulations or the applicable bid package,
plans, and specifications.
   6.    The competitive bidding process for all public works contracts to be
entered into by the City through the Board shall be governed solely by the
requirements set forth in these Regulations and in the bid package, plans, and
specifications for the applicable project. (Rev. 4-2-12)
Section 1.02   Advertising for Bids.
   1.   The Board shall award any such contract only after advertising once a
week (for not less than 2 nor more than 4 consecutive weeks) in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City.
   2.   In the alternative, the Board may cause notice to be inserted in trade
papers or other publications designated by it or to be distributed by
electronic means, including posting the notice on the City's Internet web site.
If the Board posts the notice on the City's web site, it may eliminate the
second notice otherwise required to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the City, provided that the first notice published in such
newspaper meets all of the following requirements:
      a.    It is published at least two weeks before the opening of bids.
      b.    It includes a statement that the notice is posted on the City's
internet web site.
      c.    It includes the internet address of the City's internet web site.
      d.    It includes instructions describing how the notice may be accessed
on the City's internet web site.
Section 1.03   Procedure for Awarding Bids.
   1.   The bids shall be opened and shall be publicly read by the person
designated by the Board at the time, date and place specified in the
advertisement to bidders or the specifications. The time, date and place of bid
opening may be extended to a later date by the Board, provided that written or
oral notice of the change shall be given to all persons who have received or
requested specifications prior to the original time and date fixed for the
opening.
   2.   If the Board determines that the award of a contract to the lowest or
lowest responsive bidder is not in the best interests of the City, the Board
may accept another bid so opened which the Board determines in its discretion
to be from the lowest and best responsible bidder or reject any and all bids
and advertise for other bids. The advertisement for other bids shall be for
such time, in such form, and in such newspaper or by electronic means as the
Board determines.
CHAPTER 2 - DESIGN-BUILD CONTRACTSCHAPTER 2- DESIGN-BUILD CONTRACTS
Section 2.01   GenerallySection 2.01   Generally.
   1.    Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Ohio Revised Code or
in the Regulations of the City, when any expenditure in excess of Twenty-Five
Thousand Dollars ($25,000) is to be made by the Board for the construction,
demolition, alteration, repair or reconstruction of an improvement by contract
and the Board determines that it is in the best interests of the City to use a
design-build delivery system, the Board shall engage an architect or engineer
to prepare partial plans and specifications for the improvement.
   2.    An architect or engineer who prepares partial plans and specifications
for an improvement shall not provide any services for the improvement to any
person other than the Board.
   3.    The bids shall include a bid guaranty meeting the requirements of
section 153.54 of the Ohio Revised Code or such other requirements as the Board
shall specify in the advertisement to bidders or the specifications.
   4.    The Board may include in the specifications a prorated penalty for
each day of delay beyond a specified date.
   5.    If the work bid embraces both labor and material, the Board may
specify whether such items shall be separately stated with the price thereof in
the specifications.
   6.    Any provision of the Ohio Revised Code which relates to the bidding or
terms of contracts for the construction, demolition, alteration, repair or
reconstruction of an improvement, and which may be altered or waived by the
City, may be altered or waived by the Board in the specifications.
Section 2.02   Advertising for BidsSection 2.02   Advertising for Bids.
   1.   The Board shall advertise the design-build contract once a week (for
not less than 2, nor more than 4) consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City.
   2.   The advertisement shall include a general description of the
improvement, a statement of the design-build services required and a
description of the qualifications required, and shall indicate how design-build
firms may submit statements of qualifications in order to be considered for the
contract.
   3.   The Board may also cause notice to be inserted in trade papers or other
publications designated by it or to be distributed by electronic means,
including posting the notice on the City's Internet web site. If the Board
posts the notice on the City's web site, it may eliminate the second notice
otherwise required to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within
the City, provided that the first notice published in such newspaper meets all
of the following requirements:
      a.    It is published at least two weeks before the opening of bids.
      b.    It includes a statement that the notice is posted on the City's
internet web site.
      c.    It includes the internet address of the City's Internet web site.
      d.    It includes instructions describing how the notice may be accessed
on the City's internet web site.
Section 2.03   Procedure for Awarding BidsSection 2.03   Procedure for Awarding
Bids.
   1.   The Board shall evaluate the statements of qualifications received and
may hold discussions with individual design-build firms. Following the
evaluation, the Board shall:
      a.    Select and rank not fewer than three design-build firms that the
Board considers to be the most qualified to provide the required design-build
services, except that when the Board determines that fewer than three qualified
design-build firms have submitted statements of qualifications, the Board shall
rank those design-build firms or may advertise for other statements of
qualifications, which advertisement shall be for such time, in such form, and
in such newspaper or by electronic means as the Board determines.
      b.    Issue to each design-build firm selected under paragraph a., above,
an invitation to bid containing:
         i.    The partial plans and specifications for the improvement;
         ii.    An estimated project schedule;
         iii.    A description of design services to be provided;
         iv.    A description of preconstruction services to be provided;
         v.    A description of construction services to be provided;
         vi.    A form of design-build contract; and
         vii.    An invitation to bid showing the total contract price and the
portions of the total contract price for design, preconstruction and
construction services.
      c.   Receive bids from the selected design-build firms which include:
         i.    A list of key personnel, consultants and subcontractors for the
improvement and a staffing chart;
         ii.    Design concepts for completing the partial plans and
specifications;
         iii.    A preliminary design and construction schedule;
         iv.    The total contract price and portions of the total contract
price for design, preconstruction and construction services.
      d.   Evaluate the submitted bids and may hold discussions with the lowest
responsive design-build firm to further investigate its bid including scope,
nature and cost of the proposed services and potential technical approaches to
the design and construction of the improvement.
      e.   Award the contract to the lowest and best responsible bidder as
determined in the discretion of the Board.
   2.   If the Board determines that the award of a contract to the lowest or
lowest responsive bidder is not in the best interests of the City, the Board
may accept another bid which the Board determines in its discretion to be from
the lowest and best responsible bidder in accordance with paragraph d. above or
reject any and all bids and advertise for other statements of qualifications,
which advertisement shall be for such time, in such form, and in such newspaper
or by electronic means as the Board determines.
CHAPTER 3 - CONSTRUCTION MANAGER AT RISK
Section 3.01   Generally.
   1.   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Ohio Revised Code or in
the Regulations of the City, when any expenditure in excess of Twenty-Five
Thousand Dollars ($25,000) is to be made by the Board for the range of services
that a construction manager at risk may provide for the planning, coordination,
management, direction, or construction of any or all phases of a project for
the construction, demolition, alteration, repair or reconstruction of an
improvement by contract and the Board determines that it is in the best
interests of the City to use a construction manager at risk delivery system,
the Board shall engage a construction manager at risk to perform such services
as the Board may specify for the improvement. 
   2.   A construction manager at risk who is engaged by the Board to perform
such services for an improvement shall not provide any services for the
improvement to any person other than the Board. 
   3.   Before entering into a contract to employ a construction manager at
risk, the Board or its designee shall advertise notice of its intent to employ
a construction manager at risk.  The notice shall invite interested parties to
submit proposals for consideration.  The Board or its designee may also notify
persons believed to be interested in employment as a construction manager at
risk by such means and method as the Board or its designee might direct. 
   4.   Any provision of the Ohio Revised Code which relates to notice of
accepting bids or proposals for construction manager at risk services or the
selection of or a contract with a construction manager at risk for the
performance of any construction management services relating to any
improvements is waived by the Board. 
Section 3.02   Advertising for Qualifying Proposals.
   1.   The Board or its designee shall advertise the request for proposals for
the construction manager at risk contract once a week, for not less than two
nor more than four consecutive weeks, in a newspaper of general circulation in
the City. 
   2.   The advertisement shall include a general description of the
improvement, a statement of the construction management services required, and
a general description of the qualifications required, and shall indicate how
construction managers at risk may submit statements of qualifications to be
considered for the contract. 
   3.   The Board or its designee may also cause notice to be inserted in trade
papers or other publications designated by it or to be distributed by
electronic means, including posting the notice on the City’s Internet web
site.  If the Board or its designee posts the notice on the City’s web site, it
may eliminate the second notice otherwise required to be published in a
newspaper of general circulation within the City, provided that the first
notice published in such newspaper meets all of the following requirements: 
      a.   It is published at least two weeks before the opening of proposals
and statements of qualifications. 
      b.   It includes a statement that the notice is posted on Avon Lake
Regional Water's web site.
      c.   It includes the internet address of the web site.
      d.   It includes instructions describing how the notice may be accessed
on the web site. 
Section 3.03   Procedure for Pricing Proposals. 
   1.   The Board or its designee shall evaluate the statements of
qualifications received and may hold discussions with individual construction
managers at risk regarding such statements.  Following the evaluation, the
Board or its designee shall:
      a.   Select and rank not fewer than three construction manager at risk
firms that the Board or its designee considers to be the most qualified to
provide the required construction management services, except that, when the
Board or its designee determines that fewer than three qualified construction
manager at risk firms have submitted statements of qualifications, the Board or
its designee shall rank those construction manager at risk firms or may
advertise for other statements of qualifications, which advertisement shall be
for such time, in such form, and in such newspaper or by electronic means as
the Board or its designee determines. 
      b.   The Board or its designee shall provide each construction manager at
risk selected under paragraph a. of this section with
         (1)   A description of the project, including a statement of available
design detail;
         (2)   An estimated project schedule;
         (3)   A copy of the existing partial plans and specifications for the
improvement;
         (4)   A description of the construction management services to be
provided;
         (5)   The form of the construction management contract; and
         (6)   A request for a pricing proposal. 
      c.   The pricing proposal of each construction manager at risk shall
include at least the following regarding the construction manager at risk: 
         (1)   A list of key personnel for the project;
         (2)   A statement of the general conditions and contingency
requirements;
         (3)   A fee proposal divided into a preconstruction fee, a
construction fee, and the portion of the construction fee to be at risk in a
guaranteed maximum price. 
      d.   The Board or its designee shall evaluate the submitted pricing
proposals and may hold discussions with individual construction managers at
risk to explore their proposals further, including the scope and nature of the
proposed services and potential technical approaches. 
      e.   After evaluating the pricing proposals, the Board or its designee
shall rank the selected construction managers at risk based on its evaluation
of the value of each pricing proposal, with such evaluation considering the
proposed cost and qualifications.
      f.   The Board or its designee shall enter into negotiations for a
construction management contract with the construction manager at risk whose
pricing proposal the Board determines to be the best value under paragraph e.
of this section.  Contract negotiations shall be directed toward:
         (1)   Ensuring that the construction manager at risk and the Board or
its designee mutually understand the essential requirements involved in
providing the required construction management services, including the
provisions for the use of contingency funds and the possible distribution of
savings in the final costs of the project;
         (2)   Ensuring that the construction manager at risk will be able to
provide the necessary personnel, equipment, and facilities to perform the
construction management services within the time required by the construction
management contract;
         (3)   Agreeing upon a procedure and schedule for determining a
guaranteed maximum price using an open book pricing method that shall represent
the total maximum amount to be paid by the Board or its designee to the
construction manager at risk for the project and that shall include the costs
of all the work, the cost of its general conditions, the contingency, and the
fee payable to the construction manager at risk. 
      g.   (1)   If the Board or its designee fails to negotiate a construction
management contract with the construction manager at risk whose pricing
proposal the Board or its designee determines to be the best value under
paragraph e. of this section, the Board or its designee shall inform the
construction manager at risk, in writing, of the termination of negotiations. 
         (2)   Upon terminating negotiations, the Board or its designee may
enter into negotiations as provided in this section with the construction
manager at risk that the Board or its designee ranked next highest under
paragraph e. of this section.  If the negotiations fail, the Board or its
designee may enter into negotiations as provided in this section with the
construction manager at risk the Board or its designee ranked next highest
under paragraph e. of this section.
         (3)   If the Board or its designee fails to negotiate a construction
management contract with a construction manager at risk whose pricing proposal
the Board or its designee determines to be the best value under paragraph e. of
this section, the Board or its designee may select additional construction
managers at risk to provide pricing proposals to the Board or its designee
pursuant to this section or may select an alternative delivery method for the
project. 
      h.   If the Board or its designee and construction manager at risk fail
to agree on a guaranteed maximum price, nothing in this section shall prohibit
the Board or its designee from allowing the construction manager at risk to
provide the management services that a construction manager is authorized to
provide. 
      i.   Nothing in this section affects the Board’s or its designee's right
to accept or reject any or all proposals in whole or in part. 
[END OF TITLE VII]
SCHEDULE A
WATER TURN-ON CHARGES
(revised 1/21/14)
Turn-On for Violations
   Water Service that has been turned off for a violation of any rule or
regulation herein shall not be turned back on until such time as the violation
has been corrected and all charges have been paid. In addition, any service
turned off for a violation of these Regulations shall be subject to a turn-on
charge, payable before reinstatement of service, in accordance with the
following:
Turn-On Charges
      8:00 am  – 4:30 pm      =   $35.00         
      4:30 pm  – 8:30 pm *      =   $50.00         
      Non-working hours & Weekends =   $75.00
*On shut-off day
SCHEDULE B
WATER METER RATES
Meter Rates – Quarterly      Effective 7/1/18 per Board of Municipal Utilities
Meeting 12/20/16
      First 50,000 gallons @ $1.92 per thousand gallons
      Next 200,000 gallons @ $1.58 per thousand gallons
      Next 250,000 gallons @ $1.32 per thousand gallons
Meter Rates       Effective 7/1/19 per Board of Municipal Utilities Meeting 12/
18/19
      First 50,000 gallons @ $2.00 per thousand gallons
      Next 200,000 gallons @ $1.64 per thousand gallons
      Next 250,000 gallons @ $1.37 per thousand gallons
   Minimum Service Fee (Residential) = $4.00 and includes first 2,000 gallons
usage
Meter Rates       Effective 7/1/20 per Board of Municipal Utilities Meeting 12/
18/19
      First 50,000 gallons @ $2.08 per thousand gallons
      Next 200,000 gallons @ $1.71 per thousand gallons
      Next 250,000 gallons @ $1.42 per thousand gallons
   Minimum Service Fee (Residential) = $4.25 and includes first 2,000 gallons
usage
Meter Rates       Effective 7/1/21 per Board of Municipal Utilities Meeting 12/
18/19
      First 50,000 gallons @ $2.16 per thousand gallons
      Next 200,000 gallons @ $1.78 per thousand gallons
      Next 250,000 gallons @ $1.48 per thousand gallons
   Minimum Service Fee (Residential) = $4.50 and includes first 2,000 gallons
usage
Water Outside Corporation Limits
   All water sold outside the corporation limits of Avon Lake shall be charged
according to the rate schedules above, plus 10%.
Pool Filling                                                                   
(revised 6/21/07)
   Customer requests for the filling of swimming pools shall be scheduled with
Avon Lake Regional Water for such times as Avon Lake Regional Water personnel
are available and shall be charged on a time and material basis.
SCHEDULE C
NEW LINE TESTING FEE SCHEDULE
New Water Lines                           (revised 1/21/14)
   Fill the Line *                           $335.00
   Flushing and Bacteria Sampling *                  $750.00
   Bacteria Check Sample *                     $350.00
   Put Line in Service                        $145.00
   Laboratory Analysis (price reflects “per sample” cost)   $40.00
* Flushing and sampling effort assumes street pavement is complete or
contractor supplies and installs required hoses. All additional effort required
by Avon Lake Regional Water will be billed at the established hourly labor rate
plus 100%.
New Sanitary Sewers                        (revised 1/21/14)
   Review Inspection Video                     $135.00
   Installation and Removal of Plug                  $645.00
For all new sanitary sewer installations in the City of Avon Lake, Avon Lake
Regional Water will perform the following tasks at the costs established in the
current New Line Testing Fee Schedule:
      1.   One trip to install and one trip to remove a plug on the new
sanitary’s connection to the City’s existing system.
         -   The contractor shall immediately notify Avon Lake Regional Water
upon connection of the new sanitary to install the plug.
         -   The plug shall remain on the new sanitary until such time as the
new sewer has been accepted by the City.
         -   Tampering with the plug for the purpose of draining storm water
and allowing such water entry to the Avon Lake sanitary sewer system shall be
subject to a $1000.00 fine that must be paid in full to Avon Lake Regional
Water prior to the acceptance of the sewer.
      2.   One review of the TV inspection video of the new sanitary sewer for
acceptance of the installation.
         -   Camera shall be of the pan-and-tilt type with sufficient
illumination and focus to adequately view the pipe’s condition and alignment.
         -   Both the videotape narrative and written report shall call out all
observed defects by measured location.
         -   Inadequate videotape quality or reports will cause the sewer to be
rejected by Avon Lake Regional Water until an acceptable videotape is provided.
Any additional manpower, testing, review or consultation from that specified
above will be billed on a time and material basis plus 100% of the labor costs.
All such additional costs shall be billed to the project’s owner on all private
projects and to the prime contractor on all public projects and are due upon
receipt.
All other existing installation and testing requirements not specifically
addressed herein shall remain unchanged and in full effect.
SCHEDULE D
FEE SCHEDULE FOR DAMAGE TO TAPS AND SERVICE CONNECTIONS
   Should a tap or service connection be damaged by an individual, contractor,
or other utility, the full cost or repairs shall be charged to those
responsible for the damage in accordance with the following:
         1)   During Working Hours shall be the cost of material, plus 100% of
labor costs, plus 10% overhead.
         2)   After Working Hours shall be the cost of materials, plus 150% of
labor costs, plus 10% overhead.
SCHEDULE E
METER TESTING FEES
(revised 2/19/02)
   Meters may be tested at the instigation of Avon Lake Regional Water or the
consumer. If requested by the consumer, such request shall be in writing and
shall be accompanied by a deposit in the amounts as stated below:
         5/8” to 1” Meters               $40.00
         1-1/4” to 2” Meters               Time and Material
   Should any Avon Lake Regional Water customer request his/her meter be tested
for accuracy, such test will be done by Avon Lake Regional Water or its agents.
If the meter so tested for accuracy does not meet American Water Works
Association water meter accuracy standards, then there will be no charge to the
customer requesting such test. If, however, the meter tests accurate by the
same American Water Works Associations standards, then all costs associated
with such testing procedure plus a 10% administrative fee shall be billed to
the customer. If said bill is not paid in 30 days from the date of billing, it
shall become part of the next water bill and as such shall be subject to all
existing collection policies of Avon Lake Regional Water.
   The customer or the customer’s agent shall be present to witness said test.
Failure of the customer to witness the test at a mutually agreed upon time
shall not relieve the customer of any expense incurred by Avon Lake Regional
Water in preparation for said test.
SCHEDULE F
WATER LINE INSPECTION FEE
(revised 1/21/14)
   Water mains installed on private property that are to become Avon Lake
Regional Water’s shall be subject to an inspection fee based on the following:
         $100.00 – Minimum for first 100 feet
         80¢ per lineal foot beyond 100 feet
SCHEDULE G
TAP CHARGES
(revised 1/21/14)
Taps and Service on Existing Mains
         Taps on all water mains owned and operated by the City of Avon Lake
shall be installed by Avon Lake Regional Water or its authorized agent.
         Cost of taps and service connections installed by Avon Lake Regional
Water shall be as follows:
            3/4"…………………………………………   $   1400.00
            3/4" Sprinkling…………………………….   $   1230.00
            1”……………………………………………   $   1600.00
            1” Sprinkling………………………………   $   1410.00
            1-1/2”…………………………………….   $   1700.00
            *2”…………………………………………   $   3775.00
            *Over 2”…………………………………..Time and Material plus Overhead
         Avon Lake Regional Water, for ¾” and 1” taps, shall install the
service connection to the meter which will include the installation of the curb
stop, meter vault, and meter.
         * For all taps 1-1/2” or larger, Avon Lake Regional Water shall make
the tap, and the owner requesting the tap shall be responsible for buying and
installing the vault complete to Avon Lake Regional Water specifications,
install piping in the vault including a bypass, and set the meter as provided
by Avon Lake Regional Water.
Contractor Installed Tap Charges
         Once the contractor has installed the tap and service connection, the
meter and meter vault may be set. An application for service shall be filed
with Avon Lake Regional Water office and payment of fees for the size service
received according to the following:
            3/4"…………………………………………   $     675.00
            3/4” Sprinkling……………………………...$   640.00
            1”……………………………………………   $     800.00
            1” Sprinkling………………………………..$   760.00
            *1-1/2”…………………………………….   $     525.00
            *2”…………………………………………   $   1825.00
            *Over 2”…………………………………..Time and Material plus Overhead
         *For all services 1-1/2” and larger, the contractor shall buy and
install a vault complete to Avon Lake Regional Water specifications, install
the piping in the vault including a by-pass, and set a meter that shall be
provided by Avon Lake Regional Water.
SCHEDULE H
SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
(revised 12/18/18)
Effective 7/1/18 per Board of Municipal Utilities Meeting 2/6/18
$8.25 per Bill + $5.52 per 1,000 gallons
Effective 7/1/19 per Board of Municipal Utilities Meeting 12/18/18
$21.00 Minimum Service Fee* per Bill + $6.35 per 1,000 gallons
Effective 7/1/20 per Board of Municipal Utilities Meeting 12/18/18
$23.00 Minimum Service Fee* per Bill + $7.30 per 1,000 gallons
* - Minimum Service Fee includes first 2,000 gallons of usage
SCHEDULE I
LABORATORY ANALYSES CHARGES
(revised 1/21/14)
   Bacteria (MUG)               $18.00
   Bacteria (New Line)               See Schedule C
   Fecal Coliform               $18.00
   Beach/Well Samples            $20.00
   Total Phosphorus               $17.00
   Ammonia Nitrate               $17.00
   Cyanide (Total)               $36.00
   Cyanide (Free)               $36.00
   Oil & Grease                  $70.00
   Suspended Solids               $17.00
   Metal (Stand. 10 Metal Analysis)         $150.00
   Metals (Lead & Copper)            $30.00
   Metals (Single)               $15.00
   Nitrate Nitrogen               $27.00
SCHEDULE J
Copy Charges
(revised 1/21/14)
0-9 Copies                        No Charge
10 and more copies (Black & White)            $0.10 per copy
10 and more copies (Color)               $0.25 per copy
   E-Mail copies                  No Charge
   Copies downloaded to disc (per disc price)      $10.00
SCHEDULE K
Capacity Fee Charges
(revised 1/16/2019)
   Trunk Sanitary Sewer Fee (Residential)                  $2,097.00
   Trunk Sanitary Sewer Fee (Industrial/Commercial)            $0.1399
   (price reflects “per square foot” cost)
   8” Sanitary Front Foot Cost (price reflects “per front foot”
cost)      $73.76
   Water Impact Fee                            $2,529.00
SCHEDULE L
Existing Services Demolition Permit
(Adopted 5/5/08)
   Existing services demolition permits are subject to a fee of $420.00.
   Should TV inspection determine continued Infiltration and Inflow requiring
additional work, all additional time shall be billed at Avon Lake Regional
Water’s established hourly rate.
SCHEDULE M
Foundation Drain Inspection Permits
(revised 1/21/14)
   Foundation drain permits shall be subject to a fee of $50.00.
   No charge for the Sanitary Lateral Program (SLP) Project area.
SCHEDULE N
Backflow Inspection Penalties
(adopted 1/2/19)
   Should a properly completed backflow inspection report not be submitted on
the appropriate form by the due date, the account with the backflow prevention
device shall be subject to a penalty of $50.00.
 
