BARBERTON, OHIO
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Supplement 2025 S-5 contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 174-2025, passed December 8, 2025
Ohio legislation updated through June 26, 2024
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 137-2020
   TITLE: ENACTING THE CODE OF ORDINANCES
   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF BARBERTON
REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH
CODE OF ORDINANCES, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
   WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the political
subdivision are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in
form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of
its affairs; and
   WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Ohio empower and
authorize the political subdivision to revise, amend, restate, codify and
compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book
form; and
   WHEREAS, the Legislative Authority of the Political Subdivision has
authorized a general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances
of the Political Subdivision of a general and permanent nature and publication
of such ordinance in book form; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Council of the City of Barberton,
State of Ohio:
   SECTION 1. The general ordinances of the Political Subdivision as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the “Code of Ordinances of the City of Barberton.”
   SECTION 2.  Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of
the following Titles:
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHARTER
PART TWO: ADMINISTRATION CODE
   TITLE TWO: GENERAL PROVISIONS
               202.   Code of Ordinances
               204.   Official Standards
               206.   Wards and Boundaries
               208.   Open Meetings
               210.   Contracts
               212.   Acquisition and Disposal of Property
               214.   Compliance with Americans with Disabilities Act
   TITLE FOUR: LEGISLATION
               220.   Council
               222.   Ordinances and Resolutions
   TITLE SIX: ADMINISTRATION
               230.   Mayor
               232.   Department of Law
               234.   Department of Finance
               236.   Department of Public Safety
               238.   Division of Police
               240.   Division of Fire
               242.   Department of Public Service
               244.   Division of Building Inspection
               246.   Division of Engineering
               248.   Division of Utilities
               250.   Division of Streets
               252.   Department of Urban Renewal
               253.   Department of Human Resources
               254.   Employees Generally
               256.   Residential Anti-Displacement and Relocation Plan
   TITLE EIGHT: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
               260.   Planning Commission
               262.   Board of Zoning and Building Appeals
               264.   Parks and Recreation Commission
               266.   Board of Health
               268.   Civil Service Commission
               270.   Board of Control
               272.   Charter Review Commission
               274.   Tree Commission
               276.   Barberton Community Foundation
               278.   Industrial Wastewater Review Board
               280.   Tax Incentive Review Board
               282.   Treasury Investment Board
               284.   Litter Control Advisory Board
               286.   Beautification Committee
   TITLE TEN: JUDICIAL
               298.   Municipal Court
   PART THREE: TRAFFIC CODE
   TITLE ONE: ADMINISTRATION
               301.   Definitions
               303.   Enforcement, Impounding and Penalty
               305.   Traffic Control
   TITLE THREE: STREETS AND TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
               311.   Street Obstructions and Special Uses
               313.   Traffic-Control Devices
   TITLE FIVE: VEHICLES
               331.   Operation Generally
               333.   O.V.I.; Reckless Operation; Speed
               335.   Licensing; Accidents
               337.   Safety and Equipment
               339.   Commercial and Heavy Vehicles
               341.   Drivers of Commercial Vehicles
               343.   Offenses Relating to Theft and Fraud
   TITLE SEVEN: PARKING
   351.   Parking Generally
   353.   Parking Meters
   355.   Municipal Parking Lots
   357.   Snow Emergencies
   359.   Parking Commission
   TITLE NINE: PEDESTRIANS, BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES
   371.   Pedestrians
   373.   Bicycles and Motorcycles Generally
   375.   Snowmobiles, Off-Highway Motorcycles and All-Purpose Vehicles
   PART SIX: GENERAL OFFENSES CODE
   606.   General Provisions; Administration and Enforcement
   610.   Air Pollution
   612.   Alcoholic Beverages
   618.   Animals
   624.   Drugs
   630.   Gambling
   632.   Junk Cars
   634.   Minors
   635.   Noise Abatement
   636.   Offenses Relating to Persons
   642.   Offenses Relating to Property
   648.   Peace Disturbances
   654.   Railroads
   656.   Registration of Convicted Persons
   660.   Safety, Sanitation and Health
   666.   Sex Related Offenses
   668.   Streets and Sidewalks
   670.   Trees, Weeds and Grass
   672.   Weapons and Explosives
   674.   Criminal Activity Nuisances
   698.   Penalties and Sentencing
   PART EIGHT: BUSINESS REGULATION AND TAXATION CODE
   TITLE TWO: BUSINESS REGULATION
   804.   Advertising and Billposting
   808.   Amusements and Shows
   812.   Auctions
   816.   Billiard and Pool Rooms
   820.   Boxing and Wrestling
   822.   Cable Television
   824.   Dances and Dance Halls
   828.   Fortunetelling
   830.   Gasoline Service Stations
   832.   Going-Out-of-Business Sales
   834.   Late Night Retail Establishments and Gasoline Stations
   836.   Amusement Devices, Skill-Based Amusement Machines and Arcades
   840.   Payday Loan/Cash Advance Facilities
   844.   Peddlers, Solicitors and Vendors
   848.   Polygraph Tests
   852.   Secondhand Dealers
   856.   Taxicabs
   860.   Trailer Camps and Tourist Camps
   862.   Self-Service Retail Pricing
   864.   Private Investigators and Agencies
   866.   Private Patrol Watchmen and Agencies
   868.   Christmas Tree Sales
   870.   Strikebreakers
   872.   Residential Care Facilities
   874.   Tow Trucks
   875.   Tobacco 21
   876.   Medical Marijuana Cultivators, Processors and Retail Dispensaries
   TITLE FOUR: TAXATION
   880.   Earned Income Tax (Effective Beginning January 1, 2016)
   884.   Motor Vehicle License Tax
   PART TEN: STREETS, UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICES CODE
   TITLE TWO: STREET AND SIDEWALK AREAS
   1020.   Excavations
   1024.   Street Classifications and Pavement
   1028.   Sidewalks
   1032.   Number of Buildings
   TITLE FOUR: UTILITIES
   1040.   Sewers
   1044.   Water
   1048.   Gas
   1052.   Electricity
   1054.   Industrial Waste Discharges
   1056.   Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination Program
   1058.   General Lighting Utility
   TITLE SIX: OTHER PUBLIC SERVICES
   1060.   Refuse Collection and Disposal
   1062.   Alarm Systems
   1064.   Metro Regional Transit Authority
   1068.   Parks and Recreation Areas
   1072.   Barberton Reservoir; Wolf Creek
   1074.   Management, Administration and Control of the Use of the City's
Public Rights-of-Way
   PART TWELVE: PLANNING AND ZONING CODE
   PART FOURTEEN: BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE
   TITLE TWO: BUILDING STANDARDS
   1402.   Residential Building Code of Ohio for One-, Two- and Three-Family
Dwellings
   1404.   Ohio Building Code
   1406.   National Electrical Code
   TITLE FOUR: LICENSING OF TRADESMEN
   1422.   Registration in General
   1424.   Electrical Registration
   1426.   Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning
   1428.   Plumbing Registration
   1430.   Sign Licensing
   TITLE SIX: ADMINISTRATION; MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
   1442.   Division of Building Inspection
   1444.   Permits and Fees
   1446.   Fire Districts
   1448.   Insulation
   1450.   Erosion and Sediment Control Regulation
   1452.   Land Reutilization Program
   1454.   Vacant Property Registration Program
   TITLE EIGHT: HOUSING CODE
   1462.   ICC International Property Maintenance Code
   1464.   National Electrical Contractors Association, Tri-County, Minimum
Residential Rewire Electrical Code
   TITLE TEN: COMMERCIAL MAINTENANCE CODE
   1476.   Minimum Requirements
   1478.   Rental Property Registration Program
   PART SIXTEEN: FIRE PREVENTION CODE
   1604.   Ohio and National Fire Codes
   1606.   Fire Department: Plan Review and System Test Fees
   1608.   Nursing Homes and Rest Homes
   1610.   Smoke Detectors
   1612.   Oil and Gas Wells: Emergency Information and Regulations
   TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   A.   Franchises and Agreements
   B.   Easements
   C.   Vacating of Streets and Alleys
   D.   Dedication and Plat Approval
   E.   Acquisition and Disposal of Real Property
   F.   Lease of Real Property
   G.   Grade Levels and Change of Street Name
   H.   Annexation and Detachment of Territory
   I.   Zoning Map Changes
   PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Ohio Revised Code (ORC)
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
   SECTION 3. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of
this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
   SECTION 4. Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the Political
Subdivision is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of
Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk.
   SECTION 5. Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in
Section 6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places
of the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations
therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly
signed, attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and
notices thereof as required by law have been given.
   SECTION 6. That it is hereby found and determined that all formal actions of
this Council concerning and relating to the passage of this ordinance were
taken in an open meeting of this Council and that all deliberations of this
Council and of any of its committees that resulted in such formal action were
meetings open to the public in compliance with the law.
   SECTION 6. That this ordinance is hereby declared to be an emergency measure
necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety,
convenience and welfare of the City of Barberton and the inhabitants thereof,
and provided it receives the necessary votes required by the City Charter,
shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and approval;
otherwise to be in full force and effect from and after the earliest period
allowed by law.
Passed ______________________________ 2020
_____________________________    _________________________________
Clerk of Council                        President of Council
             Approved ____________________________ 2020
                _________________________________
                Mayor
CHARTER OF THE CITY OF BARBERTON, OHIO
Editor’s note:
   The Charter of the City of Barberton was approved by the voters on 11-6-
1973. Dates appearing in parentheses, if any, indicate that the section or
subsection was enacted, amended or repealed on the date given.
PREAMBLE
We, the people of the City of Barberton, in the County of Summit and State of
Ohio, grateful to Almighty God for the freedoms we enjoy, in order to secure
for ourselves the benefits of municipal home rule and exercise all the powers
of local self government under the Constitution and laws of the State of Ohio,
do adopt this Charter for our Municipality.
INTERPRETATION OF CHARTER
The article and section headings herein have been inserted for convenient
reference and are not intended to define or limit the scope of, or otherwise
affect, any provision of this Charter.
ARTICLE 1. THE MUNICIPALITY
SECTION 1.01. NAME AND BOUNDARIES.
   The municipal corporation now existing in the County of Summit and Stat of
Ohio and known as the City of Barberton, shall continue to be a body politic
and corporate in perpetuity under the name of the City of Barberton.
   The City shall have the same boundaries that exist on the effective date of
this Charter with power and authority to change its boundaries and annex other
territory in the same manner authorized by the laws of Ohio. Territories that
may be annexed shall immediately become subject to the provisions of this
Charter.
SECTION 1.02. FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The Municipality shall be governed and administered under this Charter by
the municipal Mayor-Council form of government. All powers of the Municipality,
except as otherwise provided by the Constitution of the State of Ohio and this
Charter, shall be vested in an elected Mayor-Council who shall execute the laws
and administer the government of the Municipality.
ARTICLE 2. POWERS OF THE MUNICIPALITY
SECTION 2.01. POWERS.
   The Municipality shall have all the powers, general or special, governmental
or proprietary, that may now or hereafter lawfully be possessed or exercised by
municipal corporations under the Constitution and the general laws of the State
of Ohio.
SECTION 2.02. MANNER OF EXERCISE.
   The powers of this Municipality shall be exercised in the manner prescribed
in this Charter, or to the extent not prescribed herein, in such manner as
shall be provided by ordinance or resolution of Council, and when not
prescribed in this Charter or by ordinance or resolution of Council, such
powers shall be exercised in such manner as may now or hereafter be provided by
the general laws of the State of Ohio.
ARTICLE 3. MAYOR
SECTION 3.01. TERM OF OFFICE.
   The Mayor shall be elected at the general Municipal election in the year
1975, and every fourth (4th) year thereafter, for a term of four (4) years. His
term shall commence, and he shall assume office, on the 1st day of January next
following such election and shall serve until his successor is qualified. He
may be a candidate to succeed himself.
SECTION 3.02. QUALIFICATIONS.
   The Mayor shall have been a qualified elector and a resident of this City
for at least one year immediately prior to the last date on which his
declaration of candidacy or nominating petition may be filed, and shall
continue to be a qualified elector and resident therein during his term. During
his said term of office, he shall not hold any other public office, except that
of notary public or member of the State Militia or Reserve Corps of the Armed
Forces of the United States. (Nov. 6, 1990; Nov. 2, 2010)
SECTION 3.03. REMOVAL.
   Council may remove the Mayor from office for gross misconduct, or
malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in or disqualification for office, or
for conviction while in office for a crime involving moral turpitude, or if
adjudicated legally incompetent, or for a violation of his oath of office, or
persistent failure to perform the duties of his office; provided, however, that
such removal shall not take place without the affirmative vote of two-thirds of
the entire Council; nor until the accused Mayor shall have been notified in
writing of the charge or charges against him at least fifteen (15) days in
advance of the public hearing upon such charge or charges; and he or his
counsel shall have been given an opportunity to be heard, present evidence, and
examine, under oath, all witnesses appearing in support of such charge or
charges.
SECTION 3.04. VACANCY IN THE OFFICE OF MAYOR.
   (a)   Absence. When the Mayor is temporarily absent, inaccessible, or unable
for any cause or reason to perform his duties, the President of Council shall
become the acting Mayor and while so acting shall have and exercise all of the
powers of the Mayor, but he shall not thereby cease to be President of Council.
   (b)   Vacancy. In the event the office of Mayor shall become vacant for any
cause or reason, or if a Mayor-elect fails to qualify for office, the President
of Council shall thereupon become the Mayor, and serve for the unexpired term
or until the beginning of the term of a successor duly elected as hereinafter
provided, and this office as President of Council shall become vacant. In the
event the President of Council is unable to or declines to serve as Mayor,
Council by a vote of a majority of the members of Council shall appoint one of
its members as Mayor to serve for the unexpired term or until the beginning of
the term of the successor duly elected as provided in subsection (d) of this
Section, and the office of the member of Council so appointed shall immediately
become vacant.
   (c)   Absence of President of Council. In the event the President of Council
shall be absent or inaccessible or for any reason unable to perform his duties
as acting Mayor, the Vice-President of the Council, as provided in Section 5.07
of this Charter, shall serve as acting Mayor.
   (d)   Election of Successor in the Event of Vacancy. In the event the office
of Mayor shall become vacant, a successor for the unexpired term shall be
elected as Mayor at a special election to be held on the day of the next
general municipal election, provided that: (1) such election shall occur more
than two (2) years prior to the expiration of the unexpired term, and (2) the
vacancy shall have occurred more than one hundred twenty (120) days prior to
such election. A President of Council or a Councilman who has become Mayor
pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, may be a candidate to succeed
himself. In all other instances in which the office of Mayor shall become
vacant, the provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall apply. (Nov. 5,
1985; Nov. 8, 1988)
SECTION 3.05. DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE MAYOR.
   (a)   Executive Powers. The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of
the City. He shall supervise the administration of the City’s affairs and shall
exercise control over all departments and divisions. He shall be the chief
conservator of the peace within the City and shall cause all laws and
ordinances to be enforced. He shall be responsible for the preparation and
submission of the annual budget indicating an estimate of receipts and
expenditures, and of appropriation measures, and shall at all times keep the
Council fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the City. He
shall cause all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the City or its
inhabitants in any franchise or contract to which the City is a party to be
faithfully kept and performed.
   Except as may be otherwise provided by this Charter and the provisions of
the Civil Service laws of the State of Ohio, the Mayor shall have the power to
appoint, promote, transfer, reduce, or remove any officer or employee of the
City except those required by this Charter to be elected.
      Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, the Mayor shall execute on behalf
of the City all contracts, conveyances, evidences of indebtedness, and all
other instruments to which the City is a party. He shall have custody of the
seal of the City and may affix it to all of said instruments, but the absence
of the seal shall not affect the validity of any such instrument.
      The Mayor shall serve as Chairman of the Board of Control as established
by this Charter in Section
4.01 and he shall be recognized as the official and ceremonial head of the City
government by the Governor for military purposes and by the courts for the
purpose of serving civil processes.
      He shall recommend to Council such measures as he deems necessary or
expedient for the welfare of the City and shall keep Council advised of the
condition and future of the City.
   (b)   Legislative Powers. The Mayor shall attend Council meetings but shall
have no vote therein. He shall have the right to recommend and introduce
legislation and to take part in the discussion of all matters coming before
Council.
      Every ordinance or resolution adopted by Council shall be signed by the
President of Council or other presiding officer, attested by the Clerk of
Council, and presented promptly to the Mayor for consideration before it goes
into effect. If the Mayor approves such ordinance or resolution, he shall sign
and return it to the Clerk of Council within ten (10) days after its adoption
by Council, but if he does not approve it, he shall return it to Council within
said ten (10) days with his written objections, by delivery to the Clerk of
Council, which objections shall be entered in full on the journal of the
Council. The Mayor may approve or disapprove the whole or any item of an
ordinance or resolution appropriating money, but otherwise his approval or
disapproval shall be addressed to the entire ordinance or resolution. If he
does not return an ordinance or resolution within said ten day period, it shall
take effect in the same manner as if he had signed it. When the Mayor has
disapproved an ordinance or resolution, or a part or item thereof as herein
provided, the Council shall, not later than its next regular meeting, proceed
to reconsider it, and if upon reconsideration the ordinance or resolution or
part or item thereof be approved by the affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of
the entire Council, it shall then take effect as if it had received the
approval of the Mayor.
   (c)   Judicial Powers. The Mayor shall have all the judicial powers granted
by this Charter, the ordinances of the City, and the general laws of the State
of Ohio.
ARTICLE 4. ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS
SECTION 4.01. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   A Department of Public Safety, a Department of Public Service, a Department
of Finance, and a Department of Law are hereby established, and the Council
shall provide by ordinance for their organization. The Council may establish by
ordinance additional departments or divisions and, except for the Departments
of Public Service, Public Safety, Finance, and Law, may combine or abolish
departments or divisions.
   Any department head, as defined by ordinance (Ord. 187-2004. Passed 11-22-
04), hired after November 2, 2004, must reside, or must become a resident of
the City of Barberton within six (6) months of said appointment, and must
remain a resident for the period during which said position is occupied. If
said appointee refuses to comply with the six-month residency rule and/or fails
to remain a resident of the City of Barberton during the period of time he/she
holds said position, termination of the appointee shall ensue.
   A Board of Control is hereby established and shall consist of three (3)
members: the Mayor, as chairman, the Director of Finance; and the Director of
Law. The function of the Board of Control shall be the awarding of all
contracts to which the City is a party, except as otherwise provided in this
Charter. (Nov. 7, 1995; Nov. 2, 2004)
SECTION 4.02. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SERVICE.
   There shall be a Director of Public Service who shall be the head of the
Department of Public Service. He shall be appointed by and shall serve at the
pleasure of the Mayor. The Director of Public Service shall have charge of all
public works and improvements and the construction thereof, and of all
engineering and inspection in connection therewith. He shall be charged with
the construction, improvement, repair and maintenance of streets, sidewalks,
alleys, lanes, bridges; of water mains, pumps, systems, pipes, purification and
filtration plants, and the water distribution system; of sewers, sewage
systems, drains, ditches, culverts, streams, watercourses; and of all public
buildings and other public places belonging to the Municipality or dedicated to
public use, including oversight of information technology (IT) used in all
public buildings and other public places belonging to the Municipality. He
shall manage and control market houses, sewage treatment plants, waterworks,
and all public utilities of the Municipality supported in whole or in part by
taxation, and shall enforce all the obligations of privately owned or operated
public utilities enforceable by the Municipality. He shall have charge of the
making and preservation of all surveys, maps, plans, drawings and estimates for
public work; the cleaning, resurfacing, repairing, sprinkling and lighting of
streets and public places; the collection and disposal of waste and the
preservation of all property belonging to the Municipality and pertaining to
the functions thereof. He shall perform such other duties, consistent with his
office, as may be required by this Charter, by ordinance, or as directed by the
Mayor.
   (a)   Division of Building Inspection. There shall be within the Department
of Public Service a Division of Building Inspection under the direction of a
Building Commissioner, who shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall be under
the supervision of the Director of Public Service. He shall carry out the
duties of a Building Commissioner as provided by ordinance or, if not by
ordinance, as provided by general law. This shall be an unclassified position.
   (b)   Division of Engineering. There shall be within the Department of
Public Service a Division of Engineering under the direction of the City
Engineer who shall be a registered State of Ohio professional civil engineer,
and who shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall be under the supervision of
the Director of Public Service. He shall carry out the duties of City Engineer
as provided by ordinance or, if not by ordinance, as provided by general law.
This shall be an unclassified position.
   (c)   Division of Utilities. There shall be within the Department of Public
Service a Division of Utilities under the direction of a Superintendent of
Utilities, who shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall be under the
supervision of the Director of Public Service. He shall carry out the duties of
a Superintendent of Utilities as provided by ordinance or, if not by ordinance,
as provided by general law. This shall be an unclassified position.
      To be eligible for appointment, the applicant must hold a college degree
in science or engineering with broad experience in operation and maintenance of
waterworks and wastewater works. Courses in chemistry and sanitary engineering
are desirable, together with management ability. (Nov. 4, 1980; Nov. 7, 1995;
Nov. 4, 2008; Nov. 3, 2015)
SECTION 4.03. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY.
   There shall be a Director of Public Safety who shall be the head of the
Department of Public Safety. He shall be appointed by and shall serve at the
pleasure of the Mayor. The Director of Public Safety shall make all necessary
rules and regulations for the government of the Department of Public Safety and
the several divisions thereof, and he shall be charged with the duty of
enforcing all police, health, safety, and sanitary regulations that may be
prescribed by ordinances or rules of the City or the general laws of the State
of Ohio. He shall perform such other duties, consistent with his office, as may
be required by this Charter, by ordinance, or as directed by the Mayor.
   (a)   Division of Police. There shall be within the Department of Public
Safety a Division of Police under the direction of a Chief of Police. This
division shall consist of a Chief of Police and such other officers, patrolmen,
and personnel as provided by ordinance, all of whom shall be appointed by the
Director of Public Safety in accordance with the Civil Service provisions of
this Charter.
   (b)   Division of Fire. There shall be within the Department of Public
Safety a Division of Fire under the direction of a Fire Chief. This division
shall consist of a Fire Chief and such other officers, firemen, and personnel
as provided by ordinance, all of whom shall be appointed by the Director of
Public Safety in accordance with the Civil Service provisions of this Charter.
SECTION 4.04. DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE.
   There shall be a Director of Finance who shall be head of the Department of
Finance. The City Auditor, elected at the 1971 general Municipal election, and
the City Treasurer, elected at the 1973 general Municipal election, shall carry
out their duties as provided by general law until the expiration of their
respective terms of office, at which times these offices shall be abolished.
   At the general Municipal election to be held in 1975 and every fourth (4th)
year thereafter, the Director of Finance shall be elected for a term of four
(4) years. His term shall commence and he shall assume office on the first day
of January next following his election. He may be a candidate to succeed
himself.
   As of January 1, 1978 there shall also be an assistant Director of Finance
who shall be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the Director of
Finance. He shall carry out all duties prescribed to him by the Director of
Finance and shall be responsible for the operation of the Department of Finance
in the absence of the Director of Finance. This shall be an unclassified
position.
   (a)   Qualifications. The Director of Finance shall have been a qualified
elector and a resident of this City for at least one (1) year immediately prior
to the last date on which his declaration of candidacy or nominating petition
may be filed, and shall continue to be a qualified elector and resident therein
during his term. During his said term of office, he shall not hold any other
public office except that of notary public or member of the State Militia or
reserve Corps of the Armed Forces of the United States.
      The Director of Finance shall further have the following minimum
qualifications: He shall be a person who has had at least two years experience
in corporate, business, municipal, county, state or federal finance in a
management level.
      The provisions of Section
11.02 of this Charter shall prevail with regard to the presently employed
Director of Finance, and said officer’s rights and privileges shall be
preserved.
   (b)   Removal. Council may remove the Director of Finance from office for
gross misconduct, or malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in or
disqualification for office, or for conviction while in office for a crime
involving moral turpitude, or if adjudicated legally incompetent, or for a
violation of his oath of office or persistent failure to perform the duties of
his office; provided, however, that such removal shall not take place without
the affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the entire Council; nor until the
accused Director of Finance shall have been notified in writing of the charge
or charges against him at least fifteen (15) days in advance of a public
hearing upon such charge or charges and he or his counsel shall have been given
an opportunity to be heard, present evidence, and examine, under oath, all
witnesses appearing in support of such charge or charges.
   (c)   Powers and Duties. The Director of Finance shall be the head of the
Department of Finance and fiscal officer of the Municipality. He shall keep the
financial records of the Municipality, exhibiting accurate statements of all
moneys received and expended, of all property owned by the Municipality and of
all taxes and assessments. He shall be the custodian of all public money of the
Municipality, shah keep and preserve such money in the place or places
authorized by ordinance, and shall disburse the same as may be required by law
or ordinance. He shall not allow the amount set aside for any appropriation to
be overdrawn or drawn for any other purpose. He shall examine and audit the
accounts of all other officers, employees and departments. He shall require
evidence that the amount of any claim presented to him is due. He shall be
responsible for the preparation and submission of appropriation measures and
shall assist the Mayor and Council in the preparation of estimates, budgets and
other financial matters and at all times keep the Mayor and Council fully
advised as to the financial condition and needs of the Municipality. He shall
perform all other duties that may now or hereafter be imposed upon city
auditors or treasurers under the general laws of the State of Ohio, unless
otherwise provided by this Charter or by ordinance of Council, and shall
perform such other duties, consistent with his office, as may be required by
this Charter, by ordinance of Council, or as directed by the Mayor.
   (d)   Vacancy. In the event the office of the Director of Finance shall
become vacant for any cause or reason, the Mayor, with the approval of a
majority of Council, shall choose his successor to serve his unexpired term, or
until the beginning of the term of a successor duly elected as provided in
subsection (e) of this section.
   (e)   Election of Successor in the Event of Vacancy. In the event the office
of Director of Finance shall become vacant, a successor for the unexpired term
shall be elected as Director of Finance at a special election to be held on the
day of the next general Municipal election, provided that: (1) such election
shall occur more than two (2) years prior to the expiration of the unexpired
term and (2) the vacancy shall have occurred more than one hundred twenty (120)
days prior to such election. A successor who has become Director of Finance
pursuant to this section may be a candidate to succeed himself. In all other
instances in which the office of Director of Finance shall become vacant the
provisions of subsection (d) of this section shall apply.
(Nov. 3, 1981; Nov. 1, 1995; Nov. 2, 2010)
SECTION 4.05. DEPARTMENT OF LAW.
   There shall be a Director of Law who shall be the head of the Department of
Law. Until the commencement of the term of the first Director of Law elected
under this Charter, the City Solicitor elected at the November 1971 general
Municipal election or any successor appointed to fill a vacancy in that office
in the manner provided by general law shall continue to carry out the duties of
that office. The office of City Solicitor shall be abolished by this Charter on
December 31, 1975 at 11:59 p.m.
   At the general Municipal election to be held in the year 1975 and every
fourth (4th) year thereafter, the Director of Law shall be elected for a term
of four (4) years. His term shall commence and he shall assume office, on the
first day of January next following his election. He may be a candidate to
succeed himself.
   (a)   Qualifications. The Director of Law shall be an attorney at law duly
admitted to the practice of law in the State of Ohio. He shall have been a
resident of the City of Barberton for at least one (1) year immediately prior
to the last date on which his declaration of candidacy or nominating petition
may be filed, and shall continue to be a qualified elector and resident during
his term. During his said term of office he shall not hold any other public
office except that of notary public or member of the State Militia or Reserve
Corps of the Armed Forces of the United States.
   (b)   Removal. Council may remove the Director of Law from office for gross
misconduct, or malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in or disqualification
for office, or for conviction while in office for a crime involving moral
turpitude, or if adjudicated legally incompetent, or for a violation of his
oath of office or persistent failure to perform the duties of his office;
provided, however, that such removal shall not take place without the
affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the entire Council or until the accused
Director of Law shall have been notified in writing of the charge or charges
against him at least fifteen (15) days in advance of a public hearing upon such
charge or charges and he or his counsel shall have been given an opportunity to
be heard, present evidence, and examine, under oath, all witnesses appearing in
support of such charge or charges.
   (c)   Powers and Duties. The Director of Law shall prepare all contracts,
bonds, and other instruments in writing in which the City is concerned. He
shall be the chief legal adviser of all offices, departments, commissions,
boards, agencies, officers, and employees of the City in the matters relating
to their official powers and duties. He shall represent the City in all legal
proceedings and shall serve as Prosecuting Attorney of the Municipal Court.
Further, it shall be his duty to perform all services incident to this office
as may be required by statute, by this Charter, or by ordinance.
   (d)   Vacancy. In the event the office of the Director of Law shall become
vacant for any cause or reason, the Mayor, with the approval of a majority of
Council shall choose his successor to serve his unexpired term, or until the
beginning of the term of a successor duly elected as provided in subsection (e)
of this section.
   (e)   Election of Successor in the Event of Vacancy. In the event the office
of Director of Law shall become vacant, a successor for the unexpired term
shall be elected as Director of Law at a special election to be held on the day
of the next general Municipal election, provided that: (1) such election shall
occur more than two (2) years prior to the expiration of the unexpired term and
(2) the vacancy shall have occurred more than one hundred twenty (120) days
prior to such election. A successor who has become Director of Law pursuant to
this section may be a candidate to succeed himself. In all other instances in
which the office shall become vacant, the provisions of subsection (d) of this
section shall apply.
      In all other instances in which the office shall become vacant, the
provisions of subsection (d) of this section shall apply.
   (f)   Charter Correction in Form Only. The Law Director shall be authorized
to make typographical corrections to or changes or deletions in, as well as
changes in the form of, the Charter; however, the changes shall relate to
matters of form only. Any such modification, change, or correction shall, in
all cases, be approved by resolution of Council, prior to going into effect. In
no event shall any such modification, change, or correction affect the
construction, meaning, substance, or intent of the Charter as adopted and
amended by the people.
      The Law Director may correct obvious misspellings and typographical
errors.
      The Law Director may divide the text of any section or paragraph into
shorter paragraphs or subparagraphs and letter or number the same to improve
clarity and ease of reference.
      The Law Director may renumber the sections and rearrange their order to
provide:
         (1)   More coherent grouping of sections related in subject matter;
and
         (2)   Continuous, consecutive numbering of sections.
      Upon the adoption of any amendment that creates or abolishes an office or
offices or changes the powers or duties of any officer or agency of the City,
the Law Director shall make necessary correlative changes in existing sections
that refer to such offices, officers, or agencies by deleting therefrom, as the
case may be, the name of the office created or the title of the officer or
agency then having such powers or duties. (Nov, 5, 1985; Nov. 6, 1990; Nov. 7,
1995; Nov. 2, 2010)
ARTICLE 5. COUNCIL
SECTION 5.01. POWERS.
   The legislative power of the City, except as otherwise provided by this
Charter and by the Constitution of the State of Ohio, shall be vested in the
Council.
SECTION 5.02. NUMBER AND TERM.
   The Council shall be composed of nine (9) members, two (2) of whom shall be
elected at large, six (6) of whom shall be elected from wards, and the
President of Council. For purposes of the first election for members under this
Charter and until changed by ordinance, the aforesaid wards shall be the wards
in effect on the effective date of this Charter.
   Members of Council shall be elected at large or from their respective wards
at general Municipal elections for staggered terms of four (4) years each, the
members of Council at large being elected as a group at one general Municipal
election and the members from wards being elected at the next such election,
and shall serve until their successors are elected and assume office. They may
be candidates to succeed themselves.
   At the general Municipal election to be held in the year 1989 and every
fourth (4th) year thereafter the two (2) members of Council-at-Large and the
President of Council shall each be elected for a term of four (4) years.
   All members of Council shall qualify for office by giving any required bond
and taking the oath of office following the official certification by the
election authorities of their election and shall assume office on the first day
of January next following their election. (Nov. 8, 1988)
SECTION 5.03. QUALIFICATIONS.
   All members of Council including the President of Council shall be qualified
electors for at least one (1) year and shall have been residents of the
Municipality, and members from wards shall have resided in their respective
wards for at least one (1) year immediately prior to the last date on which
their declarations of candidacy or nominating petitions may be filed, and shall
continue to be a resident of the Municipality throughout their terms of office.
No person elected or appointed from a ward as a member of Council shall serve
unless during his term of office he shall be and continue to be a resident of
that ward. A member of Council and the President of Council shall not hold any
other public office, except as otherwise provided in this Charter or by
ordinance enacted thereunder, and except that of notary public or membership in
the State Militia or Reserve Corps of the Armed Forces of the United States.
   Any member of Council or President of Council who shall cease to possess, or
who violates, any of the qualifications herein enumerated shall forfeit his
office, but failure to maintain such qualifications shall not render void or
ineffective any action of Council in which such member has participated.
(Nov. 8, 1988; Nov. 7, 1995)
SECTION 5.04. ORGANIZATION.
   At 7:30 p.m. on the second day of January in the year of 1990 and each even-
numbered year thereafter (or if such date be Saturday or Sunday, then the
following Monday), the Council shall meet in the Council Chamber for the
purpose of organization. The Council shall elect its Vice-President and Clerk
of Council and adopt its own rules, regulations and by-laws except as otherwise
provided in this Charter. (Nov. 8, 1988)
SECTION 5.05. REMOVAL.
   The Council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its own
members. It may remove any member for gross misconduct, or malfeasance,
misfeasance or nonfeasance in or disqualification for office, or for conviction
while in office for a crime involving moral turpitude, or if adjudicated
legally incompetent, or for a violation of his oath of office or persistent
failure to abide by the rules of Council, or absence from five (5) consecutive
regular meetings of the Council unless one (1) or more of such absences shall
have been excused by the Council; provided, however, that such removal shall
not take place without the affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the
remaining members of Council; nor until the accused member shall have been
notified in writing of the charge against him at least fifteen (15) days in
advance of a public hearing upon such charge; and he or his counsel shall have
been given an opportunity to be heard, present evidence, and examine, under
oath, any witness appearing in support of such charge. The accused member shall
not vote on the question of his removal.
SECTION 5.06. VACANCIES IN COUNCIL.
   (a)   Vacancies. In the event the office of any member of Council shall
become vacant for any cause or reason, Council shall, by a majority vote of the
remaining members elected thereto, choose his successor. In the event that
Council fails to elect such a successor on or before the expiration of thirty
(30) days after such vacancy shall have occurred, Council shall be divested of
its power to appoint his successor and the Mayor shall appoint a successor.
Such successor, whether elected by Council or appointed by the Mayor, shall
serve for the unexpired term or until the beginning of the term of a successor
duly elected as hereinafter provided.
   (b)   Election of Successor in the Event of Vacancy, hi the event the office
of any member of Council shall become vacant, a successor for the unexpired
term shall be elected to the office at a special election to be held on the day
of the next general Municipal election, provided that: (1) such election shall
occur more than two (2) years prior to the expiration of the unexpired term,
and (2) the vacancy shall have occurred more than one hundred twenty (120) days
prior to such election. A member of Council who was elected or appointed
according to subsection (a) of this section, may be a candidate to succeed
himself.
SECTION 5.07. PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL AND VICE PRESIDENT.
   The person who shall have been elected to the office of President of Council
at the general election in November 1989 shall serve a four (4) year term
commencing January 1, 1990. The person holding said office may be a candidate
to succeed himself.
   Beginning in January 1990 the Council shall at the time of its organization
choose one of its members as Vice President of Council who shall preside at
meetings of Council in the absence of the President of Council.
   If the Mayor is absent or inaccessible or for any reason is unable to
perform his duties as Mayor, the President of Council shall become the acting
Mayor, and while so acting shall have and exercise all powers of the Mayor, but
he shall not thereby cease to be a member of Council. If the Mayor is unable to
perform his duties as Mayor for a period exceeding sixty (60) days due to a
mental or physical incapacity, Council may pay the President of Council
additional compensation in an amount it deems reasonable while performing the
duties as acting Mayor.
   In the event the President of Council is absent or inaccessible or for any
reason unable to perform his duties as acting Mayor, the Vice President of
Council shall become the acting Mayor, and while so acting shall have all the
powers and duties of the Mayor, but he shall not thereby cease to be a member
of Council.
   In case of vacancy of the office of Mayor, the President of Council shall
forthwith become Mayor and his office as Councilman shall become vacant. If the
office of President of Council becomes vacant, the Vice President of Council
shall forthwith become President of Council in which case the Council seat
vacated by the Vice President of Council shall be filled in the manner provided
in Section 5.06 of the Charter; and the Council shall choose a new Vice
President from its remaining members.
   The President of Council shall have all the powers, duties, functions,
obligations and rights of any other member of Council, but he shall not have
the right to vote unless his vote is necessary to determine the outcome of any
matter before the Council as in the case of a tie vote or when a certain
minimum number of votes are required; shall preside at all meetings of Council;
and shall appoint the various committees of Council, coordinating the work of
the various committees appointed by him. (Nov. 8, 1988; Nov. 7, 1995)
SECTION 5.08. CLERK OF COUNCIL.
   The Clerk of Council, who may hold other employment in the Municipal
government, shall be appointed by Council and may be removed by Council. The
Clerk of Council shall keep an accurate and complete journal of the proceedings
of Council and perform such other duties as Council may require. Council may
employ such other employees as it deems necessary for the proper discharge of
its duties.
SECTION 5.09. COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   Council shall, by ordinance, make provision for the time and place of
regular meetings of Council and the method of calling special meetings of
Council. A majority of the members of Council, excluding the President of
Council, shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business at any
meeting, but a lesser number may adjourn the meeting from time to time and
compel the attendance of absent members in such manner and under such penalties
as may be prescribed by ordinance. At any meeting at which a quorum is present,
any ordinance or resolution may be passed or adopted, or any other action may
be taken, by the affirmative vote of five (5) members of Council unless a
larger number be required by the provisions of this Charter. The Clerk of
Council shall keep a record of its proceedings in a journal in which the yea
and nay vote of each Councilman voting on an ordinance, resolution, or other
measure shall be recorded. All meetings of Council shall be open to the public
as provided in Section 121.22 of the Ohio Revised Code or otherwise by general
law, and its journal shall be available for public inspection at all reasonable
times. (Nov. 8, 1988; Nov. 6, 1990; Nov. 5, 1996; Nov. 4, 1997; Nov. 8, 2005)
SECTION 5.10. LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURE.
   All legislative action of Council shall be by resolution or ordinance
introduced in written or printed form, each of which shall contain no more than
one subject, which subject shall be clearly expressed in its title.
   No resolution or ordinance shall be revised or amended unless the resolution
or ordinance superseding it contains the entire resolution or ordinance so
revised or amended; or the section or sections so revised or amended, and,
having been revised or amended, the original resolution or ordinance, or
section or sections, shall be considered to be repealed.
   An affirmative vote of at least five (5) members of Council shall be
required for the enactment of every resolution or ordinance, unless a larger
number be required by the provisions of this Charter.
   Every resolution or ordinance shall be read at three (3) different, regular
Council meetings, unless Council votes to suspend the rule requiring separate
readings, which reading or readings shall be by title only unless otherwise
directed by a majority vote of Council. Such suspension of the rule shall
require the affirmative vote of at least six (6) members of Council if all
members are present, or the affirmative vote of at least five (5) members if
one or more members are absent.
SECTION 5.11. PUBLIC NOTICE.
   Public notice, as required by law, or by this Charter, or by resolution or
ordinance, shall be given resolutions, ordinances, statements, measures,
orders, proclamations, and reports in the manner determined by Council; except
that if public posting be selected as the medium, then not less than six (6)
public places in the Municipality shall be established for such public posting.
   Council shall cause each resolution and ordinance to be given public notice
commencing not later than seven (7) days after its first reading in the event
that the rule requiring three (3) readings is not suspended; and within seven
(7) days, like public notice shall also be given each resolution and ordinance
after its adoption and approval by the Mayor, or upon the expiration of the
time within which it may be vetoed by the Mayor, or upon its passage after veto
by the Mayor, as the case may be.
SECTION 5.12. EFFECTIVE DATE OF RESOLUTIONS AND ORDINANCES.
   Each resolution or ordinance providing for the appropriation of money, or
for an annual tax levy, or for improvements petitioned for by the owners of a
majority of the front footage of property to be benefitted and specially
assessed therefor, and any emergency resolution or ordinance necessary for the
immediate preservation of public peace, health or safety, shall take effect,
unless a later date be specified therein, upon its approval by the Mayor, or
upon the expiration of the time within which it may be vetoed by the Mayor, or
upon its passage after veto by the Mayor, as the case may be. Such legislative
action is subject to the referendum provisions of Section
8.02 of this Charter.
   No other resolution or ordinance shall become effective until thirty (30)
days after its approval by the Mayor, or upon the expiration of the time within
which it may be vetoed by the Mayor, or upon its passage after veto by the
Mayor, as the case may be.
SECTION 5.13. EMERGENCY RESOLUTIONS AND ORDINANCES.
   Each emergency resolution or ordinance shall contain a statement of the
necessity for such emergency action, and its enactment shall require the
affirmative vote of at least six (6) members of Council if all members are
present, or the affirmative vote of at least five (5) members if one or more
members are absent.
   No action of Council authorizing the surrender of joint exercise of any of
its powers or in granting any franchise, or in the enactment, amendment, or
repeal of any zoning or building resolution or ordinance, or in the changing of
any ward boundaries, or in authorizing any change in the boundaries of the
Municipality shall be enacted as an emergency measure.
SECTION 5.14. COMPENSATION AND BONDS.
   Council shall fix the compensation of the Mayor, and each officer and
employee, or members of any board or commission of the Municipality, whether
elected or appointed, except as specifically prohibited otherwise in this
Charter. In no event shall an elected official be entitled to severance pay.
   Not less than one hundred twenty (120) days immediately preceding the date
of the next Municipal election, the compensation of the Mayor and all other
elected officials shall be fixed for the next term and shall not thereafter be
changed with respect to such term.
   Council may authorize the payment or reimbursement of expenses incurred by
any officer or employee, or member of any board or commission of the
Municipality, for traveling or other expenses incidental to the authorized
furtherance of the interests of the Municipality.
   The Mayor, Director of Finance, Director of Public Service and such other
officials or employees, or members of boards or commissions as Council may by
resolution or ordinance require, shall give bond in such amount and with such
surety as may be approved by Council. The premium on such bonds shall be paid
by the Municipality. (Nov. 8, 1988; Nov. 7, 1995; Nov. 3, 2015)
SECTION 5.15. VACATION OR SALE OF PARK PROPERTY.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Charter, including, but not
limited to, Section 6.01(b), Council, by passage of an ordinance, shall submit
any ordinance to vacate or sell any portion of real property owned and used by
the City for park and recreational purposes to the electors on the date fixed
in the ordinance and, if not so fixed, at the general election in any year
occurring more than ninety (90) days from the passage of said ordinance. If
such proposal shall be approved by two-thirds (2/3) of the electors voting
thereon, it shall be effective as an ordinance on the fifth (5th) day after the
day on which the Board of Elections certifies the official results thereof.
(Nov. 3, 1998)
ARTICLE 6. BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
SECTION 6.01. PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (a)   Membership and Organization. There is hereby established a Planning
Commission which shall consist of a total of five (5) citizen members who shall
be electors of the Municipality, not holding other Municipal office or
appointment. The Mayor shall appoint each member of the Planning Commission,
with confirmation by a majority of Council, for a term of four (4) years to
serve without compensation unless otherwise provided by ordinance.
      Any vacancy occurring during the term of any member shall be filled for
the unexpired term in the manner authorized for an original appointment.
      The Commission shall choose from its five (5) members a Chairman,
Secretary and such other officers as it shall deem necessary, shall make its
own rules and regulations, and shall keep a journal of its proceedings.
      The Commission shall appoint or reappoint its officers at its regular
meeting in January of each year.
      The Commission shall, at its first meeting in January of each year, adopt
a schedule of meeting dates for the calendar year. The Commission shall
schedule at least one (1) meeting in each of not fewer than eleven (11) months
in each year. Meetings shall be open to the public and a record shall be kept
showing the vote of each member on each question. A majority of the voting
membership of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business. The affirmative vote of three (3) voting members of the Commission
shall be necessary for any official action.
      The Mayor, the Director of City Planning, and a member of Council
selected annually by Council from its committee having responsibility for
planning and zoning matters, shall be ex-officio members of the Commission and
shall have all the powers, duties and rights of any other member of the
Commission except that they shall not have the right to vote on any issue.
   (b)   Powers and Duties. The Commission shall appoint and provide for the
duties of a Director of City Planning who shall serve at the pleasure of the
Commission. The Commission may provide for such other employees as are
necessary for the execution of its duties. Such other full time employees
authorized by the Commission shall be certified and classified under Civil
Service rules and regulations.
      Council shall appropriate sufficient funds each year to carry out the
planning and zoning provisions of this Charter.
      The Planning Commission shall act as the platting Commissioners of the
Municipality, and as such it shall have control of planning and shall provide
regulations relating to the platting of all lands within the Municipality so as
to secure the harmonious development thereof in accordance with the official
master plan for the entire Municipality.
      It shall make such regulations as it deems necessary as to the manner in
which streets and other public ways shall be graded and improved and the manner
in which and the extent to which water, sewer and other utility mains, piping
or other facilities shall be installed, and in addition may establish any other
conditions precedent to the approval of a proposed plat.
      The Planning Commission shall maintain a comprehensive general plan to be
known as the official master plan which shall provide for the overall
development of the Municipality and shall review said plan periodically and may
revise the same as it deems necessary.
      The Commission may make, review, and revise such other plans and maps of
the whole or any portion of the Municipality, where said plans or maps, in the
opinion of the Commission, bear a reasonable relation to the planning of the
Municipality, provided that said plans or maps are not found to be in conflict
with an approved comprehensive general plan.
      It shall have such powers as may be conferred upon it by ordinance of
Council concerning the plan, design, location, removal, relocation, and
alteration of any public building or structure or any building or structure
located on public streets or property; the location, relocation, widening,
extension and vacation of streets, alleys, public ways, parks, playgrounds,
recreation areas, parkways, and other public places; the regulation and
restriction of the location of buildings and other structures and of premises
to be used for trade, industry, residence, or other specified uses; the
regulation and limitation of height of buildings and other structures to be
erected or altered; the regulation of the bulk and location of buildings and
other structures to be erected or altered, including the percentage of lot
occupancy, setback building lines, and the area of yards, courts and other open
spaces; the zoning and rezoning of the Municipality for any lawful purpose; and
such other powers as now or may hereafter be conferred upon it by ordinances or
by the general law to the extent not inconsistent with this Charter or such
ordinances.
   (c)   Mandatory Referral. No public building, street, boulevard, parkway,
park, playground, dock, bridge, tunnel, publicly or privately owned utility or
part thereof shall be constructed or authorized to be constructed in the
Municipality; nor shall any street, avenue, parkway, boulevard, or alley be
opened for any purpose whatsoever; nor shall any street, avenue, parkway,
boulevard, or alley be widened, narrowed, relocated, vacated, or its use
changed, or any ordinance referring to zoning or other regulations controlling
the use or development of land be adopted unless and until the action proposed
to be taken, or the ordinance or regulation proposed to be adopted, shall have
been submitted to the Planning Commission for report and recommendation. Any
matter so referred to the Planning Commission shall be acted upon by it within
sixty (60) days from the date of referral unless an additional period of time
not to exceed thirty (30) days is provided by Council. If the Planning
Commission shall fail to make a report and recommendation on such matter within
the time allotted, it shall be deemed to have approved such matter. Any
resolution, ordinance or order, or any part of provision thereof, disapproved
by formal action of the Planning Commission shall require a two-thirds (2/3)
vote of the entire Council’s voting membership for adoption or authorization.
   (d)   Qualification for Director. The Director of City Planning shall have
at least the following minimum qualifications at the time of original
appointment to the position of Director: Bachelor degree in planning or a
related field, as recognized by the American Planning Association. In the event
such certifications are revised or discontinued, the Commission shall designate
or provide for equivalent certification. (Nov. 5, 1985; Nov. 5, 1996; Nov. 7,
2000; May 2, 2006)
SECTION 6.02. BOARD OF ZONING AND BUILDING APPEALS.
   (a)   Membership and Organization. There is hereby established a Board of
Zoning and Building Appeals which shall consist of the Director of Public
Service who shall serve as Chairman of this Board, and six (6) electors of the
City holding no other public office. Six (6) members shall be appointed by the
Mayor, with confirmation by a majority of Council, to serve without
compensation for a term of six (6) years; except that of original appointments
for terms beginning January 1, 1974, one (1) shall be appointed for a term of
one (1) year, one (1) for a term of two (2) years, one (1) for a term of three
(3) years, one (1) for a term of four (4) years, one (1) for a term of five (5)
years, and one (1) for a term of six (6) years. The Board of Zoning Appeals and
Board of Building Appeals heretofore existing shall be abolished on the
effective date of this Charter.
      The Building Commissioner, the Director of City Planning, and a member of
Council selected annually by Council from its committee, having responsibility
for planning and zoning matters shall be ex-officio members of the Board of
Zoning and Building Appeals, and shall have all of the powers, duties, and
rights of the other members, except they shall have no voting rights on issues
before the Board.
      Any vacancy occurring during the term of any member of the Board of
Zoning and Building Appeals shall be filled for the unexpired term in the
manner authorized for the original appointment.
   (b)   Jurisdiction. The Board of Zoning and Building Appeals shall have the
power to hear and decide appeals for exceptions to, and variances in the
application of resolutions, ordinances, regulations, measures, and orders of
administrative officials or agencies governing zoning and building in the
Municipality, as may be required to afford justice and avoid unreasonable
hardship, subject to such reasonable standards as shall be prescribed by
Council, and such other powers as may be granted to it by Council.
   (c)   Meetings and Procedure. Meetings shall be held at the call of the
Chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. Meetings shall be
open to the public and a record shall be kept showing the vote of each member
on each question. Procedure before the Board of Zoning and Building Appeals
shall be in accordance with ordinance of Council or rules or regulations
established by the Board, not inconsistent therewith.
   (d)   Appeals to the Board. A written appeal may be submitted to the Board
of Zoning and Building Appeals within twenty (20) days after refusal of the
issuing authority to issue a zoning or building permit.
      The Board of Zoning and Building Appeals shall hold a public hearing on
each appeal and shall give ten (10) days public notice of the time and place of
the public meeting in a newspaper of general circulation in the City.
      Written notice of the hearing shall also be sent by the Board, by first
class mail, at least ten (10) days before the date of the public hearing, to
the owners of property contiguous to, or across the street from, the area which
is the subject of the appeal. Such written notices shall be mailed to the
addresses of such owners appearing on the current tax duplicate of the County.
Failure of delivery of any such notice shall not invalidate the public hearing.
      Each appeal received by the Board of Zoning and Building Appeals shall be
acted upon by said Board within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the appeal
unless an additional period of time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, is
provided by Council.
      The Board of Zoning and Building Appeals shall perform such other duties
and functions as may be imposed upon it by ordinances and resolutions of
Council.
SECTION 6.03. PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION.
   (a)   Membership and Organization. There is hereby established a Parks and
Recreation Commission which shall consist of five (5) members who are electors
of the City, holding no other public office. Three (3) members shall be
appointed by the Mayor, with confirmation by the majority of Council, to serve
without compensation for the term of five (5) years, except that of original
appointments for terms beginning on January 1, 1974, one (1) shall be appointed
for a term of one (1) year, one (1) for a term of three (3) years, and one (1)
for a term of five (5) years. The remaining two (2) members of the Parks and
Recreation Commission shall be appointed by the Barberton Board of Education
with the confirmation of a majority of Council, and shall consist of one (1)
member of the Board of Education, with the remaining member being a person
appointed by the Board of Education, and shall serve without compensation for
the terms of five (5) years, except that of the original appointments for terms
beginning on January 1, 1974, one (1) shall be for a term of two (2) years and
one (1) for a term of four (4) years, hi any case where the Board of Education
shall fail within sixty (60) days to make the appointments or to fill a vacancy
on the Commission, the Mayor shall make the appointments with confirmation by
Council. The Board of Park Commissioners heretofore existing shall be abolished
on the effective date of this Charter.
      The Mayor and one member of Council selected annually by the Council
shall be ex-officio members of the Parks and Recreation Commission and shall
have all of the powers, duties, and rights of the other members, except they
shall have no voting rights on issues before the Commission.
      The Parks and Recreation Commission shall meet at least monthly and shall
elect a chairman and a secretary at its first meeting each year for a one-year
period. Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled in the same manner as
original appointments. Meetings shall be open to the public and a record shall
be kept showing the vote of each member on each question.
   (b)   Powers and Duties. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall appoint a
Director, and if deemed necessary, an Assistant Director, and such other
employees as are necessary for the execution of its duties, and it shall
control, equip and manage parks, playgrounds, playfields, gymnasiums, swimming
pools, indoor recreation centers, and any lands or buildings owned or used by
the City for park or recreation purposes. The Commission shall also have the
authority to establish fees and charges relative to operation of various
programs and to expend funds received from sources other than Municipal funds.
      The Director and Assistant Director shall serve at the pleasure of the
Parks and Recreation Commission. These shall be unclassified positions. Such
other full-time employees as authorized by the Commission shall be certified
and classified under Civil Service rules and regulations.
   (c)   Qualifications for Director. The Director of Parks and Recreation
should have the following minimum qualifications at the time of his original
appointment to the position of Director: Bachelor degree in Park and Recreation
Administration, Recreation Administration, or Park Management, and
certification as a Parks and Recreation Administrator by the Ohio Parks and
Recreation Association. In the event such certifications are revised or
discontinued, the Commission shall designate or provide for equivalent
certifications.
SECTION 6.04. OTHER COMMISSIONS OR BOARDS.
   (a)   Board of Health. There is hereby established a Board of Health which
shall consist of a total of seven (7) members, five (5) citizen members who
shall be electors of the City holding no other public office or appointment,
the Mayor, and a member of Council selected annually by Council from its
committee having responsibility for health matters. Five (5) members shall be
appointed by the Mayor with confirmation by the majority of Council to serve
without compensation for a period of five (5) years from the date of
appointment, except that of those first appointed one (1) shall serve for five
(5) years, one (1) for four (4) years, one (1) for three (3) years, one (1) for
two (2) years, and one (1) for one (1) year, and thereafter one (1) shall be
appointed each year. A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a
quorum. The Mayor shall be President of the Board by virtue of his office.
   The Board shall have the ability to make recommendations on public health
matters to the Summit County Health District and to the City.
   (b)   Civil Service Commission. There shall be a Civil Service Commission as
provided in Chapter 124 of the Ohio Revised Code or otherwise by general law,
except that the Mayor shall appoint each member of the Civil Service
Commission, with confirmation by a majority of Council.
      The Civil Service Commission shall have the authority to limit
application to the position of Chief and Deputy Chief in the Fire and Police
Service to applicants who possess at least one (1) year of departmental
experience in the City of Barberton above the rank of firefighter or patrolman.
When less than two (2) applicants with the above qualification have applied for
the position of Chief or Deputy Chief in the Fire or Police Service, the Civil
Service Commission shall have the authority to advertise and receive qualified
applicants from outside the service of the City.
         (1)   The Civil Service Commission, may adopt rules and regulations
that establish standards, examinations, rules and credits, and procedures for
appointments and promotions within the Civil Service Commission that differ
from those established by the Ohio Revised Code provided such rules and
regulations are approved by Council.
   (c)   The Plumbing, Electrical, Warm Air Heating, and Air Pollution Control
Advisory Boards, Community Action Council, Traffic Safety, and Boxing and
Wrestling Commissions, Civil Defense and Metropolitan Regional Transit
Authority, hereto established by ordinance of the Council, shall continue to
operate under, and to have the functions, powers and duties set forth in the
provisions of existing ordinances of the Council applicable thereto, except
that the Mayor shall appoint each member of these Boards, with confirmation by
a majority of Council, subject to the right of the Council to amend or repeal
any or all of such provisions by later ordinance at any time, and to transfer,
reassign or delegate such functions, powers and duties, or any part thereof, to
another officer, individual, board, or commission. (Nov. 4, 1980; Nov. 5, 1996;
Nov. 7, 2000; Sept. 10, 2013; Nov. 3, 2015)
SECTION 6.05. CREATION OF NEW BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
   Council shall have the further power to create and establish, by ordinance,
boards and commissions other than those created and established by this
Charter.
SECTION 6.06. REMOVAL.
   Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the Mayor may remove any of
the appointed citizen members of the boards and commissions. Notification of
removal shall be submitted in writing to the person(s) being removed. Said
removal may be overridden by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the entire Council
within thirty (30) days of the notification by the Mayor to the member being
removed.
SECTION 6.07. TIME LIMITATIONS FOR APPOINTMENTS TO BOARDS OR COMMISSIONS.
   Should the Mayor fail to fill a vacancy in a board or commission as provided
in this Charter within forty-two (42) days of receiving notice of said vacancy,
the Council by a majority vote of its membership shall fill said vacancy. (Nov.
5, 1985)
ARTICLE 7. ELECTIONS
SECTION 7.01. TIME FOR HOLDING ELECTIONS.
   General Municipal elections shall be held on the first Tuesday after the
first Monday of November in odd-numbered years. Such other elections shall be
held as may be required by law or authorized by this Charter. Any matter which,
by the terms of this Charter may be submitted to the electors of the City at
any special election, may be submitted at the time of a primary or general
election.
SECTION 7.02. NOMINATING ELECTIONS (PRIMARIES).
   Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, all elections shall be held
and conducted and the results thereof ascertained and certified as provided by
the general laws of the State of Ohio and by the election authorities therein
provided for.
   Candidates for all offices at any general Municipal election under the
provisions of this Charter, with the exception of independent and write-in
candidates, shall be nominated at a primary election, in order to reduce the
cost of the primary election to be held on the first (1st) Tuesday after the
first (1st) Monday in May. The method of nomination shall, be as provided by
general law. (Nov. 6, 1990; Nov. 3, 2020)
ARTICLE 8. INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM, RECALL
SECTION 8.01. INITIATIVE.
   Ordinances and other measures may be proposed by initiative petition and
adopted by election, to the extent and in the manner now hereafter provided by
the Constitution or the laws of the State of Ohio. (Nov. 2, 2010)
SECTION 8.02. REFERENDUM.
   Ordinances and other measures adopted by Council shall be subject to
referendum, to the extent and in the manner now or hereafter provided by the
Constitution or the laws of the State of Ohio.
(Nov. 5, 1985; Nov. 7, 1995; Nov. 2, 2010)
SECTION 8.03. RECALL.
   The electors shall have the power to remove from office by a recall
election, any elected officer of the City. If an elected officer shall have
served six (6) months of his term, a petition demanding his removal may be
filed with the Clerk of Council, who shall note thereon the name and address of
the person filing the petition and the date of such filing, and deliver to such
person a receipt therefor and attach a copy thereof to said petition. Such
petition may be circulated in separate parts, but the separate parts shall be
bound together, numbered, and filed as one instrument. Each part shall contain
the name and office of the person whose removal is sought and a statement in
not more than two hundred (200) words of the grounds for the removal. Such
petition shall be signed by at least that number of electors which equals
twenty percent (20%) of the electors voting at the next preceding regular
Municipal election for the office of the officer sought to be recalled. A
petition for removal of a ward councilman shall be signed by electors of the
ward represented by that councilman. Within ten (10) days after the day on
which such petition shall have been filed, the Clerk shall determine whether or
not it meets the requirements hereof. If the Clerk shall find the petition
insufficient, he shall promptly certify the particulars in which the petition
is defective, deliver a copy of his certificate to the person who filed the
petition, and make a record of such delivery. Such person shall be allowed a
period of twenty (20) days after the day on which such delivery was made in
which to make the petition sufficient. If the Clerk shall find the petition
sufficient, he shall promptly so certify to the Council, shall deliver a copy
of such certificate to the officer whose removal is sought, and shall make a
record of such delivery. If such officer shall not resign within five (5) days
after the day on which such delivery shall have been made, the Council shall
thereupon fix a day for holding a recall election, not less than sixty (60)
days nor more than seventy-five (75) days after the date of such delivery. In
the case of a recall election for a ward councilman the election shall be held
in the ward represented by that councilman. At such recall election, this
question shall be placed upon the ballot: “Shall (naming the officer) be
allowed to continue as (naming the office)?”, with the provision on the ballot
for voting affirmatively or negatively, and in the event a majority of the vote
is negative, such officer shall be considered as removed, his office shall be
deemed vacant, and such vacancy shall be filled as provided in this Charter.
The officer removed by such recall election shall not be eligible for
appointment to the vacancy created thereby.
ARTICLE 9. FRANCHISES
SECTION 9.01. FRANCHISE.
   The Council may by ordinance grant a non-exclusive franchise to any person,
firm or corporation, to construct or operate a public utility on, across,
under, over or above any public street or public real estate within the
Municipality for a period not in excess of twenty (20) years; and it may
prescribe in the ordinance the kind or quality of service or product to be
furnished, the rate or rates to be charged therefor, and such other terms as
Council shall deem conducive to the public interest. Such franchise may be
amended or renewed in the manner and subject to the provisions established by
this Charter for original grant of franchises. No consent of the owner of
property abutting on any public street or public real estate shall be necessary
to the effectiveness of any such grant, amendment, or renewal.
   All such grants, amendments and renewals shall be made subject to the
continuing right of the Council to provide reasonable regulations for the
operation of such utilities with reference to such streets and public real
estate, including the right to require such reconstruction, relocation,
alteration, or removal of structures and equipment used in such streets or
public realty, at the expense of the public utility or public service as shall,
in the opinion of Council, be necessary in the public interest.
SECTION 9.02. EXTENSION BY ANNEXATION.
   Every such grant shall provide that upon the annexation of any territory to
the Municipality the portion of any such utility or service that may be located
within such annexed territory and upon the streets, alleys, or public grounds
thereof, shall thereafter be subject to all the terms of the grant as though it
were an extension made thereunder.
SECTION 9.03. MERGER.
   Should the voters of Barberton and the voters of another municipality or
township approve a merger of the two entities, then and in that event, the
agreement reached by the Merger Study Commission, and approved by the voters of
both communities, shall take precedence over any conflicting provisions of this
Charter. (Nov. 5, 1985)
ARTICLE 10. FINANCES AND TAXATION
SECTION 10.01. GENERAL.
   The provisions of the Constitution and laws of the State of Ohio relating
generally to budgets, appropriations, deposits, expenditures, debts, bonds, the
submission to the electors of bond issues or tax levies, and other fiscal
matters of the Municipality, shall be applicable to the Municipality, except as
modified by or necessarily inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter and
except when provision therefor is made in the Constitution of the State of
Ohio.
SECTION 10.02. CONTRACTS AND PURCHASING.
   Contracts and agreements for furnishing the Municipality with labor and
materials and for the purchase by the Municipality of supplies, materials, and
equipment shall be made after competitive bidding pursuant to plans and
specifications approved by Council, in the manner provided by this Charter and
by ordinance, or, to the extent not so provided, in the manner provided by
general law. Plans and specifications shall be prepared by, or under the
supervision of the Board of Control. The Board of Control shall open bids and
determine the lowest and/or best bidder. The Board of Control shall be entitled
to enter into such contracts and agreements without competitive bidding in such
amounts as may be authorized by general law.
ARTICLE 11. GENERAL
SECTION 11.01. EFFECTIVE DATE OF CHARTER.
   The provisions of this Charter shall become effective January 1, 1974,
except that all officials elected on November 6, 1973, including the President
of Council, shall complete their respective terms except as otherwise provided
in this Charter.
SECTION 11.02. CONTINUATION OF PRESENT OFFICIALS.
   Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, all officers and members of
boards and commissions of the Municipality holding elective office or
appointive office on December 31, 1973, shall continue in office, and in the
performance of their duties until provision shall have been otherwise made in
accordance with this Charter for the performance or discontinuance of the
duties of any such office. When such provision shall have been made, the term
of any such officer or member shall expire and his office be deemed abolished.
The powers which are conferred and the duties which are imposed upon any
officer, commission, board or department of the Municipality under the laws of
the State, or under any ordinance or contract of the Municipality in force on
December 31, 1973, shall, if such office, commission, board, or department is
abolished by this Charter, be thereafter exercised and discharged by the
officer, commission, board, or department upon whom are imposed corresponding
functions, powers, and duties by this Charter or by any ordinance or resolution
thereafter enacted.
SECTION 11.03. CONTINUANCE OF PRESENT EMPLOYEES.
   Every employee of the Municipal government on December 31, 1973, shall
continue in such employment and thereafter shall be subject in all respects to
the provisions of this Charter.
SECTION 11.04. EFFECT OF CHARTER UPON EXISTING LAWS AND RIGHTS.
   The adoption of this Charter shall not affect any preexisting rights of the
Municipality, nor any right or liability or pending suit or prosecution either
on behalf of or against the Municipality nor any franchise granted by the
Municipality nor pending proceedings for the authorization of public
improvements or the levy of assessments therefor. Except as a contrary intent
appears herein, all acts of the Council of this Municipality shall continue in
effect until lawfully amended or repealed.
SECTION 11.05. TRANSFER OF RECORDS AND PROPERTY.
   All records, property, and equipment whatsoever of any office, commission,
board, or department or part thereof, all the powers and duties of which are
assigned to any office, commission, board, or department shall be transferred
and delivered to the office, commission, board, or department to which such
powers and duties are so assigned. If part of the powers and duties of any
office, commission, board, or department or part thereof are by this Charter
assigned to another office, commission, board, or department, all records,
property, and equipment relating exclusively thereto shall be transferred and
delivered to the office, commission, board, or department to which such powers
and duties are so assigned, as the Mayor shall direct.
SECTION 11.06. OATH OF OFFICE.
   Every officer of the City shall, before assuming the duties of his office,
take and subscribe to an oath or affirmation to support the Constitution of the
United States, the Constitution of the State of Ohio and the Charter of the
Municipality, and faithfully, honestly, and impartially to discharge the duties
of his office. (Nov. 4, 1980)
SECTION 11.07. CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   The standards of ethical conduct and avoidance of conflicts of interest for
all elected and appointed officers, officials, and employees of the City shall
be those established by the general laws of the State of Ohio.
The civil and criminal penalties imposable for violations of such standards
shall be in accordance with the general laws of the State of Ohio. (Nov. 2,
2010)
SECTION 11.08. SAVING CLAUSE.
   The determination that any part of this Charter is invalid shall not
invalidate or impair the force or effect of any other part hereof, except to
the extent that such other part is wholly dependent for its operation upon the
part declared invalid.
SECTION 11.09. MEETINGS OPEN TO THE PUBLIC.
   All regular and special meetings of Council and all boards and commissions
of the Municipal government at which any formal action is to be taken or
decision rendered shall be open to the public as provided in Section 121.11 of
the Ohio Revised Code. (Nov. 5, 1996; Nov. 4, 1997; Nov. 8, 2005)
ARTICLE 12. AMENDMENTS TO CHARTER
SECTION 12.01. METHODS AND PROCEDURE.
   The Council may, by affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of its entire
membership, submit to the electors any proposed amendment or amendments to this
Charter; or upon petition signed by not less than ten percent (10%) of the
electors of the Municipality, setting forth any proposed amendment or
amendments to this Charter, the Council shall forthwith submit such proposed
amendment or amendments to the electors in accordance, in each instance, with
the provisions of the Constitution and laws of Ohio now or hereafter in effect.
   If any such proposed amendment or amendments shall be approved by a majority
of the electors voting thereon, it or they shall become a part of this Charter;
except that if two or more inconsistent proposed amendments on the same subject
shall be submitted to the same election, only the one of such amendments
receiving the largest affirmative vote not less than a majority, shall become a
part of the Charter.
SECTION 12.02. CHARTER REVIEW COMMISSION.
The Mayor shall appoint the Charter Review Commission no later than the last
day of February every fifth (5th) year, beginning in 2025. Such appointments
shall be confirmed by Council. The members of the commission shall be seven (7)
qualified electors of the Municipality, no more than four (4) of wholm are
members of the same political party. No member shall hold an elective office,
appointment or employment in the government of this Municipality. The members
of the Charter Review Commission shall serve until their duties as provided
herein are completed. The members shall serve without compensation. The Charter
Review Commission shall, in meetings open to the public, review the Municipal
Charter, and, no later than the third (3rd) Monday in June of the same year,
recommend to Council such amendments, if any, to this Charter, as in its
judgment, are conducive to the public interest. Council may submit to the
electors any such proposed amendments to this Charter in accordance, in each
instance, with the Constitution of Ohio. (Nov. 3, 2020)
PART TWO: ADMINISTRATION CODE
   Chapter
TITLE TWO: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
202.   Code of Ordinances
   
204.   Official Standards
   
206.   Wards and Boundaries
   
208.   Open Meetings
   
210.   Contracts
   
212.   Acquisition and Disposal of Property
   
214.   Compliance with Americans with Disabilities Act
TITLE FOUR: LEGISLATION
   
220.   Council
   
222.   Ordinances and Resolutions
TITLE SIX: ADMINISTRATION
   
230.   Mayor
   
232.   Department of Law
   
234.   Department of Finance
   
236.   Department of Public Safety
   
238.   Division of Police
   
240.   Division of Fire
   
242.   Department of Public Service
   
244.   Division of Building Inspection
   
246.   Division of Engineering
   
248.   Division of Utilities
   
250.   Division of Streets
   
252.   Department of Urban Renewal
   
253.   Department of Human Resources
   
254.   Employees Generally
   
256.   Residential Anti-Displacement and Relocation Plan
TITLE EIGHT: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
   
260.   Planning Commission
   
262.   Board of Zoning and Building Appeals
   
264.   Parks and Recreation Commission
   
266.   Board of Health
   
268.   Civil Service Commission
   
270.   Board of Control
   
272.   Charter Review Commission
   
274.   Tree Commission
   
276.   Barberton Community Foundation
   
278.   Industrial Wastewater Review Board
   
280.   Tax Incentive Review Board
   
282.   Treasury Investment Board
   
284.   Litter Control Advisory Board
   
286.   Beautification Committee
TITLE TEN: JUDICIAL
   
298.   Municipal Court
TITLE TWO: GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 202: CODE OF ORDINANCES
Section
202.01   Designation; citation; headings.
202.02   General definitions.
202.03   Rules of construction.
202.04   Revivor; effect of re-enactment, amendment or repeal.
202.05   Construction of section references.
202.06   Separability.
202.07   Master copies.
202.99   General Code penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Codification in book form, see Ohio R.C. 731.23
   General Offenses Code penalties and sentencing, see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 698
   Imprisonment until fine paid, see Ohio R.C. 1905.30, 2947.14
   Ordinance violations and penalties, see Ohio R.C. 715.67
   Ordinances and resolutions, see ADM. Ch.
222
   Powers of the municipality, see CHTR. Art.
2
   See section histories for similar state law
   Statute of limitations on prosecutions, see GEN. OFF.
606.06
   Traffic Code penalties, see TRAF. Ch.
303
§ 202.01 DESIGNATION; CITATION; HEADINGS.
   This document, consisting of general and permanent legislation relating to
Ohio municipalities in general, together with such general and permanent
legislation of the municipality that Council may wish to include herein, as
revised, arranged, compiled, numbered, codified and printed herewith,
consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be
known, designated and cited as the Code of Ordinances of Barberton, Ohio, for
which designation the term “code of ordinances” may be substituted. Code,
title, chapter and section headings do not constitute any part of the law as
contained in these code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 202.01)
§ 202.02 GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AND. May be read “or”, and “or” may be read “and”, if the sense requires it.
   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject
of an offense, includes not only natural persons, but also every other owner of
property.
   BOND. Includes an undertaking.
   CHILD. Includes child by adoption.
   CITY. The City of Barberton, Ohio.
   COUNCIL. The legislative authority of the municipality.
   COUNTY. Summit County, Ohio.
   FIRE CHIEF. Includes the Chief of the Fire Department if such Fire
Department has been established in the municipality, and shall include the Fire
Prevention Officer if no Fire Department has been established in the
municipality.
   IMPRISONED. The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1.05.
   INTERNET. The international computer network of both federal and non-federal
interoperable packet switched data networks, including the graphical subnetwork
known as the world wide web.
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves or
as a servant, agent or employee.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of incorporeal nature.
   LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY. The legislative authority of the municipality.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Barberton, Ohio.
   OAC. The Ohio Administrative Code.
   OATH. Includes affirmation; and “swear” includes affirm.
   OF UNSOUND MIND. The person lacks the relevant mental capacity.
   OHIO R.C., ORC or REVISED CODE. The Ohio Revised Code.
   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner or
tenant in common of the whole or part of such property.
   PERSON. Includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership and association.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property, except real property.
   PLAN OF SEWERAGE, SYSTEM OF SEWERAGE, SEWER and SEWERS. Includes sewers,
sewage disposal works and treatment plants, and sewage pumping stations,
together with facilities and appurtenances necessary and proper therefor.
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates and interests.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes boards of education; the municipal, county, state
or federal government, its officers, or an agency thereof; or any duly
authorized public official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance or any other place for the sale
of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail; and “certified mail” includes
registered mail.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of the street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   STATE. The State of Ohio.
   STREET. Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts and all other public thoroughfares within the municipality.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of such
premises, alone or with others.
   UNDERTAKING. Includes a bond.
   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
   WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; principals,
agents and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   WRITING. Includes printing.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Include any representation of words, letters, symbols
or figures; this provision does not affect any law relating to signatures.
   YEAR. Twelve consecutive months.
(ORC 1.02, 1.05, 1.44, 1.59, 701.01) (Prior Code, § 202.02)
§ 202.03 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Common and technical use. Words and phrases shall be read in context
and construed according to the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and
phrases that have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by
legislative definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
(ORC 1.42)
   (B)   Singular and plural; gender; tense. As used in this code of
ordinances, unless the context otherwise requires.
      (1)   The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the
singular.
      (2)   Words of one gender include the other genders.
      (3)   Words in the present tense include the future tense.
(ORC 1.43)
   (C)   Computation of time.
      (1)   The time within which an act is required by law to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day; except that, when
the last day falls on Sunday or a legal holiday, then the act may be done on
the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal holiday.
      (2)   When a public office, in which an act required by law is to be
performed, is closed to the public for the entire day that constitutes the last
day for doing the act or before its usual closing time on that day, the act may
be performed on the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal
holiday.
      (3)   LEGAL HOLIDAY, as used in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) above, means
the following days:
         (a)   The first day of January, known as New Year’s Day;
         (b)   The third Monday in January, known as Martin Luther King Jr.
Day;
         (c)   The third Monday in February, known as Washington-Lincoln Day;
         (d)   The day designated in the Act of June 28, 1968, 82 Stat. 250, 5
U.S.C. § 6103, as amended, for the commemoration of Memorial Day;
         (e)   The nineteenth day of June, known as Juneteenth Day;
         (f)   The fourth day of July, known as Independence Day;
         (g)   The first Monday in September, known as Labor Day;
         (h)   The second Monday in October, known as Columbus Day;
         (i)   The eleventh day of November, known as Veteran’s Day;
         (j)   The fourth Thursday in November, known as Thanksgiving Day;
         (k)   The twenty-fifth day of December, known as Christmas Day; and
         (l)   Any day appointed and recommended by the Governor of the state
or the President of the United States as a holiday.
      (4)   If any day designated in this section as a legal holiday falls on a
Sunday, the next succeeding day is a legal holiday.
(ORC 1.14)
      (5)   When an act is to take effect or become operative from and after a
day named, no part of that day shall be included. If priority of legal rights
depends upon the order of events on the same day, such priority shall be
determined by the times in the day at which they respectively occurred.
(ORC 1.15)
      (6)   If a number of months is to be computed by counting the months from
a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding
month as the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there
are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the period ends
on the last day of that month.
(ORC 1.45)
(Prior Code, § 202.03)
§ 202.04 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF RE-ENACTMENT, AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (A)   The repeal of a repealing provision of this code of ordinances does
not revive the provision originally repealed, nor impair the effect of any
saving clause therein.
(ORC 1.57)
   (B)   The re-enactment, amendment or repeal of this code of ordinances does
not, except as provided in division (C) below:
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the provision or any prior action
taken thereunder;
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded or incurred thereunder;
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal; and
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding or remedy in respect of any
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment; and the
investigation, proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced,
and the penalty, forfeiture or punishment imposed, as if the provision had not
been repealed or amended.
   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment for any offense is reduced
by a re-enactment or amendment of this code of ordinances, the penalty,
forfeiture or punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to
this code of ordinances, as amended.
(ORC 1.58)
(Prior Code, § 202.04)
§ 202.05 CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, or of divisions or subdivisions of a
section, such reference shall be construed to mean a violation of any provision
of the section, sections, divisions or subdivisions included in the reference.
   (B)   References in this code of ordinances to action taken or authorized
under designated sections of this code of ordinances include, in every case,
action taken or authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is
superseded by this code of ordinances.
(ORC 1.23)
   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless the subject matter be
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
(ORC 1.55)
(Prior Code, § 202.05)
§ 202.06 SEPARABILITY.
   If any provisions of a section of this code of ordinances or the application
thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not
affect other provisions or applications of the section or related sections
which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to
this end the provisions are severable.
(ORC 1.50) (Prior Code, § 202.06)
§ 202.07 MASTER COPIES.
   The Clerk of Council shall keep one master copy of this code of ordinances
in book form and, in connection therewith or attached thereto in such form and
manner as the Clerk of Council may determine to be most easily available for
ready reference, one copy of all amendments and supplements bearing such code,
title, chapter or section designation as may be proper. If in doubt as to such
designation, the Clerk of Council shall be guided by the advice of the Director
of Law.
(Prior Code, § 202.07) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 202.99 GENERAL CODE PENALTY.
   Whenever, in this code of ordinances or in any ordinance of the
municipality, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an
offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the commission or performance
of such act, or the failure to commit or perform such act, as required, shall,
unless another penalty is provided, be deemed a minor misdemeanor and the
offender shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or non-
compliance occurs or continues, unless otherwise provided.
(Prior Code, § 202.99)
CHAPTER 204: OFFICIAL STANDARDS
Section
204.01   Datum line; grade levels.
204.02   Official flag.
Cross-reference:
   Name and boundaries, see CHTR. §
1.01
   Seal of the city, see CHTR. §
3.05(a)
   State legal holidays, see Ohio R.C. 1.14, 5.20 et seq.
   State standard of time, see Ohio R.C. 1.04
§ 204.01 DATUM LINE; GRADE LEVELS.
   All elevations used by the city are in reference to mean sea level as
determined by the United States Geological Survey.
(Prior Code, § 204.01) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 204.02 OFFICIAL FLAG.
   Council hereby accepts on behalf of the city, the flag designed and prepared
by the Crescent Club, and declares that this flag shall be the official flag of
the city.
(Prior Code, § 204.02) (Res. 408-1975, passed 11-3-1975)
CHAPTER 206: WARDS AND BOUNDARIES
Section
206.01   Establishment.
206.02   First Ward.
206.03   Second Ward.
206.04   Third Ward.
206.05   Fourth Ward.
206.06   Fifth Ward.
206.07   Sixth Ward.
Cross-reference:
   Division into wards, see Ohio R.C. 731.06
   Name and boundaries, see CHTR. §
1.01
   Powers of the municipality, see CHTR. Art.
2
   Voting precincts, see Ohio R.C. 3501.18
§ 206.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The city shall be subdivided into six wards. The boundaries of such wards
shall be fixed in accordance with the map marked “Exhibit B”, attached to Ord.
7-2013, incorporated herein by reference, which is further described in §§
206.02 to
206.07 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 206.01) (Ord. 7-2013, passed 2-25-2013)
§ 206.02 FIRST WARD.
   The First Ward shall contain that territory bounded and described as
follows: beginning at the intersection of Wooster Road W. and Burt Street;
thence northwesterly on the centerline of Burt Street to the centerline of N.
Summit Street; thence northerly on the centerline of N. Summit Street to the
centerline of Mitchell Street; thence westerly on the centerline of Mitchell
Street to the centerline of Newton Avenue; thence southerly on the centerline
of Newton Avenue to the centerline of W. Way Street; thence westerly along the
W. Way Street to the centerline of Madison Avenue; thence northerly to the
centerline of Huntsberger Drive extended; thence northwesterly on the
centerline of Huntsberger Drive extended to the west corporation line; thence
northerly on the west corporation line to the north corporation line; thence
easterly a distance of 762.96 feet along the north corporation line to the west
corporation line; thence in a generally northerly direction along the west
corporation line to the north corporation line; thence easterly along the north
corporation line also known as the south line of property owned by Greenlawn
Memorial Park Cemetery, to the east corporation line; thence southerly along
said east corporation line to the north corporation line; thence in a generally
easterly direction along the north corporation line to the centerline of Mud
Run; thence southerly along the centerline of Mud Run to the north corporation
line; thence in a generally easterly direction along the north corporation line
to the easterly corporation line; thence southerly along the east corporation
line and the centerline of Cordelia Avenue to the centerline of the Ohio Canal;
thence northwesterly along the centerline of the Canal and the corporation
line; thence southerly along the corporation line to its intersection with the
east extension of Fairview Avenue; thence southerly along the east corporation
line to the north line of the Homewood Ranch Allotment (1st Addition); thence
easterly along the north line of said allotment to the southwest corner of Lot
180; thence northerly along the west line of Lot 180 to the northwest corner of
Lot 180; thence easterly along the north line of Lot 180 to the northeast
corner of Lot 179; thence southerly along the east line of Lot 179 to the
northwest corner of Lot 154 of the Homewood Ranch Allotment; thence easterly
along the north line of Lot 154 to the northeast corner of Lot 155; thence
southerly along the east line of Lot 155 to the centerline of Homewood Avenue;
thence easterly along the centerline of Homewood Avenue to the centerline of E.
State Street; thence southeasterly along the centerline of E. State Street to
the centerline of E. Huston Street; thence westerly along the centerline of E.
Huston Street to the centerline of N. Van Buren Avenue; thence southwesterly
along the centerline of N. Van Buren Avenue to the centerline of E. Tuscarawas
Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of E. Tuscarawas Avenue to the
centerline of the Ohio Canal; thence northeasterly along the centerline of the
Canal to the centerline of Fairview Avenue; thence northwesterly along the
centerline of Fairview Avenue to the centerline of High Street; thence north-
northeasterly along the centerline of High Street to the centerline of Wooster
Road North; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Wooster Road North to
the place of beginning.
(Prior Code, § 206.02) (Ord. 7-2013, passed 2-25-2013)
§ 206.03 SECOND WARD.
   The Second Ward shall contain that territory bounded and described as
follows: beginning at the intersection of the Homewood Avenue and E. State
Street thence easterly along the north line of Homewood Avenue to the east
corporation line; thence southerly 761.82 feet along the east corporation line
to a point; thence S. 87 07’ 17” E. along said corporation line a distance of
1,524.27 feet to the east line of Lot 4, Tract 15, Coventry Township; thence S.
03 15’ 33” W. along said lot line (also being the present corporation line of
the City of Akron) 400.98 feet to a point on the northerly line of Tuscarawas
Avenue Extension (R/W 50’) (also the present corporation line of the City of
Akron and the City of Barberton); thence S. 82 36’ 00” E. along said northerly
line 365 feet to a point; thence southeasterly along said northerly line and
the arc of a circle curving to the right (central angle = 78 53’ 48”, radius =
388.53 feet, chord = 493.73 feet, chord bearing N. 43 09’ 06” W.) a distance of
535.01 feet to a point; thence N. 86 17’ 48” E. along the present corporation
line of the City of Akron and the City of Barberton a distance of 298.23 feet
to a point on the east line of Rose Acres Allotment; thence S. 03 12’ 07” W.
along said allotment line also known as the east corporation line of the City
of Barberton, a distance of 2,478.54 feet to the south line of Robinson Avenue;
thence westerly along the south line of Robinson Avenue to the centerline line
of State Street; thence northwesterly to the centerline of Robinson Avenue;
thence westerly along the centerline of Robinson Avenue to the centerline of
Fifth Street S.E.; thence southerly along the centerline of Fifth Street S.E.
to the centerline of Portsmouth Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline
Portsmouth Avenue to the centerline of Third Street S.E.; thence southerly
along the centerline of Third Street S.E. to the centerline of Lamberton
Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of Lamberton Avenue to the
centerline of First Street S.E.; thence northerly along the centerline of First
Street S.E.; to the centerline of Quincy Avenue; thence westerly along the
centerline of Quincy Avenue to the centerline of S. Van Buren Avenue; thence
northerly along the centerline of S. Van Buren Avenue to the centerline of
Robinson Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of Robinson Avenue to the
centerline of the Ohio Canal; thence northeasterly along the centerline of the
Ohio Canal to the extended centerline of E. Tuscarawas Avenue; thence easterly
along the centerline of E. Tuscarawas Avenue to the centerline of N. Van Buren
Avenue; thence northeasterly along the centerline of N. Van Buren Avenue to the
centerline of E. Huston Street; thence easterly along the centerline of E.
Huston Street to the centerline of E. State Street; thence northwesterly along
the centerline of E. State Street to the place of beginning.
(Prior Code, § 206.03) (Ord. 7-2013, passed 2-25-2013)
§ 206.04 THIRD WARD.
   The Third Ward shall contain that territory bounded and described as
follows: beginning at the intersection of the Ohio Canal with Snyder Avenue;
thence northerly along the centerline of the Ohio Canal to the centerline of E.
Robinson Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of E. Robinson Avenue to
the centerline of S. Van Buren Avenue; thence southerly along the centerline of
Van Buren Avenue to the centerline of Quincy Avenue; thence easterly along the
centerline of Quincy Avenue to the centerline of First Street S.E.; thence
southerly along the centerline of First Street S.E. to the centerline of
Lamberton Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of Lamberton Avenue to
the centerline of Third Street SE; thence northwesterly along the centerline of
Third Street S.E. to the centerline of Portsmouth Avenue; thence easterly along
the centerline of Portsmouth Avenue to the centerline of Fifth Street S.E.;
thence northerly along the centerline of Fifth Street S.E. to the centerline of
E. Robinson Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of Robinson Avenue to
the east right-of-way line of State Street; thence S. 34 40’ 00” E. along the
east right-of-way line of State Street to the south corporation line and the
Coventry Township corporation line; thence westerly along the south corporation
line to the east corporation line; thence southerly along the east corporation
line to the southeast corner of Original Lot 19 and Tract 15, Coventry
Township; thence easterly 293.25 feet to the east corporation line; thence
southerly 1,254.13 feet to the intersection of Lockwood Road; thence westerly
along the centerline of Lockwood Road to a point; thence southerly a distance
of 400 feet to a point; thence westerly a distance of 240 feet to a point;
thence northerly 400 feet to the centerline of Lockwood Road; thence westerly
along the centerline of Lockwood Road a distance of 600.44 feet to the
intersection of Fifth Street S.E. (State Route 619); thence in a generally
northerly and westerly direction along the south corporation line a distance of
2,318.26 feet to the east corporation line; thence southerly along the east
corporation line to a point; thence N. 88 19’ 15” E. a distance of 264 feet to
a point; thence S. 14 17’ 00” E. a distance of 308.57 feet to a point; thence
N. 88 19’ 15” E. a distance of 250.80 feet to a point; thence S. 14 17’ 00” E.
a distance of 874.50 feet to a point; thence N. 88 19’ 15” E. a distance of 371
feet to a point; thence southerly a distance of 1,556 feet to the centerline of
Hametown-Eastern Road (C.H. 55); thence easterly along the centerline of
Hametown-Eastern Road (C.H. 55) a distance of 2,884.46 feet to the centerline
of Van Buren Road (C.H. 60); thence S. 11 15’ 29” E. along the said centerline
of Van Buren Road a distance of 1,094.28 feet to a railroad spike found;
thence, continuing along said centerline of Van Buren Road S. 1 56’ 29” E. a
distance of 61.84 feet to a P.K. nail set on a bridge over the Tuscarawas
River; thence S. 45 26’ 38” E. a distance of 681.15 feet to an angle point,
said point being witnessed by a 5/8” iron pin set on the west bank of said
Tuscarawas River, S. 36 57’ 56” E. a distance of 750.52 feet, said line falling
in the approximate center of said river; thence S. 88 59’ 04” W. a distance of
49.39 feet to a point on the easterly prolongation of the northerly line of
land described in deed to the City of Barberton and recorded in Volume 3816,
Page 17, of Summit County Records, said point falling in the approximate center
of said Tuscarawas River; thence S. 43 40’ 14” E. a distance of 56.12 feet;
thence N. 88 59’ 04” E. a distance of 15.27 feet; thence S. 38 53’ 26” E. a
distance of 140.13 feet; thence S. 46 09’ 56” E. a distance of 130.02 feet;
thence S. 55 40’ 56” E. a distance of 514.68 feet; thence S. 65 29’ 56” E. a
distance of 170.73 feet; thence S. 78 26’ 56” E. a distance of 195.68 feet;
thence S. 38 14’ 56” E. a distance of 230.95 feet; thence S. 88 59’ 04” W. a
distance of 1,972.69 feet to the centerline of Van Buren Road; thence S. 1 59’
29” E. along the centerline of Van Buren Road a distance of 1,232.73 feet to an
angle point in said road; thence S. 1 41’ 56” E. along the centerline of Van
Buren Road a distance of 336.78 feet to a point; thence N. 55 57’ 2” W. a
distance of 115.07 feet to a point; thence along the arc of a curve a distance
of 471.54 feet deflecting to the right and having a radius of 1,361.55 feet, a
chord bearing N. 46 01’ 21” W. a distance of 469.19 feet to a point; thence N.
36 06’ 26” W. a distance of 264.24 feet to a point; thence along the arc of a
curve a distance of 625.43 feet deflecting to the left and having a radius of
1,432.61 feet, a chord bearing N. 48 39’ 46” W. a distance of 620.48 feet to a
point; thence N. 61 13’ 07” W. a distance of 5.45 feet; thence along the arc of
a curve a distance of 1,406.34 feet deflecting to the left and having a radius
of 2,083.33 feet, a chord bearing N. 80 33’ 24” W. a distance of 1,379.79 feet
to a point; thence S. 80 02’ 17” W. a distance of 397.79 feet to a point;
thence along the arc of a curve a distance of 114.03 feet deflecting to the
right and having a radius of 1,853.67 feet, a chord bearing S. 81 52’ 07” W. a
distance of 114.01 feet to a point on the east line of Section 8; thence N. 0
22’ 0” W. along the east line of Section 8, a distance of 435.30 feet to a
point; thence S. 89 30’ 0” W. a distance of 2,816.34 feet to a point; thence N.
0 30’ 0” W. a distance of 2,096.88 feet along the centerline of Fairland Road
(C.H. 61) to the intersection of the north line of Section 8; thence S. 89 57’
00” W. a distance of 2,643.75 feet to a point; thence N. 00 35’ 00” W. a
distance of 600 feet to a point of intersection with the centerline of said
Eastern Road; thence N. 87 14’ 03” E. a distance of 5,471.97 feet to a point;
thence N. 87 33’ 45” E. to the centerline of the Tuscarawas River and the east
corporation line of the City of Norton; thence in a generally northwesterly
direction along the centerline of the Tuscarawas River and the east corporation
line of the City of Norton to the south right-of-way line of the A & B Cluster
Railroad; thence easterly along the south line of said right-of-way to the west
corporation line of the City of Barberton; thence in a generally northerly
direction along the west right-of-way line of the A & B Cluster Railroad to the
centerline of Snyder Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of Snyder
Avenue to the place of beginning.
(Prior Code, § 206.04) (Ord. 7-2013, passed 2-25-2013)
§ 206.05 FOURTH WARD.
   The Fourth Ward shall contain that territory bounded and described as
follows: beginning at the intersection of Wolf Creek and Wooster Road West;
thence northerly along the centerline of Wolf Creek to the centerline of
Hopocan Avenue; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Wolf Creek passing
over Norton Avenue to the north corporation line; thence easterly along the
north corporation line to the west corporation line; thence northerly along the
west corporation line to the north corporation line; thence easterly passing
over Barber Road and Wesleyan Avenue to the east corporation line; thence
southerly along the east corporation line to the north corporation line; thence
easterly along the north corporation line to the west corporation line; thence
northerly along the west corporation line to the centerline of Huntsberger
Drive; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Huntsberger Drive extended
to the centerline of Madison Avenue; thence southerly along the centerline of
Madison Avenue to the centerline of W. Way Street; thence easterly along the
centerline of W. Way Street to the centerline of Newton Avenue; thence
northerly along the centerline of Newton Avenue to the centerline of Mitchell
Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Mitchell Street to the
centerline of N. Summit Street; thence southerly along the centerline of N.
Summit Street to the intersection of N. Summit Street and Burt Street; thence
in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Burt Street to the
centerline of Wooster Road N.; thence in a southwesterly direction along the
centerline of Wooster Road N. to the centerline of High Street; thence in a
southerly direction along the centerline of High Street to the centerline of
Norton Avenue and Coventry Road and Fairview Avenue to the centerline of the
Ohio Canal; thence southwesterly along the centerline of the Ohio Canal to the
south corporation line; thence west along the centerline of Wooster Road West
to the centerline of Wolf Creek and the place of beginning.
(Prior Code, § 206.05) (Ord. 7-2013, passed 2-25-2013)
§ 206.06 FIFTH WARD.
   The Fifth Ward shall contain that territory bounded and described as
follows: beginning at the intersection of Wolf Creek and Wooster Road West;
thence westerly along the centerline of Wooster Road West to the centerline of
Thirty-first Street N.W.; thence northerly on Thirty-first Street N.W. to
Hudson Run Creek; thence northwesterly along the centerline of Hudson Run Creek
to the west corporation line; thence northerly along the west corporation line
to the north corporation line; thence in a generally easterly direction on the
north corporation line to the northeast corner of parcel #0104240; thence in a
northerly direction along the west corporation line to the northwest corner of
parcel #4700020; thence easterly along the north corporation line to the
northeast corner of parcel #4605817; thence in a southerly direction along the
east corporation line to the southwest corner of parcel #4606622; thence in a
generally easterly direction along the north corporation line to the southeast
corner of parcel #4607978; thence in a generally southerly direction to the
south corner of parcel #4608862; thence in a southerly direction along the east
corporation line to the east right-of-way line at Hillsdale Avenue; thence
northeasterly along the east right-of-way line of Hillsdale Avenue to the
centerline of Hopocan Avenue; thence northwesterly along the west corporation
line to the north corporation line; thence easterly along the north corporation
line to the west corporation line; thence northerly along the west corporation
line passing over Wilbur Avenue to the north corporation line; thence easterly
along the north corporation line to the west corporation line; thence northerly
along the west corporation line passing over Raymond Avenue and Norton Avenue
to the north corporation line; thence easterly along the north corporation line
to the centerline of Wolf Creek; thence southwesterly along the centerline of
Wolf Creek to the centerline of Hopocan Avenue; thence southerly along the
centerline of Wolf Creek to the place of beginning.
(Prior Code, § 206.06) (Ord. 7-2013, passed 2-25-2013)
§ 206.07 SIXTH WARD.
   The Sixth Ward shall contain that territory bounded and described as
follows: beginning at the intersection of the Wolf Creek and Wooster Road West;
thence easterly along the centerline of Wooster Road West to the centerline of
the Ohio Canal; thence southerly along the centerline of the Ohio Canal to its
intersection with the centerline of Snyder Avenue; thence westerly along the
centerline of Snyder Avenue to its intersection with the west right-of-way of
the Akron-Barberton Cluster Railroad right-of-way; thence south southerly along
the west line of the Akron-Barberton Cluster Railroad right-of-way to the south
corporation line; thence in a generally westerly direction on the south
corporation line to the west corporation line; thence in a generally westerly
direction along the west corporation line to Hudson Run Road; thence
southwesterly along the south right-of-way of Hudson Run Road to the east
corporation line; thence southerly along the east corporation line to the south
corporation line; thence in a generally westerly direction along the south
corporation line to the east corporation line; thence in a generally southerly
direction to the centerline of Cleveland-Massillon Road; thence southeasterly
along the centerline of Cleveland-Massillon Road to the south corporation line;
thence westerly along the south corporation line to the east corporation line;
thence in a generally southerly direction along the east corporation line to
the centerline of Eastern Road; thence easterly along the centerline of Eastern
Road to the west corporation line; thence northerly along the west corporation
line to the south right-of-way line of Alcorn Drive; thence westerly along the
south right-of-way line to the centerline of Taylor Road; thence northwesterly
along the centerline of Taylor Road to the south corporation line; thence
westerly along the south corporation line to the west corporation line; thence
in a generally northerly direction on the west corporation line to the north
corporation line; thence in a generally easterly direction on the north
corporation line to the west corporation line; thence northerly along the west
corporation line to the centerline of Hudson Run Creek; thence southeasterly
along the centerline of Hudson Run Creek to the centerline of Thirty-first
Street N.W.; thence southerly on the centerline of Thirty-first Street N.W. to
the centerline of Wooster Road West; thence easterly along the centerline of
Wooster Road West to Wolf Creek and the place of beginning.
(Prior Code, § 206.07) (Ord. 7-2013, passed 2-25-2013)
CHAPTER 208: OPEN MEETINGS
Section
208.01   Definitions.
208.02   Notice of regular and organizational meetings.
208.03   Notice of special meetings.
208.04   Notice to news media of special meetings.
208.05   Notification of discussion of specific types of public business.
208.06   General provisions.
Cross-reference:
   Council meetings to be open to public, see CHTR. §§
5.09,
11.09
   Meetings of public bodies to be open, see Ohio R.C. 121.22
§ 208.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CLERK. The Clerk of Council.
   DAY. Calendar day.
   MEETING. Any prearranged discussion of the public business of the municipal
body by a majority of the members of the municipal body.
   MUNICIPAL BODY. Each of the following:
      (1)   Council;
      (2)   Board of Control;
      (3)   Board of Trustees of Public Affairs;
      (4)   Assessment Equalization Board;
      (5)   Planning Commission;
      (6)   Board of Building and Zoning Appeals;
      (7)   Civil Service Commission;
      (8)   Parks and Recreation Commission;
      (9)   Board of Health; and
      (10)   Committees of the above municipal bodies comprised of members of
such bodies if such committees are comprised of a majority of the members of
the main municipal body, or are decision-making committees.
   ORAL NOTIFICATION. Notification given orally either in person or by
telephone, directly to the person for whom such notification is intended, or by
leaving an oral message for such person at the address, or if by telephone at
the telephone number, of such person as shown on the records kept by the Clerk
of Council under this chapter.
   POST.
      (1)   To post in an area accessible to the public during the usual
business hours at the office of the Clerk of Council and at the following
locations:
         (a)   Barberton Municipal Building, 576 W. Park Avenue;
         (b)   Krinkle House, 534 Tuscarawas W.;
         (c)   United States Post Office, Barberton Branch, 531 Wooster Road
W.;
         (d)   Central Fire Station, Wooster Road W.;
         (e)   West Side Fire Station, Twenty-fourth Street N.W.; and
         (f)   North End Fire Station, State Street.
      (2)   A notice identifying the locations at which notifications will be
posted pursuant to this chapter shall be published by the Clerk of Council
within ten calendar days after the adoption of this chapter.
   PUBLISHED. Published once in a newspaper having a general circulation in the
city, as defined in Ohio R.C. 7.12, except that no portion of such newspaper
need be printed in the city. If at the time of any such publication there is no
such newspaper of general circulation, then such publication shall be in a
newspaper then determined by the Clerk of Council to have the largest
circulation in the city.
   SPECIAL MEETING. A meeting which is neither a regular meeting nor an
adjournment of a regular or special meeting to another time or day to consider
items specifically stated on the original agenda of such regular or special
meeting.
   WRITTEN NOTIFICATION. Notification in writing mailed, telegraphed or
delivered to the address of the person for whom such notification is intended
as shown on the records kept by the Clerk of Council under this chapter, or in
any way delivered to such person. If mailed, such notification shall be mailed
by first-class mail, deposited in a U.S. Postal Service mailbox no later than
the second day preceding the day of the meeting to which such notification
refers; provided that, at least one regular mail delivery day falls between the
day of mailing and the day of such meeting.
(Prior Code, § 208.01) (Ord. 467-75, passed 12-29-1975)
§ 208.02 NOTICE OF REGULAR AND ORGANIZATIONAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Clerk of Council shall post a statement of the time(s) and place
(s) of regular meetings of each municipal body for each calendar year not later
than the second day preceding the day of the first regular meeting (other than
the organizational meeting) of the calendar year of that municipal body. The
Clerk of Council shall check at reasonable intervals to ensure that such
statement remains so posted during such calendar year. If, at any time during
the calendar year, the time or place of regular meetings, or of any regular
meetings, is changed on a permanent or temporary basis, a statement of the time
and place of such changed regular meetings shall be so posted by the Clerk of
Council at least 24 hours before the time of the first changed regular meeting.
   (B)   The Clerk of Council shall post a statement of the time and place of
any organizational meeting of a municipal body at least 24 hours before the
time of such organizational meeting.
   (C)   Upon the adjournment of any regular or special meeting to another day,
the Clerk of Council shall promptly post notice of the time and place of such
adjourned meeting.
   (D)   In addition to the posting of the statements as provided in divisions
(A) and (B) above, the Clerk of Council shall cause to be published once a
statement of the time(s) and place(s) of regular meetings for the calendar year
of each municipal body, a statement of the time and place of any changed
regular meetings, and a statement of the time and place of any organizational
meeting of a municipal body. Such publication shall occur no later than the day
preceding the day of the first such regular meeting of the calendar year, the
day preceding the day of the first changed regular meeting, and the day
preceding the day of any such organizational meeting, as the case may be.
(Prior Code, § 208.02) (Ord. 467-75, passed 12-29-1975)
§ 208.03 NOTICE OF SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   Except in the case of a special meeting referred to in §
208.04 of this chapter, the Clerk of Council shall, no later than 12 hours
before the time of a special meeting of a municipal body, post a statement of
the time, place and purposes of such special meeting.
   (B)   The statement under this section and the notifications under §
208.04 of this chapter shall state such specific or general purpose or purposes
then known to the Clerk of Council to be intended to be considered at such
special meeting and may state, as an additional general purpose, that any other
business as may properly come before such municipal body at such meeting may be
considered and acted upon.
   (C)   In addition to the posting of the statement as provided in division
(A) above, the Clerk of Council shall cause to be published once, no later than
12 hours prior to the time of a special meeting of a municipal body, a
statement of the time, place and purpose of such special meeting.
(Prior Code, § 208.03) (Ord. 467-75, passed 12-29-1975)
§ 208.04 NOTICE TO NEWS MEDIA OF SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   (1)   Any news medium organization that desires to be given advance
notification of special meetings of a municipal body shall file with the Clerk
of Council a written request therefor, on a standard form to be provided by the
Clerk of Council.
      (2)   Except in the event of an emergency requiring immediate official
action as referred to in division (D) below, a special meeting shall not be
held unless at least 24 hours’ advance notice of the time, place and purposes
of such special meeting is given to the news media that have requested such
advance notification in accordance with division (B) below.
   (B)   (1)   News media requests for such advance notification of special
meetings shall specify:
         (a)   The municipal body that is the subject of such request;
         (b)   The name of the medium;
         (c)   The name and address of the person to whom written notifications
to the medium may be mailed, telegraphed or delivered;
         (d)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers (including addresses
and telephone numbers at which notifications may be given either during or
outside of business hours) of at least two persons to either one of whom oral
notifications to the medium may be given; and
         (e)   At least one telephone number which the request identifies as
being manned, and which can be called at any hour for the purpose of giving
oral notification to such medium.
      (2)   Any such request shall be effective for six months from the date of
filing with the Clerk of Council or until the Clerk of Council receives written
notice from such medium canceling or modifying such request, whichever is
earlier. Each requesting news medium shall be informed of such period of
effectiveness at the time it files its request. Such requests may be modified
or extended only by filing a complete new request with the Clerk of Council. A
request shall not be deemed to be made unless it is complete in all respects,
and such request may be conclusively relied on by the city, the municipal body
that is the subject of such request and the Clerk of Council.
   (C)   The Clerk of Council shall give such oral notification or written
notification, or both, as the Clerk of Council determines, to the news media
that have requested such advance notification in accordance with division (B)
above, of the time, place and purposes of each special meeting, at least 24
hours prior to the time of such special meeting.
   (D)   In the event of an emergency requiring immediate official action, a
special meeting may be held without giving 24 hours’ advance notification
thereof to the requesting news media. The persons calling such meeting, or any
one or more of such persons or the Clerk of Council on their behalf, shall
immediately give oral notification or written notification, or both, as the
persons giving such notification determine, of the time, place and purposes of
such special meeting to such news media that have requested advance
notification in accordance with division (B) above. The minutes or the call, or
both, of any such special meeting shall state the general nature of the
emergency requiring immediate official action.
(Prior Code, § 208.04) (Ord. 467-75, passed 12-29-1975)
§ 208.05 NOTIFICATION OF DISCUSSION OF SPECIFIC TYPES OF PUBLIC BUSINESS.
   (A)   (1)   Any person, upon written request and as provided herein, may
obtain reasonable advance notification of all meetings at which any specific
type of public business is scheduled to be discussed. Such person may file a
written request with the Clerk of Council specifying:
         (a)   The person’s name, and the address(es) and the telephone number
(s) at or through which the person can be reached during and outside of
business hours;
         (b)   The specific type of public business the discussion of which the
person is requesting advance notification;
         (c)   The municipal body that is the subject of such request; and
         (d)   The number of calendar months, not to exceed six, which the
request covers. Such request may be canceled by request from such person to the
Clerk of Council.
      (2)   Each such written request shall be accompanied by stamped self-
addressed envelopes sufficient in number to cover the number of regular
meetings during the time period covered by the request and an estimated number
of special meetings. The Clerk of Council shall notify in writing the
requesting person when the supply of envelopes is running out, and if the
person desires notification after such supply has run out, such person must
deliver to the Clerk of Council an additional reasonable number of stamped
self-addressed envelopes as a condition to receiving further notification.
      (3)   Such requests may be modified or extended only by filing a complete
new request with the Clerk of Council. A request shall not be deemed to be made
unless it is complete in all respects, and such request may be conclusively
relied on by the city, municipal body that is the subject of such request and
the Clerk of Council.
   (B)   (1)   The Clerk of Council shall, if possible, give such advance
notification under this section by written notification. If such written
notification cannot be given or has not been given, the Clerk of Council shall
give oral notification.
      (2)   The contents of written notification under this division (B) may be
a copy of the agenda of the meeting. Written notification hereunder may be
accomplished by giving advance written notification, by copies of the agenda,
of all meetings of the municipal body that is the subject of such request.
(Prior Code, § 208.05) (Ord. 467-75, passed 12-29-1975)
§ 208.06 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Any person may visit or telephone the office of the Clerk of Council
during that office’s regular office hours to determine, based on information
available at that office: the time and place of regular meetings; the time,
place and purposes of any then known special meetings; and whether the
available agenda of any such future meeting states that any specific type of
public business, identified by such person, is to be discussed at such meeting.
   (B)   Any notification provided herein to be given by the Clerk of Council
may be given by any person acting in behalf of or under the authority of the
Clerk of Council.
   (C)   A reasonable attempt at notification shall constitute notification in
compliance with this chapter.
   (D)   A certificate by the Clerk of Council as to compliance with this
chapter shall be conclusive upon the city and the municipal body involved.
   (E)   To better ensure compliance with this chapter as to notice and
notification, it shall be the responsibility of the chairman or secretary of a
municipal body other than Council, or the person or persons calling the
meetings, to timely advise the Clerk of Council of future meetings, and the
subject matters to be discussed thereat, of such municipal body.
(Prior Code, § 208.06) (Ord. 467-75, passed 12-29-1975)
CHAPTER 210: CONTRACTS
Section
210.01   Participation in contracts with Ohio Department of Administrative
Services.
210.02   Professional design service contracts.
210.03   Participation in contracts with the Ohio Department of Transportation
(ODOT).
210.04   Construction manager at risk procedures.
Cross-reference:
   Contracts for utility services without advertising for bids, see Ohio R.C.
9.30
   Contracts involving street excavations, see S.U. & P.S.
1020.05
   Contracts, see CHTR. §
10.02
   Cooperative purchasing, see ADM.
242.01
   Department of Finance, see CHTR. §
4.04; ADM. Ch.
234
   Public contracts generally, see Ohio R.C. 735.05 et seq.
   Unlawful interest in contracts, see CHTR. §
11.06; GEN. OFF.
606.17
   Urban renewal contracts, see ADM.
252.10
§ 210.01 PARTICIPATION IN CONTRACTS WITH OHIO DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE
SERVICES.
   (A)   Council hereby authorizes the Mayor to participate in state contracts
which the Ohio Department of Administrative Services, Office of State
Purchasing, has entered into for the purchase of supplies, services, equipment
and certain materials pursuant to Ohio R.C. 125.04.
   (B)   Council further hereby authorizes the Mayor to be bound by all
contract terms and conditions as the Ohio Department of Administrative
Services, Office of State Purchasing, prescribes. Such terms and conditions may
include a reasonable fee to cover the administrative costs which the Department
of Administrative Services incurs as a result of the city’s participation in a
contract. Council further agrees to be bound by all such terms and conditions.
   (C)   Council hereby authorizes the Director of Finance to directly pay the
vendor, under each such state contract in which it participates, for items it
receives pursuant to the contract.
(Prior Code, § 210.01) (Ord. 42-1995, passed 3-27-1995)
§ 210.02 PROFESSIONAL DESIGN SERVICE CONTRACTS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      PROFESSIONAL DESIGN FIRM. Any person legally engaged in rendering
professional design services.
      PROFESSIONAL DESIGN SERVICES. Services within the scope of practice of an
architect or landscape architect registered under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4703 or a
professional engineer or surveyor registered under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4733.
      PUBLIC AUTHORITY. The City of Barberton or any of its agents.
      QUALIFICATIONS. All of the following:
         (a)   Competence of the professional design firm to perform the
required professional design services, as indicated by the technical training,
education and experience of the firm’s personnel, especially the technical
training, education and experience of the employees within the firm who would
be assigned to perform the services;
         (b)   Ability of the firm, in terms of its workload and the
availability of qualified personnel, equipment and facilities, to perform the
required professional design services competently and expeditiously;
         (c)   Past performance of the firm, as reflected by the evaluations of
previous clients, with respect to such factors as control of costs, quality of
work and meeting of deadlines; and
         (d)   Other similar factors.
   (B)   Qualifications. When the city plans to contract for professional
design services, the Director of Public Service shall encourage professional
design firms to submit a statement of qualifications and update the statements
at regular intervals.
   (C)   Prequalification of bidders. The Director of Public Service may
institute prequalification requirements for professional design firms seeking
to provide services to the city and may require that each prequalified firm
maintain a current statement of qualifications on file with the Director of
Public Service. The prequalification requirements shall be based on factors
such as those set out in division (A) above.
   (D)   Qualification evaluation procedure.
      (1)   When the city plans to contract for professional design services,
the Director of Public Service shall accept proposals from firms qualified to
perform the required services, at a compensation determined to be fair and
reasonable to the public authority.
      (2)   When a firm is selected by the Director of Public Service or the
City Engineer, the Director of Public Service shall request approval of the
Board of Control to make expenditures under the contract.
   (E)   Professional liability insurance requirements; waiver.
      (1)   Except for any person providing professional design services of a
research or training nature, any person rendering professional design services
to the city shall have and maintain, or be covered by, during the period the
services are rendered, a professional liability insurance policy or policies
with a company or companies that are authorized to do business in the state and
that afford professional liability coverage for the professional design
services rendered. The insurance shall be in an amount considered sufficient by
the Director of Law.
      (2)   The requirement for professional liability insurance set forth in
division (E)(1) above may be waived by the Director of Public Service and the
Director of Law for good cause, or the Director of Public Service may allow the
person providing the professional design services to provide other assurances
of financial responsibility.
   (F)   Rules of procedure. The Director of Public Service may adopt rules to
implement the provisions of this section.
   (G)   Competitive bidding. Pursuant to § 10.02 of the City Charter, the
Board of Control shall award any contract provided for in this section to the
lowest and best bidder.
(Prior Code, § 210.02) (Ord. 163-1996, passed 9-23-1996)
§ 210.03 PARTICIPATION IN CONTRACTS WITH THE OHIO DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
(ODOT).
   (A)   The Director of Public Service hereby requests authority in the name
of the city to participate in the Ohio Department of Transportation (ODOT)
contracts for the purchase of machinery, materials, supplies or other articles
which the Department has entered into pursuant to Ohio R.C. 5513.01(B).
   (B)   The Director of Public Service is hereby authorized to agree in the
name of the city to be bound by all terms and conditions as the Director of
Transportation prescribes.
   (C)   The Director of Public Service is hereby authorized to agree in the
name of the city to directly pay vendors, under each such contract of the Ohio
Department of Transportation in which the city participates, for items it
receives pursuant to the contract.
   (D)   The city hereby agrees to hold the Director of Transportation and the
Ohio Department of Transportation harmless for any claim or dispute arising out
of participation in a contract pursuant to Ohio R.C. 5513.01(B).
(Prior Code, § 210.03) (Ord. 89-1998, passed 5-11-1998)
§ 210.04 CONSTRUCTION MANAGER AT RISK PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Definitions.
      CONSTRUCT. Includes performing, or subcontracting for performing,
construction, demolition, alteration, repair, or reconstruction.
      CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT CONTRACT. A construction management at risk
contract with a guaranteed maximum between the city and another person
obligating the person to provide construction management services.
      CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT SERVICES or MANAGEMENT SERVICES. The range of
services that a construction manager at risk may provide.
      CONSTRUCTION MANAGER AT RISK. A person with substantial discretion and
authority to plan, coordinate, manage, direct, and construct all phases of a
project for the construction, demolition, alteration, repair, or reconstruction
of any public building, structure, or other improvement and who provides the
city a guaranteed maximum price as determined in this section.
      MANAGE. Includes approving bidders and awarding subcontracts for
furnishing materials regarding, or for performing, construction, demolition,
alteration, repair, or reconstruction.
      OPEN BOOK PRICING METHOD. A method in which a construction manager at
risk provides the city, at the city's request, all books, records, documents,
and other data in its possession pertaining to the bidding, pricing, or
performance of a construction management contract awarded to the construction
manager at risk.
      QUALIFIED. Having the following qualifications:
         (a)   Competence to perform the required management services as
indicated by the technical training, education, and experience of the
construction manager at risk's personnel, especially the technical training,
education, and experience of the construction manager at risk's employees who
would be assigned to perform the services;
         (b)   Ability in terms of workload and the availability of qualified
personnel, equipment, and facilities to perform the required management
services competently and expeditiously;
         (c)   Past performance as reflected by the evaluations of previous
clients with respect to factors such as control of costs, quality of work, and
meeting of deadlines;
         (d)   Financial responsibility as evidenced by the capability to
provide a surety bond in an amount equal to the value of the construction
management contract, or by other means acceptable to the city;
         (e)   Other similar factors.
   (B)   Contract with construction manager at risk as exception to competitive
bidding. A contract which must otherwise be competitively bid may be awarded by
the city without competitive bidding to a construction manager at risk pursuant
to this section, provided that the same is authorized and directed by
resolution or ordinance of the Council, which shall contain the name of the
construction manager at risk and the guaranteed maximum price.
   (C)   Advertising for construction manager at risk.
      (1)   Before entering into a contract to employ a construction manager at
risk, the city shall advertise, in a newspaper of general circulation in Summit
County, notice of its intent to employ a construction manager at risk. The
notice shall invite interested parties to submit initial proposals for
consideration and shall be published at least 30 days prior to the date for
accepting the initial proposals. The initial proposals shall present the
qualifications, experience, skills, knowledge and representative projects of
the party seeking to be the construction manager at risk. The city may also
advertise the information contained in the notice in appropriate trade journals
and otherwise notify persons believed to be interested in employment as a
construction manager at risk.
      (2)   The advertisement shall include a general description of the
project, a statement of the specific management services required, and a
description of the qualifications required for the project.
   (D)   Evaluation of most qualified initial proposals; obtaining pricing
proposals; contract negotiations.
      (1)   Before entering into a contract for construction management
services with a construction manager at risk, the city shall evaluate the
initial proposals submitted in response to its advertisement and select not
fewer than three construction managers at risk the city considers to be the
most qualified to provide the required construction management services, except
that the city shall select and rank fewer than three when the city determines
in writing that fewer than three qualified construction managers at risk are
available, or fewer than three construction managers at risk submitted
proposals.
      (2)   The city shall provide each construction manager at risk selected
under division (D)(1), above, with a description of the project, including a
statement of available design detail, a description of how the guaranteed
maximum price for the project shall be determined, including the estimated
level of design detail upon which the guaranteed maximum price shall be based,
the form of the construction management contract, and a request for a pricing
proposal.
      (3)   The pricing proposal of each construction manager at risk shall
include at least the following regarding the construction manager at risk:
         (a)   A list of key personnel for the project;
         (b)   A statement of the general conditions and contingency
requirements;
         (c)   A fee proposal divided into a preconstruction fee, a
construction fee, and the portion of the construction fee to be at risk in a
guaranteed maximum price.
      (4)   The city shall evaluate the submitted pricing proposals and may
hold discussions with individual construction managers at risk to explore their
proposals further, including the scope and nature of the proposed services and
potential technical approaches.
      (5)   After evaluating the pricing proposals, the city shall rank the
selected construction managers at risk based on its evaluation of the value of
each pricing proposal, with such evaluation considering the proposed cost and
qualifications.
      (6)   The city shall enter into negotiations for a construction
management contract with the construction manager at risk whose pricing
proposal the city determines to be the best value under division (D)(4), above.
Contract negotiations shall be directed toward:
         (a)   Ensuring that the construction manager at risk and the city
mutually understand the essential requirements involved in providing the
required construction management services, including the provisions for the use
of contingency funds and the possible distribution of savings in the final
costs of the project;
         (b)   Ensuring that the construction manager at risk will be able to
provide the necessary personnel, equipment, and facilities to perform the
construction management services within the time required by the construction
management contract;
         (c)   Agreeing upon a procedure and schedule for determining a
guaranteed maximum price using an open book pricing method that shall represent
the total maximum amount to be paid by the city to the construction manager at
risk for the project and that shall include the costs of all the work, the cost
of its general conditions, the contingency, and the fee payable to the
construction manager at risk.
      (7)   (a)   If the city fails to negotiate a construction management
contract with the construction manager at risk whose pricing proposal the city
determines to be the best value under division (D)(4), above, the city shall
inform the construction manager at risk, in writing, of the termination of
negotiations.
         (b)   Upon terminating negotiations, the city may enter into
negotiations as provided in this section with the construction manager at risk
that the city ranked next highest under division (D)(4), above. If negotiations
fail, the city may enter into negotiations as provided in this section with the
construction manager at risk the city ranked next highest.
         (c)   If a city fails to negotiate a construction management contract
with a construction manager at risk whose pricing proposal the city determines
to be the best value under division (D)(4), above, the city may select
additional construction managers at risk to provide pricing proposals to the
city pursuant to this section or may select an alternative delivery method for
the project.
      (8)   Nothing in this section affects a city's right to accept or reject
any or all proposals in whole or in part.
   (E)   Financial assurance to be provided by construction manager at risk.
Before construction begins pursuant to a construction management contract with
a construction manager at risk, the construction manager at risk shall provide
a surety bond in an amount equal to the value of the construction management
contract, or other financial guarantee to the city acceptable to the city and
approved by the Council and Law Director.
   (F)   Prequalification of prospective bidders; solicitation of bids.
      (1)   The construction manager at risk shall establish criteria by which
it will prequalify prospective bidders on subcontracts awarded for work to be
performed under the construction management contract. The criteria established
by a construction manager at risk shall be approved by the Mayor, or his or her
designee, and shall be consistent with the rules adopted by the Ohio Facilities
Construction Commission pursuant to R.C. § 153.503 and this section.
      (2)   For each subcontract to be awarded, the construction manager at
risk shall identify at least three prospective bidders that are prequalified to
bid on the subcontract. The construction manager at risk may identify fewer
than three if the construction manager at risk establishes to the satisfaction
of the Mayor, or his or her designee, that fewer than three prequalified
bidders are available. The Mayor, or his or her designee, shall verify that
each prospective bidder meets the prequalification criteria and may eliminate
any bidder determined to be not qualified.
      (3)   After the prospective bidders are prequalified and accepted by the
Mayor, or his or her designee, the construction manager at risk shall solicit
proposals from each bidder. The solicitation and selection of a subcontractor
shall be conducted under an open book pricing method.
   (G)   Award of subcontracts.
      (1)   The construction manager at risk may award a contract to one of the
prequalified bidders for each subcontract but is not required to do so if the
bids do not meet the criteria established by the construction manager at risk
or do not strictly comply with the bid proposal. The construction manager at
risk shall not be required to award the subcontract to the low bidder.
      (2)   The Mayor, or his or her designee, may accept a subcontract awarded
by the construction manager at risk, or may reject a subcontract if the Mayor,
or his or her designee, determines that the bidder is not responsible.
      (3)   If the construction manager at risk is authorized by the Mayor, or
his or her designee, to self-perform a portion of the work, the construction
manager at risk shall submit a sealed bid for the portion of the work prior to
accepting and opening any bids for the same work.
   (H)   Construction of section with other statues and code provisions. The
requirements set forth in this section for the bidding, selection, and award of
a construction management contract by a city shall prevail in the event of any
conflict with any other section of the Ohio Revised Code or Codified Ordinances
of the city.
(Ord. 72-2025, passed 6-9-2025)
CHAPTER 212: ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY
Section
212.01   Disposal of personal property.
212.02   Sale and disposal of real property.
Cross-reference:
   Acquisition and disposal of real property, see TSO E
   Contracts and purchasing, see CHTR. §
10.02; ADM. Ch.
210
   Cooperative purchasing, see ADM.
242.01
   Department of Finance, see CHTR. §
4.04; ADM. Ch.
234
   Disposition of property held by Police Division, see GEN. OFF.
606.24
   Disposition of unclaimed vehicles, see Ohio R.C. 737.32, 4513.62 et seq.
§ 212.01 DISPOSAL OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   Personal property not needed for municipal purposes shall be sold, by the
board or officer having supervision or management thereof, at either the annual
city auction conducted by the Police Division or upon authorization of Council
by ordinance, which shall set forth the method of sale. For the purpose of this
section, PERSONAL PROPERTY means all assets owned by the city, except real
property.
(Prior Code, § 211.01) (Ord. 148-1996, passed 10-28-1996)
§ 212.02 SALE AND DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY.
   When determined by Council that any interest in real property owned by the
city is no longer needed for municipal purposes, such interest in real property
may be sold, conveyed, disposed of, or otherwise transferred in a manner
determined by Council to be in the best interest of the city, including, if
determined by Council, without competitive bidding.
(Ord. 79-2025, passed 6-23-2025)
CHAPTER 214: COMPLIANCE WITH AMERICANS WITH
DISABILITIES ACT
Section
214.01   ADA Coordinator.
214.02   Grievance procedure; other remedies.
214.03   ADA Board.
Cross-reference:
   Abusing handicapped assistance dogs, see GEN. OFF.
618.20,
618.21
   Dogs with handicapped persons, see GEN. OFF.
618.12
   Failure to provide for handicapped persons, see GEN. OFF.
636.23
   Interfering with civil rights, see GEN. OFF.
606.20
   Parking facilities for handicapped persons, see TRAF.
351.16
   Unlawful discriminatory practices, see Ohio R.C. 4112.02
§ 214.01 ADA COORDINATOR.
   The Law Director is hereby authorized, as ADA Coordinator, to coordinate the
city’s efforts to comply with and carry out its responsibilities under the
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) and the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission and the Justice Department Regulations implementing
Title I and Title II of the ADA, respectively.
(Prior Code, § 212.01) (Ord. 35-1992, passed 3-9-1992)
§ 214.02 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE; OTHER REMEDIES.
   (A)   Council hereby authorizes the ADA Coordinator to adopt and publish
grievance procedures for the prompt and equitable resolution of complaints
alleging the city’s non-compliance with the ADA.
   (B)   The following ADA grievance procedure is hereby adopted:
      (1)   All complaints regarding access or alleged discrimination shall be
submitted, in writing, to the ADA Coordinator for resolution. A record of the
complaint and action taken will be maintained. A decision by the ADA
Coordinator will be rendered within 15 working days.
      (2)   If the complaint cannot be resolved to the satisfaction of the
complainant by the ADA Coordinator, it will be forwarded to the ADA Board, as
established in §
214.03 of this chapter.
      (3)   The Board shall establish ground rules or procedures for hearing
complaints, requests or suggestions from disabled persons regarding access to
and participation in public facilities, services, activities and functions in
the community. Further, the Board shall hear such complaints in public, after
adequate public notice is given, in an unbiased, objective manner. The Board
shall issue a written decision within 30 days of notification. All proceedings
of the Board shall be recorded, transcripted and maintained.
      (4)   If the complaint cannot be resolved to the complainant’s
satisfaction by the Board, the complaint shall be heard by Council. An open,
public meeting of Council will precede the vote. A determination must be made
within 30 days of the hearing. The decision of Council is final.
      (5)   A record of the action taken on each request or complaint must be
maintained as a part of the records or minutes at each level of the grievance
process.
   (C)   The individual’s right to a prompt and equitable resolution of the
complaint must not be impaired by his or her pursuit of other remedies, such as
the filing of a complaint with the U.S. Department of Justice or any other
appropriate federal agency. Furthermore, the filing of a lawsuit in a state
court or in the Federal District Court can occur at any time. The use of this
grievance procedure is not a prerequisite to the pursuit of other remedies.
(Prior Code, § 212.02) (Ord. 35-1992, passed 3-9-1992; Ord. 174-1992, passed
11-9-1992)
§ 214.03 ADA BOARD.
   There is hereby established an ADA Board consisting of the ADA Coordinator,
the Parks and Recreation Director, the Public Service Director, the
Administrative Coordinator of Personnel, the Building Commissioner and at least
four individuals, preferably residents, who have a disability, have a family
member with a disability or have experience with dealing with disabled persons.
The purpose of this ADA Board is to conduct the self-evaluation process
described in 56 Federal Register 35718, § 35.105.
(Prior Code, § 212.03) (Ord. 35-1992, passed 3-9-1992)
TITLE FOUR: LEGISLATION
CHAPTER 220: COUNCIL
Section
220.01   Department heads to attend certain Council meetings.
220.02   Clerk of Council.
Editor’s note:
   A document entitled “Rules, Ordinances, Statutes Governing Council of the
City of Barberton” has been adopted by Council and revised in 1970. Copies are
available, at cost, from the Clerk of Council.
Cross-reference:
   Establishment and organization of departments, see CHTR. §
4.01
   Form of government, see CHTR. §
1.02
   Number and term, see CHTR. §
5.02
   Organization, see CHTR. §
5.04
   Powers, see CHTR. §
5.01
   President of Council to be acting Mayor, see CHTR. §§ 3.04, 5.07
   Qualifications, see CHTR. §
5.03
   Removal of Council members, see CHTR. §
5.05
   Removal of Mayor from office, see CHTR. §
3.03
   Removal of officials, see CHTR. §§ 4.04(b), 4.05(b)
   Vacancy, see CHTR. §
5.06
§ 220.01 DEPARTMENT HEADS TO ATTEND CERTAIN COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   (A)   For purposes of this section only, DEPARTMENT HEADS includes the
following positions: Director of Public Service; Director of Public Safety;
Director of Law; Director of Finance; Planning Director; City Engineer;
Building Commissioner; Superintendent of Utilities; Health Commissioner; and
Director of Parks and Recreation.
   (B)   All department heads, as defined in division (A) above, are hereby
required to attend all regular and committee of the whole Council meetings at
which an ordinance or resolution pertaining to their respective departments is
to be voted upon or discussed by Council. If a department head is not present
when Council is to vote on an ordinance or resolution pertaining to his or her
department, such ordinance or resolution may, at the option of the sponsor of
such legislation, be tabled until the department head can be present.
(Prior Code, § 220.01) (Ord. 119-1976, passed 6-7-1976)
§ 220.02 CLERK OF COUNCIL.
   The responsibilities and goals of the Clerk of Council are hereby
established as those set forth in the “Clerk of Council Description of Work”,
which is set forth below. While the list is not all inclusive, should there be
a departure from such list, it must be approved by the President of Council. If
the Clerk of Council is away for more than 24 hours, the President of Council
shall be informed.
 
   CLERK OF COUNCIL
   DESCRIPTION OF WORK
 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF WORK:
Keeps official records of all City Council proceedings and coordinates the
activities of City Council.
*   Council meeting preparation.
*   Prepares Council meeting agenda and distributes. (Council’s packet, the
Administration and all department heads.) (Implemented by the Clerk of Council.)
*   Prepares, updates and distributes matters referred.
*   Prepares Council calendar and delivers to six locations throughout the city.
(This calendar can change two to three times in a week).
*   Works with the Law Director’s Secretary regarding legislation called for at the
Committee of the Whole meetings.
*   Attends all City Council meetings.
*   Records minutes of Council and keeps an index of tapes in the vault.
*   Prepares minutes of all Council meetings and records them in the Minute Book and
indexes in the vault. (Transcribes, proofreads, photocopies, collates and
distributes minutes.)
*   Adds the minutes to Folio Views (indexing system). Copies Folio Views and
distributes to two Council members. (Implemented by the Clerk of Council.)
*   Indexes the minutes of the Board of Control. Copies and distributes to two
Council members.
*   Assists Council President and eight Council members as requested.
*   Certifies plat.
*   Maintains Council files.
*   Certifies notes to County Auditor.
*   Certifies approved legislation.
*   Responsible for compliance with the Open Meetings Act. Notifies Barberton Herald
and Akron Beacon Journal in compliance with Ohio Revised Code.
*   Administers office operation working independently and as directed by the
Council President and Council members.
*   Composes official correspondence and other related documents signed by the
“Clerk of Council”.
*   Responsible for proper distribution and necessary action relative to office
mail.
*   Responsible for assessments. Prepares assessment letters and sends to residents
by certified mail. Maintains file and follow-up procedure for same. (When residents
did not sign for assessment letter, the Clerk of Council hand delivers the letter.)
*   Responsible for handling correspondence from residents regarding the assessment
program.
*   Special Council meeting preparation and information. Delivers notice of special
meeting to each Council member’s home and notifies the press.
*   Certifies proposed Charter amendments and ballot issues to the Summit County
Board of Elections prior to filing deadline. Provide the Board of Elections with 32
certified copies of the ordinance dealing with the Charter change or ballot issue.
Have the wording for the Charter change approved by the Attorney General. Once the
Attorney General has approved the wording, have the Law Director approve the wording
and return to the Board of Elections.
*   Responsible for administration of the liquor license permits. Checks with the
Police Chief for information regarding applicant. Maintains file and follow-up.
*   Publishes legal notices (in newspaper and Council calendar) for meeting dates
for public hearings.
*   Assists residents with complaints, inquiries and requests, such as certifying
documents, copies of minutes, etc.
*   Responsible for purchasing and maintaining adequate office supplies for Clerk of
Council, Council members and maintenance of office equipment.
*   Responsible for purchase orders. (This was handled by the Finance Department
previously.)
*   Certifies resolutions to officials, individual groups, organizations, etc., as
directed by Council via legislation.
*   Prepares address and telephone list for Council, administration and department
heads.
*   Prepares Chaplain List.
*   Prepares committee assignment list.
*   Responsible for notifying the Ohio Ethics Commission of any changes in the
status of Council members (resignations, etc.). Responsible for distributing Ohio
Ethics Commission’s financial disclosure statement forms to all Council members,
past and present.
 
SPECIAL ASSIGNMENTS:
Annexation:
-Responsible for compiling information regarding annexation and mailing information
to the Secretary of State, Summit County Council and Summit County Auditor and
Attorney General.
-Responsible for obtaining check from the Finance Department for annexation filing
fee and submitting check to Summit County Auditor.
   Sine Die - Make dinner reservations, send out invitations and receive RSVPs.
   Redistricting. Work with the Law Director on this upcoming project on
notification, etc.
 
GOALS:
(1)   Reorganize the vault and bring file of ordinances up to date.
(2)   Work with the Records Retention Commission regarding all Council records in
the top floor of the City Building. Transfer legislation to microfilm for better
access and purchase a microfilm reader for the city.
(3)   Have five years of minutes (1986-1990) added to Folio Views.
(4)   Attend Career Development Program and work towards becoming a Certified
Municipal Clerk.
 
(Prior Code, § 220.02) (Res. 202-1997, passed 12-8-1997)
CHAPTER 222: ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
Section
222.01   Posting.
Cross-reference:
   Code of Ordinances, see ADM. Ch.
202
   Effective date of ordinances and resolutions, see CHTR. §
5.12
   Emergency ordinances and resolutions, see CHTR. §
5.13
   Executive and legislative powers of the Mayor, see CHTR. §
3.05
   Franchises, see CHTR. §
9.01
   Initiative, referendum and recall, see CHTR. Art.
8
   Legislative power of Council, see CHTR. §
5.01
   Legislative procedure of Council, see CHTR. §
5.10
   Powers of the municipality, see CHTR. Art.
2
   Public notice, see CHTR. §
5.11
§ 222.01 POSTING.
   (A)   Council hereby adopts public posting as the method of public notice to
be given resolutions and ordinances, unless otherwise provided by state
statute, the City Charter or city resolution or ordinance.
   (B)   Council hereby designates the following six public places to be used
for the public posting of its resolutions and ordinances:
      (1)   Barberton Municipal Building, 576 West Park Avenue;
      (2)   Barberton Public Library, 602 W. Park Avenue;
      (3)   United States Post Office, Barberton Branch, 531 Wooster Road W.;
      (4)   Leach’s Meats, 256 Thirty-first Street, S.W.;
      (5)   Giant Eagle, 41 Fifth Street, S.E.; and
      (6)   North End Fire Station, State Street.
   (C)   The Clerk of Council is hereby authorized and directed to give public
notice to each resolution and ordinance, unless otherwise provided by state
statute, the City Charter or city resolution or ordinance, by causing them to
be posted in the six public paces designated in division (B) above and in the
manner provided by §
5.11 of the City Charter. Such ordinances and resolutions shall remain posted
for not less than 14 days.
(Prior Code, § 222.01) (Ord. 102-1974, passed 3-25-1974; Ord. 150-1974, passed
4-29-1974; Ord. 247-2001, passed 11-26-2001; Ord. 144-2009, passed 9-14-2009)
TITLE SIX: ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 230: MAYOR
Editor’s note:
   There are no sections in Ch. 230. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross-references and any future legislation.
Cross-reference:
   Appointment of members of commissions, see CHTR. §§ 6.01, 6.02, 6.03, 12.02
   Compensation and bond, see CHTR. §
5.14; ADM.
254.01
   Conflict of interest, see CHTR. §
11.07
   Executive powers, see CHTR. §
3.05(a)
   Form of government, see CHTR. §
1.02
   Judicial powers, see CHTR. §
3.05(c)
   Legislative powers, see CHTR. §
3.05(b)
   Powers in civil emergencies, see GEN. OFF.
648.13
   Qualifications, see CHTR. §
3.02
   Removal from office, see CHTR. §
3.03
   Removal of members of commissions, see CHTR. §
6.06
   Supervision of urban renewal activities, see ADM.
252.05
   Term of office, see CHTR. §
3.01
   Transfer of records and property, see CHTR. §
11.05
   Vacancy or absence, see CHTR. §
3.04
   Veto power, initiative and referendum, see CHTR. §§ 8.01, 8.02
CHAPTER 232: DEPARTMENT OF LAW
Section
232.01   Liability Loss Fund; claims against city.
Cross-reference:
   Bond of Director, see CHTR. §
5.14; ADM.
254.01
   Director of Law to replace City Solicitor, see CHTR. §
4.05
   Duties of Law Director regarding urban renewal activities, see ADM.
252.10, 252.12
   Establishment, see CHTR. §
4.01
   Law Enforcement Trust Fund, see ADM.
238.05
   Qualifications, powers and duties of Director of Law, see CHTR. §
4.05(a),(c)
   Removal, vacancy, see CHTR. §
4.05(b), (d), (e)
§ 232.01 LIABILITY LOSS FUND; CLAIMS AGAINST CITY.
   (A)   The Council hereby establishes a General Liability Loss Fund to be
used for the payment of claims against the municipality or any of its officers
or employees for injury, death or loss to persons or property allegedly caused
by an act or omission of the political subdivision or any of its employees,
within the scope of their duties for the municipality, in connection with a
governmental or proprietary function. Said Fund may also be used to pay the
costs of administering the Fund, the costs of defending claims and the costs of
adjusting claims made against the municipality.
   (B)   The Director of Law of the municipality is hereby given the exclusive
authority to settle or compromise claims against the municipality up to a
maximum amount of $5,000 per claim. Claims in excess of $5,000, but less than
$50,000 shall be approved by the Board of Control. Claims in excess of $50,000
shall be approved by Council.
   (C)   The Director of Law is hereby authorized to retain outside legal
counsel in such cases as the Director of Law deems appropriate to protect the
interests of the municipality. The Mayor is hereby authorized to retain a
person or firm of his or her choosing to adjust claims made against the
municipality.
   (D)   The creation of this Liability Loss Fund shall not constitute, nor be
construed as, a waiver of the immunities in favor of the municipality contained
within Ohio R.C. Ch. 2744.
(Prior Code, § 232.01) (Ord. 200-1988, passed 10-24-1988; Ord. 28-2016, passed
3-28-2016)
CHAPTER 234: DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
Section
234.01   Division of Taxation; establishment; regulations.
234.02   Charge for bad checks.
234.03   Investment of City funds.
234.04   Reimbursement of temporary advances from note and bond proceeds.
234.05   Emergency Reserve for Public Facilities and Programs Fund.
234.06   Public Infrastructure Improvement Reserve Fund.
234.07   Investment policy.
234.08   D.A.R.E. Program Fund.
234.09   Applications for loans from City; credit report required.
234.10   Minimum fund balance policy.
234.11   Adopting state-recommended finance policies.
234.12   Fire Prevention and Education Fund.
234.13   Computer Legal Research Fund.
234.14   Street Capital Improvement Fund.
234.15   Agency Fund.
234.16   Agency Fund.
234.17   Lighting Fund.
234.18   Local Coronavirus Relief Fund.
234.19   Summit County COVID-19 PSGP Fund.
234.20   American Rescue Plan Grant Fund.
234.21   Road Maintenance Fund.
234.22   CO2/Smoke Detector Fund.
Cross-reference:
   Assistant Director of Finance to be appointed, see CHTR. §
4.04
   Bond of Director, see CHTR. §
5.14; ADM.
254.01
   Cooperative purchasing, see ADM.
242.01
   Department of Taxation, see B.R. & T.
880.10(f)
   Earned income tax, see B.R. & T. Ch.
880
   Establishment, see CHTR. §
4.01
   Falsification, see GEN. OFF.
606.10
   Finances and taxation, see CHTR. Art.
10
   Law Enforcement Trust Fund, see ADM.
238.05
   Liability Loss Fund, see ADM.
232.01
   Qualifications, powers and duties of Director of Finance, see CHTR. §
4.04(a), (c)
   Removal, vacancy, see CHTR. §
4.04(b), (d), (e)
§ 234.01 DIVISION OF TAXATION; ESTABLISHMENT; REGULATIONS.
   A Division of Taxation is hereby created which shall have such officers,
deputies, clerks and other employees as may from time to time be determined by
Council; such employees shall receive such compensation as may be determined by
Council. The Auditor shall make all appointments of personnel and purchase all
supplies for the Division. The Division shall be charged with the
administration of the city income tax under the direction of the Auditor who
shall prescribe the form and method of accounts and reports to be rendered by
the Division to his or her office and shall examine and audit all such accounts
and exhibit accurate records showing the amount received from each taxpayer and
the date of the receipt. The Auditor shall also make written report to Council
annually of all moneys collected hereunder during the preceding year.
(Prior Code, § 234.01) (Ord. 203-1971, passed 9-27-1971)
§ 234.02 CHARGE FOR BAD CHECKS.
   Council hereby authorizes and directs the Finance Director to charge a fee
of $20 to any individual who issues a bad check to the city.
(Prior Code, § 234.02) (Ord. 190-1996, passed 11-25-1996)
§ 234.03 INVESTMENT OF CITY FUNDS.
   Whenever there are moneys in the treasury of the city that will not be
required to be used by the city for a period of six months or more, such moneys
may, pursuant to Ohio R.C. 731.57 through 731.59, and in lieu of being
deposited in a bank, be invested in obligations of the city, in bonds or other
obligations of the United States or those for the payment of principal and
interest of which the faith of the United States is pledged, discount notes of
the Federal National Mortgage Association, bonds issued by the Home Owners’
Loan Corporation pursuant to the Home Owners’ Loan Act of 1933, 48 Stat. 128,
12 U.S.C. § 1461, and the amendments thereto, bonds of the state and bonds of
any municipal corporation, village, county, township or other political
subdivision of the state, as to which there is no default of principal,
interest or coupons. Such investments shall not be made at a price in excess of
the current market value of such bonds or other interest- bearing obligations.
(Prior Code, § 234.03) (Ord. 101-1991, passed 6-10-1991)
§ 234.04 REIMBURSEMENT OF TEMPORARY ADVANCES FROM NOTE AND BOND PROCEEDS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AUTHORIZED OFFICER. The Mayor or the Director of Finance of the issuer.
      BONDS. Bonds, notes, certificates and other obligations included in the
meaning of “bonds” under I.R.C. § 150, as amended.
      DECLARATION OF OFFICIAL INTENT. A declaration of intent, in the form,
manner and time contemplated in the reimbursement regulations, that the
advances for expenditures referred to therein are reasonably expected to be
reimbursed from the proceeds of reimbursement bonds to be issued after those
expenditures are paid.
      REIMBURSEMENT BONDS. Bonds the proceeds of which are to be used for
reimbursement of such capital or other qualifying expenditures paid before
issuance of the bonds.
      REIMBURSEMENT REGULATIONS. Treasury Regulations § 1.150-2 and any
amendments thereto or superseding regulations, whether in proposed, temporary
or final form, as, at the time applicable, prescribing conditions under which
the proceeds of reimbursement bonds, when allocated or applied to a
reimbursement, will be treated as expended for all or any purposes of I.R.C. §§
103 and 141 to 150, as amended.
   (B)   Authorization and requirement of a declaration of official intent.
Each authorized officer is hereby authorized to prepare and sign a declaration
of official intent, with respect to capital and other expenditures (and
including any costs of issuance of the reimbursement bonds to be made from
money temporarily available and which are reasonably expected to be reimbursed
in accordance with applicable authorizations, policies and practices) from the
proceeds of reimbursement bonds, to make the appropriate reimbursement and
timely allocations from the proceeds of the reimbursement bonds to reimburse
such prior expenditures, and to take any other actions as may be appropriate,
all at the times and in the manner prescribed in the reimbursement regulations,
to satisfy the requirements for the reimbursement to be treated as an
expenditure of such proceeds for purposes of I.R.C. §§ 103 and 141 to 150, as
amended. No advance from any fund or account or order for payment shall be made
for expenditures (other than expenditures excepted from such requirement under
the reimbursement regulations) that are to be reimbursed subsequently from
proceeds of reimbursement bonds, unless a declaration of official intent with
respect thereto is made within the time required by the reimbursement
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 234.04) (Ord. 23-1995, passed 2-27-1995)
§ 234.05 EMERGENCY RESERVE FOR PUBLIC FACILITIES AND PROGRAMS FUND.
   (A)   Effective 1-1-1996, and each year thereafter, at least 2% of the
actual net income tax receipts from the immediately completed fiscal year shall
be placed and maintained in the Emergency Reserve for Public Facilities and
Programs Fund. Annual contributions shall be made until the maximum of
$2,000,000 is reached. The Fund will receive credit for interest income earned
on the Fund balance. Once the maximum amount is reached, the Fund balance will
only increase by the amount of annual interest earned on the balance.
   (B)   Funds in the Emergency Reserve for Public Facilities and Programs Fund
can only be appropriated and disbursed upon the recommendation of the Mayor and
the Finance Director and upon a majority vote of seven members of Council.
(Prior Code, § 234.05) (Ord. 175-1995, passed 11-27-1995; Ord. 152-2020, passed
11-30-2020)
§ 234.06 PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT RESERVE FUND.
   (A)   Effective immediately, and January 1 of each year thereafter, at least
3%, but no greater than 10%, of the actual net income tax receipts from the
immediately completed fiscal year shall be placed and maintained in the Public
Infrastructure Improvement Reserve Fund. The Public Infrastructure Improvement
Reserve Fund will receive credit for interest income earned on the Fund’s
balance.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE means public
assets such as streets, bridges, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, drainage systems
and lighting systems.
   (C)   Funds in the Public Infrastructure Improvement Reserve Fund can only
be appropriated for infrastructure construction and improvement projects
approved by the five-year capital improvement plan. A majority vote of seven
members of Council shall be needed in order to appropriate the funds for other
purposes.
(Prior Code, § 234.06) (Ord. 174-1995, passed 11-27-1995)
§ 234.07 INVESTMENT POLICY.
   (A)   Objective. The primary objective of the investment policy of the city
is to maintain the safety and liquidity of all principal while attaining a
market rate of return. It is recognized that return on investment is of least
importance compared to safety and liquidity.
   (B)   Standards of care.
      (1)   Ethics and conflict of interest. Officers and employees involved in
the investment process shall refrain from personal business activity that could
conflict with the proper execution and management of the investment program or
could impair their ability to make impartial decisions. Employees and officers
shall refrain from undertaking personal investment transactions with the same
individual with whom business is conducted on behalf of the city.
      (2)   Delegation and authority. Authority to manage the investment
program is granted to the Director of Finance. No person may engage in an
investment transaction, except as provided by the terms of this policy and the
procedures established by the Finance Director.
   (C)   Safekeeping and custody.
      (1)   All financial institutions and brokers/dealers who desire to become
qualified bidders for investment transactions must supply the following as
appropriate: audited financial statements; proof of National Association of
Securities Dealers (NASD) certification; and certification of having read
Barberton’s investment policy.
      (2)   Depositories for active funds will be awarded every five years.
      (3)   The Director of Finance is responsible for establishing and
maintaining an internal control structure designed to ensure that assets are
protected from loss, theft or misuse.
   (D)   Eligible investments.
      (1)   U.S. government obligations, U.S. government agency obligations and
U.S. government instrumentality obligations, or any other obligation guaranteed
as to principal and interest by the United States of America. All government
agency or instrumentality securities must be direct issuances of the government
agency or instrumentality;
      (2)   Repurchase agreements with institutions that have a signed master
agreement on file in the Department of Finance;
      (3)   Certificates of deposit;
      (4)   Bonds and other obligations of the state, or the political
subdivisions of the state; provided that, with respect to bonds or other
obligations of political subdivisions, all of the following apply:
         (a)   Bonds or other obligations are payable from the political
subdivision’s general revenues and backed by the full faith and credit of the
political subdivision;
         (b)   Bonds or other obligations are rated, at the time of purchase,
in the three highest classifications established by at least one nationally
recognized standard rating service and purchased through a registered
securities broker or dealer;
         (c)   Aggregate value of the bonds or other obligations does not
exceed 20% of interim monies available for investment at the time of purchase;
and
         (d)   The city is not the sole purchase of the bonds or other
obligations at original issuance. No investment shall be made in municipal
bonds unless the Finance Director has completed additional training that has
been approved by the Treasurer of state and is either conducted by or provided
under the supervision of the Treasurer of state.
      (5)   Shares of State Treasury Assets Reserve of Ohio (Star Ohio);
      (6)   Money market mutual funds regulated by the Securities and Exchange
Commission with portfolios consisting of only domestic securities;
      (7)   Commercial paper issued by entity that has assets exceeding
$500,000,000 having the following qualifications.
         (a)   The notes must be rated at the time of purchase in the highest
classification established by at least two nationally recognized standard
rating services.
         (b)   The aggregate value of the notes must not exceed 10% of the
aggregate value of the outstanding commercial paper of the issuing corporation.
         (c)   The notes must mature no later than 270 days after purchase.
         (d)   The notes be limited to the aggregate of 5% of interim monies
available for investment at the time of purchase, when issued by a single
issuer.
      (8)   (a)   Bankers acceptances of banks that are insured by the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation (“FDIC”) and that mature no later than 180 days
after purchase.
         (b)   Total investment in commercial paper and banker’s acceptances
shall not exceed 40% of interim moneys available for investment at time of
purchase. No investment shall be made in commercial paper or bankers
acceptances unless the Finance Director has completed additional training that
has been approved by the Treasurer of State and is either conducted by or
provided under the supervision of the Treasurer of State.
   (E)   Collateralization and maximum maturities and reporting.
      (1)   Collateralization.
         (a)   Certificates of deposit must be backed by the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation or collateral with a market value of at least 110% of the
certificate’s value or surety bonds issued in the name of the city for 100% of
the principal and interest amount of the deposit. The collateral for a
certificate of deposit may be held by a third party or in a separate trust
account or in a pool of securities as defined in Ohio R.C. 135.181.
         (b)   Individual securities which collectively are the subject of a
repurchase agreement become the property of the city for the period of the
agreement and are to be held by a third party for safekeeping.
      (2)   Maximum maturities. Maximum final stated maturities will be five
years. To the extent possible, the Finance Director will attempt to match
investments with anticipated cash flow requirements.
      (3)   Report. The Director of Finance shall prepare a quarterly
investment report.
   (F)   Amendments. This policy shall be reviewed on an annual basis. Any
changes must be made in the form of an ordinance amendment approved by City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 234.07) (Ord. 187-1995, passed 12-11-1995; Ord. 192-1996, passed
11-25-1996; Ord. 180-2000, passed 9-11-2000; Ord. 99-2016, passed 9-26-2016)
§ 234.08 D.A.R.E. PROGRAM FUND.
   There is hereby established a City D.A.R.E. Program Fund to be used to
receive funds to be used for the continuance of the Drug Abuse Resistance
Education Program in the city schools.
(Prior Code, § 234.08) (Ord. 117-1993, passed 7-26-1993)
§ 234.09 APPLICATIONS FOR LOANS FROM CITY; CREDIT REPORT REQUIRED.
   (A)   The Administration of the city shall secure a credit report on any
individual or company who or which applies for a loan from the city.
   (B)   The Director of Law is hereby authorized to establish the legal
parameters for the use of such credit reports by the administration to avoid
invasion of privacy problems.
(Prior Code, § 234.09) (Ord. 188-1997, passed 11-10-1997)
§ 234.10 MINIMUM FUND BALANCE POLICY.
   (A)   Establishment; purpose. There is hereby established a minimum fund
balance policy in and for the city. The purpose of this policy is to take a
proactive approach to financial management in the city. The Policy will assist
the city in maintaining the security of the General Fund, Water Operating Fund,
Sewer Operating Fund and Solid Waste Disposal Fund and contribute to the
financial stability of the city by maintaining adequate financial reserves. The
policy also will allow the Administration and Council to recognize warning
indicators of financial stress at an early date.
   (B)   Adjustment of annual appropriations. At the time of budget
preparation, annual appropriations for the General Fund, Water Operating Fund,
Sewer Operating Fund and Solid Waste Disposal Fund shall be adjusted to ensure
that the projected fund balance is greater than or equal to the minimum fund
balance. The minimum fund balance required shall be equal to 10% of the total
operating and capital budget for each fund, excluding non-debt service
transfers and any portion of the operating expenditures and capital projects
funded by grants.
   (C)   Calculation of projected fund balance. The projected fund balance will
be calculated at the time of budget preparation. Projected fund balance will be
calculated by taking the budget year’s estimated beginning unencumbered fund
balance, plus anticipated revenue, less total appropriations. The resulting
fund balance must comply with the minimum fund balance established above.
   (D)   Application of policy. This policy will be applied to the proposed
annual budget of the city prior to presenting the budget to Council. Any
changes in the budget made by Council prior to or after the adoption of the
annual appropriation ordinance must also comply with the restrictions
established in this policy.
   (E)   Waiver of policy. If, during appropriation discussions, the
Administration and/or Council determine that the city cannot meet the
requirements of this policy, the requirements of this section may be waived by
a majority vote of seven members of Council. A concise statement will be
included in the annual appropriations ordinance explaining the decision to
waive the policy. The statement should include the reason or reasons given for
waiving the policy and a specific timetable for returning to the policy.
(Prior Code, § 234.10) (Ord. 194-2000, passed 10-23-2000)
§ 234.11 ADOPTION OF STATE-RECOMMENDED FINANCE POLICIES.
   The Council hereby adopts the following policies for the city as recommended
by the state audit report:
   (A)   Stale dated checks;
   (B)   Electronic, mechanical and rubber stamp signatures; and
   (C)   Travel and meal reimbusement.
(Prior Code, § 234.11) (Ord. 224-2006, passed 11-27-2006; Ord. 215-2008, passed
12-8-2008; Ord. 124-2015, passed 9-14-2015)
§ 234.12 FIRE PREVENTION AND EDUCATION FUND.
   (A)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to create a new fund, the
“Fire Prevention and Education Fund”, to account for donations received for
fire prevention activities.
   (B)   The donations deposited in the “Fire Prevention and Education Fund”
will be used for special projects and will be separate from the annual Fire
Department Budget.
(Prior Code, § 234.12) (Ord. 20-2013, passed 2-11-2013)
§ 234.13 COMPUTER LEGAL RESEARCH FUND.
   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to create a new fund, the
“Computer Legal Research Fund”, for the fees collected on criminal, traffic and
civil cases filed in the Municipal Court.
(Prior Code, § 234.13) (Ord. 52-2013, passed 4-8-2013)
§ 234.14 STREET CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND.
   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to create a new fund, the
“Street Capital Improvement Fund”, to account for the additional income tax
collected from the 0.25% income tax increase effective 1-1-2014.
(Prior Code, § 234.14) (Ord. 193-2013, passed 11-25-2013)
§ 234.15 AGENCY FUND.
   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to create a new fund, the
“Agency Fund”, to be compliant with the Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
guidelines.
(Prior Code, § 234.15) (Ord. 88-2018, passed 7-23-2018)
§ 234.16 AGENCY FUND.
   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to create a new fund, the
“Agency Fund”, which will be used to report resources held by the reporting
government in a purely custodial capacity.
(Prior Code, § 234.16) (Ord. 134-2018, passed 11-13-2018)
§ 234.17 LIGHTING FUND.
   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to create a new fund, the
“Lighting Fund”.
(Prior Code, § 234.17) (Ord. 155-2018, passed 12-17-2018)
§ 234.18 LOCAL CORONAVIRUS RELIEF FUND.
   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to create a new fund, the
“Local Coronavirus Relief Fund”.
(Ord. 69-2020, passed 6-22-2020)
§ 234.19 SUMMIT COUNTY COVID-19 PSGP FUND.
   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to create a new fund, the
“Summit County COVID-19 PSGP  Fund”.
(Ord. 81-2020, passed 7-13-2020)
§ 234.20 AMERICAN RESCUE PLAN GRANT FUND.
   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to create a new revenue fund,
the “American Rescue Plan Grant Fund.”
(Ord. 34-2021, passed 4-12-2021)
§ 234.21 ROAD MAINTENANCE FUND.
   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to create a new fund, the “Road
Maintenance Fund.”
(Ord. 67-2021, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 234.22 CO2/SMOKE DETECTOR FUND.
   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to create a new revenue fund,
the "CO2/Smoke Detector Fund."
(Ord. 15-2025, passed 1-27-2025)
CHAPTER 236: DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY
Section
236.01   City Electrician; Assistant.
236.02   School guards.
236.03   Parking meter maintenance and repair man.
Cross-reference:
   Appointment of Dog Warden, see ADM.
238.02
   Auxiliary Police Unit, see ADM.
238.01
   Bond of Director, see CHTR. §
5.14; ADM.
254.01
   Division of Fire, see CHTR. §
4.03(b); ADM. Ch.
240
   Division of Police, see CHTR. §
4.03(a); ADM. Ch.
238
   Establishment, see CHTR. §
4.01
   Powers and duties of Director of Public Safety, see CHTR. §
4.03
   Traffic-control powers of Director of Public Safety, see TRAF. Ch.
305
§ 236.01 CITY ELECTRICIAN; ASSISTANT.
   (A)   There shall be a City Electrician within the Department of Public
Safety whose duties shall be to erect, install and maintain all lines and
electrical equipment for the city, including those used by the Fire Division
and the Police Division, as well as to erect and maintain street intersection
lights. The Electrician shall have charge of all tools and equipment owned by
the city and used for the purpose of maintaining, constructing and erecting
electrical equipment.
   (B)   There shall also be an Assistant City Electrician.
(Prior Code, § 236.01) (Ord. 122-1954, passed 9-7-1954)
§ 236.02 SCHOOL GUARDS.
   There shall be school crossing guards in such number as Council determines
who shall be appointed by the Director of Public Safety and who shall not be on
the competitive classified civil service list of the Police Division. The
school guards shall be assigned to traffic duty upon the public streets and
grounds adjoining and in the vicinity of schools of the city and, in connection
with such traffic duty, shall have the same power and capacity and be subject
to the same duties, obligations and liabilities as patrolmen.
(Prior Code, § 236.02)
§ 236.03 PARKING METER MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR MAN.
   There shall be a parking meter maintenance and repair man in the Department
of Public Safety whose duty shall be to maintain and repair parking meters. The
parking meter maintenance and repair man shall collect all moneys obtained from
the operation of parking meters and give a daily accounting of the same to the
Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 236.03) (Ord. 41-1947, passed 7-7-1947)
CHAPTER 238: DIVISION OF POLICE
Section
238.01   Reserve Police and Auxiliary Volunteer Units.
238.02   Animal Control Warden.
238.03   Drug Law Enforcement Fund.
238.04   Parking Enforcement Unit.
238.05   Law Enforcement Trust Fund.
238.06   Extension of police protection.
Editor’s note:
   Because of the frequency of change, provisions relating to compensation,
classification and benefits are not codified. Copies of the latest relevant
legislation may be obtained from the Clerk of Council. Rules and regulations of
and for the Division of Police were accepted by Ord. 300-1977, passed 11-7-
1977. Copies are available, at cost, from the Chief of Police.
   The city executes labor agreements from time to time with the Fraternal
Order of Police, Lodge 13, Ohio Labor Council, which agreements provide for
compensation, benefits and conditions of employment. Copies of the latest
relevant legislation, and of such agreements, may be obtained, at cost, from
the Clerk of Council.
§ 238.01 RESERVE POLICE AND AUXILIARY VOLUNTEER UNITS.
   (A)   Appointment of members. There is hereby created within the Police
Department a Reserve Police Unit and an Auxiliary Volunteer Unit. The members
of the separate Units shall be appointed by the Director of Public Safety, in
such numbers as deemed necessary. Members appointed shall not be in the
classified service of the city. Such members may be called to active duty at
any time by the Director of Public Safety or, in his or her absence, by the
Police Chief.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AUXILIARY VOLUNTEER. A civilian affiliated with the Police Department
because of his or her interest in contributing to the Police Department’s role
in a community service support capacity. The AUXILIARY VOLUNTEER MEMBER shall
serve in a part-time, unsalaried and non-sworn capacity.
      RESERVE POLICE OFFICER. A part-time, sworn and certified law enforcement
officer who possesses the same powers and performs the same duties as full-time
officers. The qualifications and training for RESERVE POLICE OFFICERS will be
equivalent to full-time sworn police officers performing like functions.
RESERVE OFFICERS will work a regularly scheduled tour of duty each week.
      VOLUNTEER POLICE OFFICER. A part-time volunteer, sworn and certified law
enforcement officer who possesses the same powers and performs the same duties
as full-time officers. The qualifications and training for VOLUNTEER POLICE
OFFICERS will be equivalent to full-time sworn police officers performing like
functions. These OFFICERS shall serve in an unsalaried capacity and volunteer a
minimum of eight hours of duty per month.
   (C)   Terms of service. Members of the Reserve Police Unit and Auxiliary
Volunteer Unit shall serve at the pleasure of the Director of Public Safety, or
until resignations submitted by such members are accepted by the Director of
Public Safety. Willfully neglecting or refusing to respond for assignment or
duty when called or required may subject the unit members to suspension or
dismissal by the director of public safety.
   (D)   Control of units. The Chief of Police shall be the Commanding Officer
of the units and shall control the assignment, training and stationing of
members and direct the work of such units. Such reserve officers and auxiliary
volunteer members shall obey the chain of command of the Police Department and
shall take orders from all regularly appointed members thereof.
   (E)   Rules and regulations. The Chief of Police shall prescribe rules and
regulations for the organization, administration, conduct and control of the
units.
   (F)   Uniforms. Reserve officers shall wear the same uniform as full-time
police officers. The uniforms of auxiliary volunteers shall clearly distinguish
them from certified police officers.
   (G)   Services; compensation.
      (1)   Reserve police officers and volunteer police officers will be
utilized to supplement the Police Department’s day-to-day delivery of law
enforcement services, with each assignment being four hours on average.
      (2)   Reserve police officers will be paid for their assigned services at
a rate to be determined by Council.
      (3)   Volunteer police officers will be paid a nominal fee for their
service at a rate to be determined by Council.
      (4)   Auxiliary volunteers shall perform services without compensation or
for a nominal fee.
      (5)   All services performed by auxiliary volunteers shall be performed
within the limits of the city.
   (H)   Non-liability. This section is an exercise by the city of its police
powers for the protection of the public peace, health, property, safety and
general welfare, and neither the city, nor an agent or representative of the
city, nor any reserve police officer or auxiliary volunteer member appointed
under the provisions of this section, nor any individual, firm, partnership or
corporation, nor the receiver or trustee of any other agent thereof, who, in
good faith, executes any executive order, rule or regulation promulgated
pursuant to the provisions of this section, shall be liable for injury or
damage sustained to any person or property as the direct or proximate result of
such action.
(Prior Code, § 238.01) (Ord. 103-1994, passed 7-25-1994)
§ 238.02 ANIMAL CONTROL WARDEN.
   (A)   The Director of Public Safety may appoint and commission, at his or
her discretion, with the prior approval of the Chief of Police, a special
police officer to be known as an Animal Control Warden, who shall have the
police power necessary to investigate and assist in the enforcement of all
state statutes and city ordinances relating to animals, including, but not
limited to, division (E) below. Such Warden shall have all the rights,
privileges, immunities and obligations extended to regular members of the
Police Division, subject to the limitations hereinafter specified. Any person
so authorized shall first secure a permit from the Director, which permit shall
be revocable by the Director, for cause. The Director shall send, by registered
mail, notification of a hearing to an Animal Control Warden, if revocation for
cause is being considered, which hearing shall occur at least five days before
the effective date of such revocation.
   (B)   A permit must be granted, without charge, before any commission is
valid and no person shall engage in special police duties as an Animal Control
Warden unless and until such permit has been issued. An application for the
permit shall be obtained from the office of the Chief of Police; it shall
include, but not be limited to, fingerprints, photographs, past addresses and
past employment. Each applicant must be 21 years of age or over. Any applicant
granted a permit by the Director shall, before his commission is effective,
provide evidence to the Director from an insurance company that the applicant
has obtained a $300,000 liability insurance policy to protect against any
property damage or personal injury claim arising out of any negligence or
misfeasance attributable to him or her or arising out of vehicle crashes
occurring in the performance of any duty imposed by the ordinances of the city.
   (C)   The powers herein granted to the Animal Control Warden and the rights,
privileges and immunities further granted shall inure only so long as he or she
is employed by the city in that capacity. While engaged in his or her capacity
as an Animal Control Warden, he or she shall carry a badge and other
credentials to be furnished by the Chief of Police, which credentials shall
specify his or her police capacity. He or she shall not be permitted to carry a
pistol, rifle or other firearm, but may carry for use in performing his or her
duties a night stick, billy club or gas gun.
   (D)   No person herein authorized to be commissioned and appointed as an
Animal Control Warden shall, in the course of his or her duties, have any claim
upon the City or the Police Pension Fund, or upon any division of the county or
state, by and through the special commission herein granted, arising out of any
damage or personal injury sustained by such person in his or her course of
employment as an Animal Control Warden.
   (E)   The Animal Control Warden shall retain custody of any stray dog for a
period of three days to allow its owner to claim it. If the owner does not
timely claim it, the Animal Control Warden shall release the dog to the county.
If the owner does timely claim it, the Animal Control Warden shall release the
dog to its owner upon the payment of a $20 impound fee to be used to maintain
the kennel operations and the equipment.
(Prior Code, § 238.02) (Ord. 44-1996, passed 3-25-1996)
§ 238.03 DRUG LAW ENFORCEMENT FUND.
   (A)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to establish a fund to be
known as the “Drug Law Enforcement Fund”. The Fund shall be used to subsidize
law enforcement efforts.
   (B)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to request approval for
the establishment of such Fund from the Auditor of the state and, upon
receiving such approval, the establishment of such Fund shall be accomplished.
(Prior Code, § 238.03) (Ord. 284-1986, passed 11-24-1986)
§ 238.04 PARKING ENFORCEMENT UNIT.
   (A)   Creation of unit. There is hereby established, pursuant to Ohio R.C.
737.051(B), within the Police Department of the city a Parking Enforcement
Unit.
   (B)   Appointment of members. The Director of Public Safety shall be the
executive head of the Parking Enforcement Unit and shall make all appointments
and removals of parking enforcement officers.
   (C)   Term of service. Parking enforcement officers shall serve at the
pleasure of the Director of Public Safety or until resignation submitted by
such officers are accepted by the Director of Public Safety.
   (D)   Rules; training. The Director of Public Safety shall prescribe rules
for the organization, training, administration, control and conduct of the
Parking Enforcement Unit. Regarding rules for training, the Director shall
prescribe the training of the officers and shall include instruction of general
administration, rules and procedures governing the unit, the role of the
judicial system as it relates to parking regulations and enforcement, proper
techniques and methods relating to the enforcement of parking ordinances, human
interaction skills and first aid.
   (E)   Authority. The authority of the parking enforcement officers shall be
limited to the enforcement of ordinances governing parking in handicapped
parking locations and fire lanes and the enforcement of Ch. 351 and 355 of this
code of ordinances. These officers shall have no other powers.
   (F)   Non-liability. This section is an exercise by the city of its police
powers for the protection of the public peace, health, property, safety and
general welfare, and neither the city, nor an agent or representative of the
city, nor any officer appointed under the provisions of this section, nor any
other agent thereof, who, in good faith, executes any executive order, rule or
regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this section, shall be
liable for injury or damage sustained to any person or property as the direct
or proximate result of such action.
(Prior Code, § 238.04) (Ord. 94-1991, passed 6-10-1991)
§ 238.05 LAW ENFORCEMENT TRUST FUND.
   (A)   The Director of Finance is authorized to establish a fund to be known
as the “Law Enforcement Trust Fund”, such fund to be used for the purposes
specified in division (B) below.
   (B)   The Fund shall be expended only to pay the costs of:
      (1)   Protracted or complex investigations or prosecutions;
      (2)   Reasonable technical training or expertise;
      (3)   Matching funds to obtain federal grants to aid law enforcement; and
      (4)   Such other law enforcement purposes that legislative authority
determines to be appropriate.
(Prior Code, § 238.05) (Ord. 166-1989, passed 8-5-1989)
§ 238.06 EXTENSION OF POLICE PROTECTION.
   (A)   The City Council approves providing of police protection to the county
and to the municipal corporations and townships within the county.
   (B)   Police protection shall be extended only upon authorization by the
Chief of Police, supervisor or officer-in-charge of the Barberton Division of
Police in the exercise of that officer’s discretion, taking into account the
following considerations:
      (1)   That such police protection may be extended in times of emergency
or disaster only so far as is consistent with the proper protection of the
city; and
      (2)   That the availability of police equipment and personnel shall be
subject to priority of use within the city.
(Prior Code, § 238.06) (Ord. 189-1996, passed 11-25-1996)
CHAPTER 240: DIVISION OF FIRE
Section
240.01   Aid to other municipalities.
240.02   Rules adopted.
240.03   Deputy Fire Chief.
240.04   Fire and emergency responses.
240.05   Emergency medical and rescue services.
Editor’s note:
   Because of the frequency of change, provisions relating to compensation,
classification and benefits are not codified. Copies of the latest relevant
legislation may be obtained from the Clerk of Council.
Cross-reference:
   Appointment of emergency firefighters, see Ohio R.C. 737.10
   Civil Service Commission, see CHTR. §
6.04(b); ADM. Ch.
268
   Creation within Department of Public Safety, see CHTR. §
4.03(b)
   Driving over fire hose, see TRAF.
331.28
   False fire alarm or report, see GEN. OFF.
648.08, 648.09
   Fire Codes, see F.P. Ch. 1604
   Fire Districts, see B. & H. Ch.
1446
   Fire protection, nursing homes, see F.P. Ch. 1608
   Fires in parks, see S.U. & P.S.
1068.06(f)
   Fireworks, see S.U. & P.S.
1068.06(b); F.P. Ch. 1612
   General duties, see Ohio R.C. 737.11
   Hours and leave, see Ohio R.C. 737.21, 4115.02
   Open burning, see GEN. OFF.
610.09(i), 660.20
   Original appointments, probationary period and age, see Ohio R.C. 124.27,
124.30, 124.42
   Parking near fire, see TRAF.
331.27
   Police and Firemen’s Disability and Pension Fund, see ADM.
254.12
   Promotions, see Ohio R.C. 124. 31, 124.45
   Reductions, suspensions and removals, see Ohio R.C. 124.34 et seq. 737.12
   Sick leave, see Ohio R.C. 124.38
§ 240.01 AID TO OTHER MUNICIPALITIES.
   (A)   Council hereby authorizes the Fire Division to aid all other
firefighting and EMS agencies in the county by providing assistance with their
EMS and firefighting equipment.
   (B)   The Fire Chief is hereby authorized to charge other communities where
mutual aid is provided by the Barberton Fire Department, in accordance with the
receiving community’s billing practices.
(Prior Code, § 240.02) (Res. 186-1981, passed 10-26-1981; Ord. 28-2008, passed
2-25-2008)
§ 240.02 RULES ADOPTED.
   The rules and regulations of the Fire Division will be as issued in the
Manual of Rules and Regulations of the Division of Fire and the Manual of SOG
of the Division of Fire, as developed by the Chief of the Division of Fire and
governing laws.
(Prior Code, § 240.03) (Ord. 106-1999, passed 5-10-1999)
§ 240.03 DEPUTY FIRE CHIEF.
   (A)   There is hereby established the position of Deputy Fire Chief in the
Division of Fire.
   (B)   The position of Deputy Fire Chief shall be filled in accordance with
Ohio R.C. 124.45 and the rules and regulations of the Barberton Civil Service
Commission.
   (C)   The Chief of Fire shall direct the Deputy Chief to assist the Chief of
Fire in the administrative operations of the Division. The Deputy Chief, or his
or her designated officer, shall carry out the duties and responsibilities as
prescribed by the Chief of Fire.
(Prior Code, § 240.04) (Ord. 106-1999, passed 5-10-1999)
§ 240.04 FIRE AND EMERGENCY RESPONSES.
   The Fire Division is hereby authorized to be the primary responder to all
fires and hazardous materials emergencies in the city.
(Prior Code, § 240.05) (Ord. 106-1999, passed 5-10-1999)
§ 240.05 EMERGENCY MEDICAL AND RESCUE SERVICES.
   (A)   The Fire Division is hereby authorized to be the primary provider of
emergency medical services (EMS) and rescue services in the city.
   (B)   The Chief of the Division of Fire, in conjunction with the Safety
Director and the Finance Director, is hereby authorized to assess a fee on any
private company that utilizes personnel employed by the municipality in the
transportation of patients to or from a medical facility or other location. The
Chief of the Fire Division shall develop a “transport assist fee policy” to
determine the fee and guidelines for assessment, on an annual basis. This
policy shall be available for distribution to all area transport companies
operating within the city.
(Prior Code, § 240.06) (Ord. 106-1999, passed 5-10-1999)
CHAPTER 242: DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SERVICE
Section
242.01   Cooperative purchasing.
Cross-reference:
   Division of Building Inspection, see CHTR. §
4.02(a); B. & H. Ch.
1442
   Division of Engineering, see CHTR. §
4.02(b); ADM. Ch.
246
   Division of Utilities, see CHTR. §
4.02(c); ADM. Ch.
248
   Duties of Director re street excavations, see S.U. & P.S. Ch.
1020
   Duties of Director re sidewalk construction and improvement, see S.U. & P.S.
Ch.
1028
   Establishment, see CHTR. §
4.01
   Powers and duties of Director, see CHTR. §
4.02
   Services of Director to Parks and Recreation Commission, see ADM.
264.01
   Superintendent of Utilities, see CHTR. §
4.02(c); ADM.
248.01
§ 242.01 COOPERATIVE PURCHASING.
   The Director of Public Service is hereby authorized to participate in the
County-University and Educational Cooperative and Purchasing Program (CUE) for
the purchase of supplies, services, equipment and certain materials.
(Prior Code, § 242.01) (Ord. 217-1990, passed 12-10-1990; Ord. 42-1995, passed
3-27-1995)
CHAPTER 244: DIVISION OF BUILDING INSPECTION
Editor’s note:
   Provisions relating to the Division of Building Inspection are codified in
Ch. 1442, Part Fourteen, of this code of ordinances.
CHAPTER 246: DIVISION OF ENGINEERING
Section
246.01   Engineering Department fees.
246.02   Insurance guarantee.
Cross-reference:
   Bond of City Engineer and Assistant, see CHTR. §
5.14; ADM.
254.01
   Duties regarding sewer construction, see S.U. & P.S.
1040.03 et seq.,
1040.08
   Duties regarding sidewalk construction and improvement, see S.U. & P.S. Ch.
1028
   Duties regarding street excavations, see S.U. & P.S. Ch.
1020
   Engineering and inspection services to Parks and Recreation Commission, see
ADM.
264.01
   Establishment of Division and position of City Engineer, see CHTR. §
4.02(b)
   Numbering of buildings, see S.U. & P.S.
1032.02
§ 246.01 ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT FEES.
Table of Engineering Department Fees
Table of Engineering Department Fees
Commercial inspection fee          $25/hour
Culvert pipe inspection permit     $50 (inspect only)
Curb cut permit                    $50 (inspect only)
Drive aprons permit                $50 (inspect only)
Engineering plan review fee        $100 (commercial)
Excavation (street opening) permit $35
Sanitary sewer permit              $50
Sidewalk permit                    $50
Storm sewer permit                 $50
NOTE TO TABLE:
Any work started without the proper permit will be subject to a penalty of
$200, plus permit fees.
 
(Prior Code, § 246.01) (Ord. 26-2005, passed 2-28-2005)
§ 246.02 INSURANCE GUARANTEE.
   Before a permit may be obtained, a copy of insurance from the party
performing the work must be on file. A homeowner may construct his or her own
sidewalk, but he or she will be required to sign a disclaimer. Insurance will
not be required of the homeowner (Ord. 144-1998); however, a $100 refundable
deposit to guarantee the work will be required of the homeowner (Ord. 109-
2001).
(Prior Code, § 246.02) (Ord. 26-2005, passed 2-28-2005)
CHAPTER 248: DIVISION OF UTILITIES
Section
248.01   Composition; Superintendent.
Cross-reference:
   Duties regarding street excavations, see S.U. & P.S.
1020.08(j), (k)
   Establishment of Division and position of Superintendent of Utilities, see
CHTR. §
4.02(c)
   Operation of Municipal Water Treatment Plant, see S.U. & P.S. Ch.
1044
§ 248.01 COMPOSITION; SUPERINTENDENT.
   The Division of Utilities in the Department of Public Service shall be
composed of a Water Treatment Plant, a Water Pollution Control Center, a Bureau
of Sanitation, a Bureau of Water Distribution, a Bureau of Sewer Collection, a
Bureau of Forestry and a General Utilities office, all under the general charge
of the Superintendent of Utilities, subject, however, to the direction of the
Director of Public Service.
(Prior Code, § 248.01)
CHAPTER 250: DIVISION OF STREETS
Editor’s note:
   There are no sections in Ch. 250. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross-references and any future legislation.
Cross-reference:
   Power of Council to establish divisions, see CHTR. §
4.01
   Powers and duties re street excavation, see S. U. & P. S.
1020.09 et seq.
   Street classifications and paving, see S. U. & P. S.
1020.03, Ch. 1024
CHAPTER 252: DEPARTMENT OF URBAN RENEWAL
Section
252.01   Establishment.
252.02   Purpose and necessity.
252.03   Council policy.
252.04   Definitions.
252.05   Designation of Mayor as supervisor.
252.06   Preparation of studies and plans.
252.07   Contents of plan; supporting documentation; relocation plan.
252.08   Action by Planning Commission.   
252.09   Public hearing; Council action.
252.10   Federal aid contracts.
252.11   Modification of plans.
252.12   Execution of plan.
252.13   Finance.
252.14   Building permits.
252.15   Tax exemption; lien.
Cross-reference:
   Appropriation of property, see Ohio Const., Art. I, § 19, Art. XVIII, §§ 10,
11
   Building permits, see B. & H.
1406.03
   Community improvement corporations, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 1724
   Community redevelopment corporations, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 1728
   General or master plan, see CHTR. §
6.01(b)
   Housing Code, see B. & H. Ch.
1462 et seq.
   Planning Commission, see CHTR. §
6.01; ADM. Ch.
260
   Residential Anti-Displacement and Relocation Plan Policy, see ADM. Ch.
256
   Urban Renewal Debt Retirement Fund, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 725
§ 252.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby established a Department of Urban Renewal in and for the
city.
(Prior Code, § 252.01) (Ord. 242-1967, passed 11-27-1967)
§ 252.02 PURPOSE AND NECESSITY.
   It is hereby determined that there exist within the city, slum, blighted,
deteriorated and deteriorating areas, as defined in §
252.04, which constitute a serious and growing menace injurious and inimical to
the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the residents thereof. The
existence of such areas contributes substantially and increasingly to the
spread of disease and crime and to losses by fire and accident, necessitating
excessive and disproportionate expenditures of public funds for the
preservation of the public health and safety, for crime prevention, correction,
prosecution and punishment, for the treatment of juvenile delinquency, for the
maintenance of adequate police, fire and accident protection and for other
public services and facilities; constitutes an economic and social liability;
and substantially impairs and arrests the sound growth of the community,
retards the provision of housing accommodations, aggravates traffic problems
and retards the elimination of traffic hazards and the improvement of traffic
facilities. This menace is beyond remedy and control solely by regulatory
processes and exercise of the police power and cannot be dealt with effectively
by ordinary operation of private enterprise without the aids herein provided.
The elimination in whole or in part of slum, blighted, deteriorated and
deteriorating areas and the prevention of occurrence or recurrence of such
areas by redevelopment, conservation, rehabilitation and reconditioning, to the
extent feasible, of the salvageable portions of such areas and by other
activities pursuant to urban redevelopment or urban renewal, as defined herein,
are public uses and purposes for which public money may be expended and private
property acquired by purchase, donation or eminent domain and are governmental
functions of concern to the city, requiring the exercise of the powers of
government granted to the city by the provisions of Art. XVIII of the Ohio
Constitution. The necessity, in the public interest and general welfare, for
the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared as a matter of legislative
determination.
(Prior Code, § 252.02) (Ord. 242-1967, passed 11-27-1967)
§ 252.03 COUNCIL POLICY.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of Council to promote and encourage
the sound development, including renewal and redevelopment where necessary, of
the entire city, in accordance with the general plan for the city. Council
realizes that the city government will be unable to carry out coordinated and
effective programs for renewal without the cooperation and support of the
public as a whole. Therefore, Council stands ready to cooperate with private
enterprise, civic groups, neighborhood agencies and governmental agencies in
developing and carrying out urban renewal programs and projects to promote the
sound development of new areas, to prevent the spread of slums and blight and
to eliminate slums, blighted, deteriorated and deteriorating areas in the city.
(Prior Code, § 252.03) (Ord. 242-1967, passed 11-27-1967)
§ 252.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENCY or URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY or LOCAL PUBLIC AGENCY or CITY. The City of
Barberton, Ohio.
   DETERIORATING AREA.
      (1)   An area, whether predominantly built up or open, which is not a
slum, blighted or deteriorated area but which, because of incompatible land
uses, non-conforming uses, lack of adequate parking facilities, faulty street
arrangement, obsolete platting, inadequate community and public utilities,
diversity of ownership, tax delinquency, increased density of population
without commensurate increases in new residential buildings and community
facilities, high turnover in residential or commercial occupancy, lack of
maintenance and repair of buildings, or any combination thereof, is detrimental
to the public health, safety, morals and general welfare, and which will
deteriorate, or is in danger of deteriorating, into a slum, blighted or
deteriorated area; or
      (2)   An area consisting principally of land in highways, railway or
subway tracks, bridge or tunnel entrances, or other similar facilities which
have a blighting influence on the surrounding area and over which air right
sites can be developed thereby eliminating such blighting influence.
   GENERAL NEIGHBORHOOD RENEWAL PLAN. A plan and program for the urban renewal
or redevelopment of a general neighborhood renewal area. The GENERAL
NEIGHBORHOOD RENEWAL PLAN need not contain all of the required contents set
forth in §
252.07 of this chapter with respect to an urban renewal plan or urban
redevelopment plan. Approval of the GENERAL NEIGHBORHOOD RENEWAL PLAN by
Council does not create authority to carry out project execution activities.
   GENERAL NEIGHBORHOOD RENEWAL AREA. An urban renewal area of such scope that
urban renewal activities therein have to be carried out in more than one
separate urban renewal project, over an estimated period of up to ten years.
   GENERAL PLAN or MASTER PLAN. A broad and general guide and pattern for the
future growth and development of the city including maps, plats, charts and
descriptive, interpretive and analytical narratives, as may be appropriate; and
specifically means the Comprehensive Plan adopted by the City Planning
Commission pursuant to Ohio R.C. 713.02, and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   OPEN SPACE LAND. Land which has not been developed by the construction or
installation of streets, utilities, buildings (except sporadic or incidental
structures) or other site improvements. Whether or not such an area has been
platted in whole or in part does not prevent its being classified as OPEN SPACE
LAND.
   PROJECT AREA or URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA or URBAN RENEWAL AREA. A slum,
blighted, deteriorated or deteriorating area or any combination or part thereof
which Council designates as of a character and size appropriate for urban
renewal activities and for which an urban redevelopment plan or urban renewal
plan is proposed or prepared.
   REDEVELOPER. Any person purchasing property from the city within a project
area or owning property located within such area and entering into a conforming
agreement with the city in consideration of being permitted by the city to
retain title to such property.
   REHABILITATION or CONSERVATION or RECONDITIONING. Includes those
undertakings and activities identified herein.
   SLUM, BLIGHTED OR DETERIORATED AREA. An area within the corporate limits of
the city in which there is a majority of structures or other improvements
which, by reason of dilapidation, deterioration, age or obsolescence,
inadequate provision for ventilation, light, air, sanitation or open spaces,
high density of population and overcrowding, unsafe and unsanitary conditions
or the existence of conditions which endanger life or property by fire or other
hazards and causes, or any combination of such factors, is conducive to ill
health, transmission of disease, infant mortality, juvenile delinquency and
crime and is detrimental to the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare. The term also means an area with overcrowding or improper location of
structures on the land, excessive dwelling unit density, detrimental land uses
or conditions, unsafe, congested or poorly designed streets or inadequate
public facilities or utilities, all of which substantially impair the sound
growth and planning of the community, are conducive to ill health, transmission
of disease, infant mortality, juvenile delinquency and crime, and are
detrimental to the public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
   SLUM CLEARANCE or CLEARANCE or URBAN REDEVELOPMENT. Includes those
undertakings and activities identified herein.
   URBAN RENEWAL or URBAN REDEVELOPMENT. Those activities of the city, with or
without federal or state aid or assistance, for developing, undertaking and
carrying out of urban renewal or redevelopment programs and projects, including
all planning and other related activities of the city in connection therewith,
or any part of such activities.
   URBAN RENEWAL PLAN or URBAN REDEVELOPMENT PLAN. A plan, as it exists from
time to time, for the urban renewal or redevelopment of a project area or part
thereof.
   URBAN RENEWAL PROJECT or URBAN REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT or PROJECT.
Undertakings and activities of the city, with or without federal or state aid
or assistance, in a project area for the elimination and prevention of the
development or spread of slum, blighted, deteriorated or deteriorating areas,
and may involve clearance and redevelopment in a project area, or
rehabilitation and conservation in a project area, or any combination or part
thereof, in accordance with the urban renewal or urban redevelopment plan for
such project area to the full extent of and in accordance with the rights,
powers and authority of the city, whether derived from the applicable
provisions of the Federal or State Constitution or statutes, or from the city
ordinances. Such undertakings and activities in a project area may include:
      (1)   Acquisition of realty, including the acquisition of air rights;
      (2)   Demolition and removal of buildings and improvements;
      (3)   Installation, construction or reconstruction of streets, utilities,
parks, playgrounds and other improvements necessary for carrying out the urban
renewal or urban redevelopment plan;
      (4)   Disposition of property for uses in accordance with the urban
renewal or urban redevelopment plan;
      (5)   Encouragement and assistance to interested residents in a private
program of voluntary repair and rehabilitation of buildings or other
improvements in accordance with the urban renewal plan, with or without aid and
assistance by Federal Housing Administration mortgage insurance or special
support for mortgage financing through the Federal National Mortgage
Association or similar organizations;
      (6)   Acquisition of any real property where necessary to eliminate
unhealthful, unsanitary or unsafe conditions, to reduce the lot occupancy or
population density that creates such conditions, to eliminate uses incompatible
with the general character of a neighborhood, which are detrimental to the
public welfare, or otherwise to remove or prevent the spread of blight or
deterioration or to provide land for needed public facilities; and disposition
of property, acquired in accordance with this subparagraph, for voluntary
repair and rehabilitation of buildings or other improvements in accordance with
the urban renewal plan;
      (7)   Construction of foundations and platforms necessary for the
appropriate provision of air right sites in accordance with the urban renewal
or urban redevelopment plan; and
      (8)   Acquisition and repair or rehabilitation for guidance purposes and
resale, of structures which, under the urban renewal plan, are to be repaired
or rehabilitated for dwelling use or related facilities; provided, however,
that, there shall not be acquired for such purposes, in any project area,
buildings which contain or will contain more than 100 dwelling units, or 5% of
the total number of dwelling units in such area which, under the urban renewal
plan, are to be repaired or rehabilitated, whichever is the lesser. The URBAN
RENEWAL PROJECT shall not include the construction or improvement by the city
of any building other than municipal buildings, except as provided herein.
(Prior Code, § 252.04) (Ord. 242-1967, passed 11-27-1967)
§ 252.05 DESIGNATION OF MAYOR AS SUPERVISOR.
   The Mayor is hereby charged with the responsibility of supervising the urban
renewal and urban redevelopment activities of the city, coordinating the
activities of the several officers, employees, commissions and boards concerned
with such projects and executing on behalf of the city, as its authorized
representative, all applications to the federal government for grants, loans
and advances.
(Prior Code, § 252.05) (Ord. 242-1967, passed 11-27-1967)
§ 252.06 PREPARATION OF STUDIES AND PLANS.
   The Mayor shall enter into such contracts on behalf of the city with
engineers, architects and other professional services as may be necessary to
provide the necessary inspections, studies, plans, surveys and reports in
connection with the preparation of a general neighborhood renewal plan and in
connection with those urban renewal or redevelopment activities to be
undertaken by the city to the extent that funds have been appropriated
therefor. The Planning Commission may itself conduct such inspections, studies,
plans, surveys and reports. When studies, plans, surveys and reports pursuant
to this section have been prepared, they shall be submitted to Council and
filed as provided from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 252.06) (Ord. 242-1967, passed 11-27-1967)
§ 252.07 CONTENTS OF PLAN; SUPPORTING DOCUMENTATION; RELOCATION PLAN.
   (A)   Any urban renewal or redevelopment plan hereafter prepared shall be
prepared in such detail as to clearly set forth sufficient information to
permit the Planning Commission to exercise its power of approval or disapproval
under §
6.01 of the City Charter and such plan shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
      (1)   A description of the boundaries of the project area;
      (2)   A land use plan showing the location, the character and extent of
public and private land ownership, the utilities and the use and occupancy
proposed within the area;
      (3)   A delineation of the areas of land acquisition and such demolition
and removal or rehabilitation, conservation or reconditioning of existing
structures, if any, as may be proposed to be carried out in the project area;
and
      (4)   A statement indicating the controls, the use and the development
and building restrictions to be placed on the property in the project area in
order to prevent a recurrence of slum or blighted conditions; and, in addition
thereto, such plan or its supporting documentation shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
         (a)   A report showing the proposed changes, if any, in the building,
housing or zoning ordinances or in maps, street layouts, levels or grades;
         (b)   A statement from the appropriate city official setting forth the
capability of the city to finance that portion of the project costs to be
contributed by the city; and
         (c)   A statement of the relationship of the plan to those definite
objectives of the city respecting appropriate land uses, improved traffic
conditions and transportation, public utilities, recreation and community
facilities and other public improvements.
   (B)   A relocation plan shall indicate a feasible method for the temporary
relocation of individuals and families displaced from the project area and
shall also indicate that there are or are being provided in the project area,
or in other areas not generally less desirable with regard to public utilities
and public and commercial facilities, at rents or prices within the financial
means of the individuals and families to be displaced from the project area,
decent, safe and sanitary dwellings equal in number to the number of such
displaced individuals and families, available to them and reasonably accessible
to their places of employment.
(Prior Code, § 252.07) (Ord. 242-1967, passed 11-27-1967)
§ 252.08 ACTION BY PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   When a general neighborhood renewal plan or an urban renewal or urban
redevelopment plan and the supporting documentation therefor is filed with
Council, Council shall refer such plan and supporting documentation to the
Planning Commission for its review and recommendations, including the exercise
of its power of approval or disapproval under §
6.01 of the City Charter and its certification as to whether or not such plan
is in conformity with the general plan of the city, by causing a copy of such
plan and supporting documentation to be delivered to the person charged with
the preparation and custody of the record of proceedings of the Commission.
   (B)   The Commission shall submit in writing to Council its approval or
recommendations concerning such plan. The approval of the Commission shall also
constitute its approval of those matters placed under its jurisdiction by §
6.01 of the City Charter, except as the recommendations of the Commission may
include a disapproval pursuant to such section. Except as recommendations or
disapprovals are received from the Commission on or before the thirtieth day
after the day of delivery to the person charged with the preparation and
custody of the record of proceedings of the Commission of such plan and
supporting documentation, the plan shall be conclusively presumed to have been
approved by the Commission.
(Prior Code, § 252.08) (Ord. 242-1967, passed 11-27-1967)
§ 252.09 PUBLIC HEARING; COUNCIL ACTION.
   (A)   Council, before approving a general neighborhood renewal plan or an
urban renewal or urban redevelopment plan, shall hold a public hearing on the
plan at which time an opportunity shall be provided to all persons interested
to be heard either in person or by counsel, which hearing may be adjourned from
time to time. Notice of the date, time and place of such hearing shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city once a week for two
consecutive weeks on the same day of the week and at least seven full days
shall elapse between the second publication and the date set for the public
hearing. Such notice shall also contain a description of the project area by
its location in relation to highways, streets, watercourses or other natural or
artificial boundaries, and shall also designate the place at which the plan,
maps, plats and other materials describing the project area are available for
public inspection.
   (B)   (1)   Following the completion of such public hearing, Council may
either approve or reject the general neighborhood renewal plan or the urban
renewal or urban redevelopment plan or make modifications and approve such plan
as modified, with the following exceptions:
         (a)   If the boundaries of the project area are extended to include
any land (except land contained within the right-of-way lines of a dedicated
street or alley) not included in the urban renewal or urban redevelopment plan
upon which the public hearing was held, pursuant to division (A) above;
         (b)   If there is added a type of urban renewal or redevelopment
activity not included in the urban renewal or urban redevelopment plan upon
which such public hearing was held, which requires the acquisition of property;
or
         (c)   If there is any change in land use or redevelopment restrictions
contained in the urban renewal or urban redevelopment plan upon which such
public hearing was held.
      (2)   If any or all of such exceptions exist, then a public hearing shall
be held on such urban renewal or urban redevelopment plan as modified, prior to
the approval thereof by Council, in accordance with the provisions of division
(A) above.
      (3)   If such modifications are other than in accordance with the
recommendations of the Planning Commission, such general neighborhood renewal
plan or urban renewal plan or urban redevelopment plan, as modified, shall be
resubmitted to the Commission for its written approval or recommendations
pursuant to the provisions of §
252.08 of this chapter.
   (C)   When Council wishes to approve a general neighborhood renewal plan or
an urban renewal or redevelopment plan, it shall do so by ordinance passed by
not less than a majority vote, after reading in full on three separate days or
under suspension of rules; provided, however, if such plan has not been
approved by the Commission, or if there were any partial disapprovals by or
adverse recommendations of the Commission under §
6.01 of the City Charter, not accepted by Council by its modifications of the
plan in accordance therewith, then an affirmative vote of two-thirds of the
members of Council shall be required to pass such ordinance and, to the extent
that such disapproval involves the construction of an improvement or utility
within the meaning of §
6.01 of the City Charter, the concurrence of the head of the department or
departments having control of the construction of such proposed improvement or
utility shall also be necessary.
   (D)   The ordinance of Council approving a general neighborhood renewal plan
should contain a finding that such plan conforms to the general plan and to the
workable program of the city and such other findings as may be necessary or
desirable, but need not contain those findings set forth in division (E) below
for approval of urban renewal or redevelopment plans. Such approval of a
general neighborhood renewal plan may be made before or at the same time as the
approval of an urban renewal or redevelopment plan for a project within the
general neighborhood renewal area.
   (E)   The ordinance of Council approving an urban renewal or redevelopment
plan shall include the following findings:
      (1)   Specific finding of fact as to the conditions in the project area
which make it a slum, blighted, deteriorated or deteriorating area, and
findings that the project area is a slum, blighted, deteriorated or
deteriorating area;
      (2)   That the size and character of the area and the location of
elements of slum, blight and deterioration in the area make it appropriate for
urban renewal activities;
      (3)   That the proposals for the proper relocation of individuals and
families displaced in carrying out the project, in decent, safe and sanitary
dwellings in conformity with acceptable standards, are feasible and can be
reasonably effected in sufficient time to permit the proper prosecution and
completion of the project; that such dwellings or dwelling units available or
to be made available to such displaced individuals and families are at least
equal in number to the number of displaced individuals and families; that they
are not generally less desirable in regard to public utilities and public and
commercial facilities than the dwellings of the displaced individuals and
families in the project area; that they are available at rents or prices within
the financial means of the displaced individuals and families; and that they
are reasonably accessible to their places of employment;
      (4)   That if Federal aid is needed, such financial aid to be provided by
the federal government under its contract is necessary to enable the project to
be undertaken in accordance with the plan;
      (5)   That the plan for the project area will afford maximum opportunity
consistent with the sound needs of the community as a whole for the
rehabilitation or redevelopment of the project area by private enterprise;
      (6)   That the plan conforms to the existing general or master plan for
the overall development of the city as prepared by the Commission pursuant to §
6.01 of the City Charter;
      (7)   That the plan gives due consideration to the provision of such
adequate park and recreational areas and facilities as may be desirable for
neighborhood improvement, with special consideration for the health, safety and
welfare of the children residing in the general vicinity of the site covered by
the plan;
      (8)   That if there is included in the plan any provision permitting the
new construction of hotels, motels or other housing for transient use, the city
has caused to be made a competent independent analysis of the local supply of
transient housing and, as a result thereof, determines that there exists in the
project area a need for additional units of such housing;
      (9)   That if the project area is not predominantly residential in
character and is not to be redeveloped for predominantly residential use, the
redevelopment of the project area for predominantly non-residential uses is
necessary for the proper development of the community;
      (10)   That where an open space land program is involved, the land and
the interests in land to be acquired are for the purpose of preserving such
area as open space land and are necessary to orderly long range development, to
curb urban sprawl and the spread of urban blight and deterioration, to
encourage more economical and desirable urban development and to provide areas
for parks, playgrounds, parkways, conservation areas and watersheds, and to
preserve natural resources, and that the area to be so acquired is of a size
and character appropriate for such purposes;
      (11)   That if federal aid is involved and clearing is the sole treatment
proposed, the objectives of the urban renewal plan cannot be achieved through
rehabilitation of the urban renewal area;
      (12)   That if federal aid is involved and both clearance and
rehabilitation treatment are proposed, the objectives of the urban renewal plan
cannot be achieved through more extensive rehabilitation of the urban renewal
area;
      (13)   That if federal aid is involved, the United States of America and
the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development are hereby
assured of full compliance by the city with regulations of the Department of
Housing and Urban Development effectuating Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of
1964, being Pub. L. No. 88-352, and relevant portions of any subsequent civil
rights acts; and
      (14)   That where an educational institution or a hospital is located in
or near the project area and it is desired to utilize § 112 of the Housing Act
of 1949, being 42 U.S.C. §§§ 1450 et seq., as amended, in addition to the
elimination of slums and blight from such area, the undertaking of an urban
renewal or urban redevelopment project in such area will further promote the
public welfare and the proper development of the community by making land in
such area available for disposition, for uses in accordance with the urban
renewal or urban redevelopment plan, to such educational institution or
hospital for redevelopment in accordance with the uses specified in the urban
renewal or urban redevelopment plan, by providing, through the redevelopment of
the area in accordance with the urban renewal or urban redevelopment plan, a
cohesive neighborhood environment compatible with the functions and needs of
such educational institution or hospitals, or by any combination of the
foregoing.
   (F)   Any documents which were submitted to Council to support findings in
the ordinance provided for in division (E) above should be filed by the Clerk
of Council with a copy of the ordinance.
   (G)   The taking effect of the ordinance approving an urban renewal or
redevelopment plan shall constitute authority to spend moneys of the city
appropriated for carrying out urban renewal or redevelopment activities in
accordance with the plan, as well as the proceeds of bonds or notes issued for
such purpose, and to accept advances, gifts, donations and grants from the
federal government, the state, any entity, instrumentality or subdivision of
either, or from any other entity or person for such purpose.
(Prior Code, § 252.09) (Ord. 242-1967, passed 11-27-1967)
§ 252.10 FEDERAL AID CONTRACTS.
   Any contract with a federal agency for loans, advances, grants or other
federal aid to the city shall be approved by the Law Director as to form and
legality and, after approval and authorization by ordinance of Council, shall
be executed by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 252.10) (Ord. 242-1967, passed 11-27-1967)
§ 252.11 MODIFICATION OF PLANS.
   (A)   An approved urban renewal plan may be amended, modified or changed by
ordinance of Council from time to time. However, if the boundaries of the
project area are extended to include any land (except land contained within the
right-of-way lines of a dedicated street or alley) not previously included
therein; if there is added a new type of urban renewal activity which requires
the acquisition of property; if there is any change in the land use or
redevelopment restrictions; if there is a change in the proposed location,
extent or character of a public improvement or utility within the project area
or in any matter directly within the jurisdiction of the Planning Commission to
approve or disapprove under §
6.01 of the City Charter; or if such amendment, modification or change is
deemed by Council to be a substantial change in the urban renewal or
redevelopment plan; then all of the proceedings provided for in §§
252.08 and
252.09 of this chapter shall be carried out in connection with such amendment,
modification or change; except that, the findings to be made in the ordinance
approving the urban renewal or urban redevelopment plan shall be altered to fit
the changed circumstances. The land use or redevelopment restrictions
applicable to any land previously conveyed by the city may not be amended,
modified or changed without the consent of the owner thereof.
   (B)   A general neighborhood renewal plan may be amended, modified or
changed by ordinance of Council from time to time, provided that any such
amendment, modification or change is submitted to the Commission for its
written approval or recommendations pursuant to the provisions of §
252.08 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 252.11) (Ord. 242-1967, passed 11-27-1967)
§ 252.12 EXECUTION OF PLAN.
   (A)   Acquisition of property. As authorized by Council, the Urban Renewal
Director, with the appropriate advice and assistance of the Law Director, shall
cause the necessary steps to be taken to acquire parcels of land in the project
area in accordance with the urban renewal or redevelopment plan, including, but
not limited to, negotiating for such parcels and obtaining appraisals, title
examinations and reports. The Mayor shall execute contracts for any of such
services and appropriate documents to transfer title to the city. However, in
the event appropriation of property is necessary, Council shall initiate and
carry out the necessary proceedings, with the appropriate assistance of the
several officers, employees, boards and commissions of the city. Acquisition
may take place at any time after compliance with §§
252.08 and
252.09 of this chapter.
   (B)   Preparation for disposition of property. After any necessary
appropriations of city moneys and authorization of expenditures by ordinances
of Council; Council action, where appropriate, to rezone property, vacate or
dedicate streets or other public places and provide for the establishment and
preservation of open space areas; certification of funds by the City Auditor,
where appropriate; and preparation of or approval of legal form of contracts by
the Law Director; the Mayor shall make the contracts and cause the purchase of
the necessary supplies and materials and the provision of the necessary labor
for such city activities as may be necessary to carry out the urban renewal
project, including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The demolition, rehabilitation or repair of structures, whether
voluntarily by the private owners thereof or by the city for demonstration
purposes in limited numbers;
      (2)   The removal of pavement, sidewalk, lighting and trees;
      (3)   The capping, removal and relocation of city-owned utility lines;
      (4)   The grading and construction of site improvements and supporting
facilities;
      (5)   The temporary lease, rental or permission to let others use
structures or parcels of land while owned by the city;
      (6)   The necessary relocation activities;
      (7)   The enforcement of any applicable provisions of law or conforming
agreements relative to building, zoning and platting; and
      (8)   The repair or rehabilitation of land and structures remaining in
private ownership.
   (C)   Disposition of property. Council may authorize by ordinance the
transfer, lease or conveyance of any real property in accordance with and for
the purpose of the plan, subject to such lawful terms, conditions, restrictions
and covenants, including covenants running with the land, to assist in carrying
out the purposes of the plan. All dispositions of real property shall be at not
less than the fair value thereof as determined by Council based upon the
proposed new uses and restrictions thereon to be imposed thereon under the
urban renewal plan by Council through zoning ordinances, private covenants or
otherwise. Such determination shall be made only after obtaining independent
appraisals of such fair value upon the aforesaid bases, which appraisals shall
not be binding upon the city. The manner of disposition shall be prescribed by
ordinance and may be by negotiation, with or without any competitive bidding,
and such competition and award of a disposition contract may be based on
factors other than price alone. Two weeks publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city shall be sufficient notice for the taking of
competitive bids or of the execution of a disposition contract without
competitive bidding. The financial and legal ability of those proposing to
acquire or lease such real property shall be considered in all dispositions.
The Mayor shall execute, on behalf of the city, such instruments as may be
necessary to transfer, lease or convey such real property in the form approved
by the Law Director and authorized by Council, which form shall include all
covenants running with the land, including any portions of the plan
incorporated by reference, and shall execute any certificates of completion of
improvements or other appropriate instruments, on behalf of the city, that may
be necessary in accordance with any covenants in such instruments of lease or
conveyance.
   (D)   Conforming agreement with property owners. If the owner of property in
the project area is willing to make the use of his or her property conform to
the urban renewal or redevelopment plan and Council determines that the
acquisition of such property by the city will not be necessary if so conformed,
the Mayor, upon Council’s authorization, may enter into a conforming agreement
upon such terms and security as may be authorized by Council. Such agreement
may provide for the acquisition of property upon continued failure of the
property owner to keep his or her agreement after notice from the city
specifying such failure.
   (E)   Agreements with other redevelopment agencies. In the execution of
urban renewal or redevelopment projects, Council may authorize, as to any
appropriate projects or parts of projects, the employment of community
improvement corporations, community redevelopment corporations and metropolitan
housing authorities, as defined by the statutes of the state and, when
authorized by ordinance of Council, may grant leases, make conveyances and
enter into agreements with such corporations related to appropriate aspects of
such projects to the full extent of the powers possessed by such corporations.
(Prior Code, § 252.12) (Ord. 242-1967, passed 11-27-1967)
§ 252.13 FINANCE.
   The cost of urban renewal activities may be paid in whole or in part by the
city from the appropriate general or special fund or from accounts established
pursuant to Ohio R.C. Ch. 135 and 5705 and the city may accept grants or gifts
of moneys or real personal property from persons, entities, governments or
taxing authorities to be used for the planning and financing of such urban
renewal activities. All bonds or notes payable from the general credit and
taxes of the city to finance urban renewal activities shall be issued in
accordance with the applicable provisions of Ohio R.C. Ch. 133. Accounts shall
be maintained for the carrying out of those urban renewal activities being
financed by loans or advances from the Federal government separate from any
other city accounts, including city accounts used to carry out any activities
being financed by the City; no money or real or personal property shall in any
way be pledged as security for the repayment of any federal loans or advances,
except the separately described portion of a project area set aside for such
purpose, together with the proceeds from the sale, lease or temporary operation
thereof and with federal capital grant moneys earned in connection therewith,
in order to avoid violating statutory and constitutional debt and tax
limitations.
(Prior Code, § 252.13) (Ord. 242-1967, passed 11-27-1967)
§ 252.14 BUILDING PERMITS.
   After approval of an urban renewal or redevelopment plan by Council, no
building permit shall be issued for the improvement or enlargement of any
existing structure, or for the construction of a new structure, in the
clearance and redevelopment portion of the project area; except that, such
permit may be issued for the repair of an existing structure when such repair
is deemed necessary by the Mayor for the immediate preservation of the public
health and safety or is required by the redeveloper in accordance with the
redevelopment plan.
(Prior Code, § 252.14) (Ord. 242-1967, passed 11-27-1967)
§ 252.15 TAX EXEMPTION; LIEN.
   (A)   All property of the city, including funds, owned or held by it for the
purposes of this chapter, shall be exempt from levy and sale by virtue of an
execution and no execution or other judicial process shall issue against the
same, nor shall judgment against the city be a charge or lien upon such
property. However, the provisions of this section shall not apply to or limit
the right of obligees to pursue any remedies for the enforcement of any pledge
or lien given pursuant to this chapter by the city on its rents, fees, grants
or revenues from urban renewal or redevelopment projects.
   (B)   The property of the city, acquired or held for the purposes of this
chapter on January 1 of any year, is declared to be public property used
exclusively for essential public and governmental purposes and such property
shall be exempt from all taxes of the city, county, state or any taxing
authority thereof. However, such tax exemptions shall terminate when the city
sells, leases or otherwise disposes of such property in a project area to a
purchaser or lessee which is not a person, corporation, partnership or other
association entitled to tax exemption with respect to such property.
(Prior Code, § 252.15) (Ord. 242-1967, passed 11-27-1967)
CHAPTER 253: DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES
Section
253.01   Director of Human Resources and Labor Relations.
Cross-reference:
   County human services departments, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 329
   Department of Aging, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 173
   Employment of minors, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4109
   State Human Services Department, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 5101
§ 253.01 DIRECTOR OF HUMAN RESOURCES AND LABOR RELATIONS.
   (A)   The non-bargaining and unclassified position of Director of Human
Resources and Labor Relations is hereby established.
   (B)   Pursuant to §
3.05 of the City Charter, the Mayor shall hire the individual to fill this
position and, pursuant to §
5.14 of the City Charter, Council shall fix the compensation for this position
at a later date.
(Prior Code, § 253.01) (Ord. 136-1997, passed 7-28-1997)
CHAPTER 254: EMPLOYEES GENERALLY
Section
254.01   Bonds.
254.02   Use of city-owned vehicles.
254.03   Use of personal automobiles.
254.04   Residency requirements.
254.05   Compensation for work in higher job classifications.
254.06   Personal day; longevity pay.
254.07   Tuition reimbursement.
254.08   Health benefit plan.
254.09   Health care coverage.
254.10   Payment of medical co-insurance to retirees.
254.11   Vacation pay upon retirement.
254.12   PERS pick-up.
254.13   Police and Firemen’s Disability and Pension Fund pick-up.
254.14   Equal Opportunity Policy.
254.15   Vehicle, wireless phones and credit card policy.
Editor’s note:
   The city executes agreements from time to time with representatives of
various classes of municipal employees, which agreements provide for
compensation, benefits and conditions of employment. Copies of the latest
relevant legislation, and of such agreements, may be obtained, at cost, from
the Clerk of Council.
   Because of the frequency of change, provisions relating to compensation and
certain employee benefits are not codified. Copies of the latest relevant
legislation may be obtained, at cost, from the Clerk of Council.
Cross-reference:
   Civil Service Commission, see CHTR. §
6.04(b); ADM. Ch.
268
   Conflict of interest, see CHTR. §
11.07
   Continuation of pre-Charter employees and officials, see CHTR. §§ 11.02,
11.03
   Oath of office, see CHTR. §
11.06
   Offenses relating to public office, see GEN. OFF.
606.10 et seq.
   Polygraph tests, see B.R. & T. Ch.
848
   Power of Council to fix bonds and authorize expenses, see CHTR. §
5.14
   Public Employees’ Retirement System, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 145
   Removal from office, see Ohio R.C. 3.07 et seq.
§ 254.01 BONDS.
   The following persons in the classified and unclassified service of the city
shall be required to furnish good and sufficient bonds for the faithful
performance of the duties of their office in the amount set forth. Such bonds
shall be to the satisfaction of the Mayor, except that the Mayor’s bond shall
be to the satisfaction of the Auditor. All bonds shall be deposited with the
Auditor; except that, the Auditor’s bond shall be deposited with the Treasurer.
When the term of the Auditor expires and his or her functions are assumed by
the Director of Finance, then the Mayor’s bond shall be to the satisfaction of
the Director of Finance and all bonds shall be deposited with the Director of
Finance; except that, the bond of the Director of Finance shall be deposited
with the Mayor.
All other employees in Division of Taxation $1,000 each
Assistant City Engineer                     $1,000
Auditor                                     $2,000
Bailiffs - Municipal Court                  $3,000 each
Building Commissioner                       $2,000
Cashier - Division of Taxation              $10,000
City Engineer                               $1,000
Clerk of Council                            $500
Clerk of the Division of Police             $3,000
Clerk - Municipal Court                     $6,000
Deputy Clerks - Municipal Court             $1,000 each
Director of Finance                         $10,000
Director of Law                             $1,000
Director of Public Service                  $1,000
Director of Public Safety                   $1,000
Investigator - Division of Taxation         $2,000
Mayor                                       $2,000
Parking Meter Maintenance and Repair Man    $1,000
Secretary to the Auditor                    $1,000
Senior Clerk - Division of Taxation         $2,000
Superintendent of Streets                   $1,000
Treasurer                                   $10,000
Utilities Division personnel                $10,000 (blanket bond)
Utility Clerk-Division of Taxation          $5,000
 
(Prior Code, § 254.01)
§ 254.02 USE OF CITY-OWNED VEHICLES.
   (a)   No official or employee of the city shall use any city-owned vehicle,
except for official business, nor shall any city-owned vehicle be used by any
of such persons outside the city limits at any time, except on specific
instructions of the Director of Public Service and for official business only.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is subject to immediate dismissal from
the public service.
(Prior Code, § 254.02) (Ord. 65-1941, passed 6-7-1941)
§ 254.03 USE OF PERSONAL AUTOMOBILES.
   (A)   The following persons shall be required to furnish an automobile with
which to perform the duties of their respective offices and shall be reimbursed
for gasoline expenses, parking fees and toll fees:
      (1)   Nurses - Health Department (four);
      (2)   Planning Director;
      (3)   Dog Warden;
      (4)   Probation Officer - Municipal Court;
      (5)   Health Commissioner - Health Department;
      (6)   Staff Planner - Planning Department;
      (7)   Sanitary Inspector - Health Department;
      (8)   WIC Nutritionist - Health Department;
      (9)   Director of Environmental Health;
      (10)   NCS Housing Coordinator;
      (11)   NCS Housing Inspector;
      (12)   Recycle Center Manager - effective 4-1-1982;
      (13)   Litter Control Educator - effective 4-1-1982; and
      (14)   Utilities Superintendent - effective 12-1-1983.
   (B)   The above listed city employees shall be reimbursed at the rate of
$0.18 for each mile they travel while in the performance of their official
duties on behalf of the city. This does not include mileage incurred while
driving to and from work, to and from lunch, or traveling resulting from an
activity of a personal nature done during working hours or at any other time.
   (C)   The above listed city employees shall also be reimbursed for all
parking fees and toll road fees paid for by the employee from his or her own
personal moneys which may be incurred while in the performance of his or her
official duties on behalf of the city.
   (D)   Before any employee is reimbursed for mileage, parking fees or toll
fees, he or she must present to the City Auditor a receipt for each parking
fee, a receipt for each toll road fee and a report showing the exact number of
miles traveled each day while in the performance of his or her official duties.
Each employee is also required to sign an affidavit alleging the accuracy and
truthfulness of his or her claimed expenses.
   (E)   Each employee who desires to be reimbursed shall deliver to the City
Auditor his or her report and/or receipts at the end of each month. The Auditor
shall then make the necessary computations and pay such employee as soon as
possible, but in any event not later than ten days after receiving the reports
and receipts from the employee. The Auditor shall pay by separate check and
shall not include this money in an employee’s regular paycheck.
   (F)   Any employee who falsifies any report or receipt shall be subject to
immediate dismissal, in addition to any other penalties provided by law for
falsification.
(Prior Code, § 254.03) (Ord. 147-1973, passed 7-2-1973; Ord. 7-1980, passed 1-
7-1980; Ord. 87-1998, passed 6-22-1998)
§ 254.04 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall be appointed to a full-time or part-time position in
the service of the city unless he or she resides within a 15-mile radius of the
flag pole bearing the American flag in front of the Barberton City Hall for the
period during which he or she occupies such position for the city; provided,
however, that, the provisions of this section shall not apply to persons
occupying positions for the city as of 10-10-1976. Current employees of the
city living within the city limits may move out of the city so long as they
live within the 15-mile radius.
   (B)   Any new full-time or part-time employees hired by the city after the
effective date of this section who do not reside within a 15-mile radius of the
Barberton City Hall shall, as a condition of his or her employment, move within
a 15-mile radius of the Barberton City Hall within 365 days after he or she is
hired. Any such employee hired after the effective date of this section who
fails to move into the 15-mile radius within the appropriate 365-day period
shall be terminated from his or her employment by the appropriate appointing
authority.
   (C)   Upon the recommendation of the Mayor, and with the approval of the
Personnel Committee of City Council, all residency requirements as provided in
this section may be waived or modified on an individual case by case basis.
Such written approval from the Personnel Committee shall be conveyed to the
Mayor in writing by its Chairperson as a result of a majority vote of the
Committee. The waiving or modification of such residency requirements as
provided in this section shall not be done to evade the spirit of this section.
The waiving or modification of such requirements should only be considered for
the purpose of employment, recruitment or retainment of specialized,
professional or highly skilled city employees.
   (D)   The following positions, defined as “department heads”, are required
to be residents of the city under §
4.01 of the City Charter:
      (1)   Director of Safety;
      (2)   Director of Public Service;
      (3)   Director of Human Resources;
      (4)   Director of Utilities;
      (5)   Director of Planning;
      (6)   Director of Beautification;
      (7)   Director of Parks and Recreation;
      (8)   Building Commissioner;
      (9)   Health Commissioner;
      (10)   Fire Chief;
      (11)   Police Chief; and
      (12)   City Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 254.04) (Ord. 186-1990, passed 12-10-1990; Ord. 2-1991, passed
1-7-1991; Ord. 187-2004, passed 11-22-2004)
§ 254.05 COMPENSATION FOR WORK IN HIGHER JOB CLASSIFICATIONS.
   (A)   A permanent full-time employee of the city who, on the written orders
of his or her division head or department head, works on a job in a higher
classification for more than four consecutive hours, shall be paid at the rate
for such higher classification and in the same step as such employee is in at
the time for the number of hours worked in the higher classification. A
permanent full-time employee shall not be paid at a higher rate under any
circumstances for replacing a department head or a division head.
   (B)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and directed to draw his
or her warrants in payment of such sums as are authorized to be paid under
division (A) above.
(Prior Code, § 254.05) (Ord. 316-1977, passed 11-21-1977)
§ 254.06 PERSONAL DAY; LONGEVITY PAY.
   (A)   Each full-time non-bargaining unit employee shall be entitled to take
one working day off, per year, to be designated as a personal day, with no
reduction in accumulated sick leave.
   (B)   Each full-time non-bargaining unit employee shall be entitled to
longevity pay, effective 4-1-1986, as follows:
 
Years of Service Amount Per Month
0 - 5            $0
5 - 10           $10
10 - 15          $20
15 - 20          $35
20 and over      $50
 
   (C)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and directed to draw
warrants in payment thereof.
(Prior Code, § 254.06) (Ord. 101-1986, passed 4-28-1986)
§ 254.07 TUITION REIMBURSEMENT.
   (A)   Reimbursement to management level city employees for the cost of
tuition and books for credit courses at Akron University or Kent State
University, upon the prior written approval of the Director of Public Safety,
is hereby authorized.
   (B)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and directed to draw
warrants in payment thereof.
(Prior Code, § 254.07) (Ord. 33-1986, passed 1-27-1986)
§ 254.08 HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN.
   (A)   Council hereby establishes a self-funded hospital benefit plan for
eligible city employees. Such plan shall include medical, dental, vision care
and prescription drug benefits.
   (B)   The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized to enter into a
professional service contract with Klais and Company for the administration of
the hospital benefit plan.
(Prior Code, § 254.08) (Ord. 37-1986, passed 1-27-1986)
§ 254.09 HEALTH CARE COVERAGE.
   (A)   The payment of health care premiums by the city for all full-time,
non-bargaining unit employees is hereby authorized after the first month of
health care coverage.
   (B)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to make payment to the
Health Insurance Fund for said premiums.
   (C)   The provisions of this section apply to all full-time, non-bargaining
unit employees hired after 1-1-1989.
(Prior Code, § 254.085) (Ord. 65-1989, passed 4-10-1989)
§ 254.10 PAYMENT OF MEDICAL CO-INSURANCE TO RETIREES.
   (A)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to pay to any former
employee who retired prior to 4-1-1983, the amount of any medical co-insurance
liability, up to $500 per person or $750 per family in any given calendar year.
The existence and amount of such liability as to any retiree shall be verified
by the Personnel Director prior to payment.
   (B)   The Director of Finance may establish an account for each employee or
his or her dependents who retired prior to 4-1-1983, in order to carry out the
intent of division (A) above.
(Prior Code, § 254.09) (Ord. 205-1984, passed 12-10-1984)
§ 254.11 VACATION PAY UPON RETIREMENT.
   Council hereby grants to all non-bargaining unit employees, as well as to
elected and appointed officials of the city, the option of taking a lump sum
payment at the time of their retirement under the public employees retirement
system (PERS) equal to the number of weeks of vacation due such person in the
year of retirement, up to a maximum of seven weeks, in lieu of taking the
vacation time off. This section shall not affect any other PERS regulations,
nor shall such lump sum payment be included in calculating the retiree’s
pension benefits.
(Prior Code, § 254.10) (Ord. 243-1987, passed 10-26-1987)
§ 254.12 PERS PICK-UP.
   (A)   Pursuant to present federal and state law, all full-time employees of
the city who contribute to the public employees retirement system (PERS) may
defer the federal and state income taxes on a portion of their wages and
salaries if the city picks up the statutorily required contribution by such
employees to PERS.
   (B)   The city will not incur any additional costs in the deferment of
federal and state income taxes.
   (C)   Subject to division (D) below, the full amount of the statutorily
required contribution to PERS shall be withheld from the gross pay of each
employee and shall be “picked up” (assumed and paid to PERS). Such pickup shall
be in lieu of contributions to PERS by each employee. No employee subject to
this pick-up shall have the option of choosing to receive the statutorily
required contribution to PERS directly instead of having it picked up by the
city, or of being excluded from the pick-up. The city shall, in reporting and
making remittance to PERS, report that the public employee’s contribution for
each person subject to such pick-up has been made as provided by statute.
   (D)   If any person entitled to PERS pick-up under this section is subject
to a pick-up by the city of his or her statutorily required contribution to
PERS, other than as provided by this section, the pick-up provided in this
section shall apply only to an amount equal to the difference between the full
amount of that person’s statutorily required contribution to PERS and the
amount which is picked up by the city, other than as provided by this section.
   (E)   The gross wage or salary of any person subject to the pick-up provided
by this section shall not change as a result of such pick-up.
   (F)   The PERS pick-up provided in this section is effective with respect to
all full-time elected and non- bargaining unit employees who contribute to PERS
as of 5-1-1984; and with respect to full-time employees of the A.F.S.C.M.E.
bargaining unit who contribute to PERS, as of 8-1-1985.
   (G)   The Director of Finance is hereby directed to implement the provisions
of this section to effect the pick-up of the statutorily required contributions
to PERS for those employees within the classes established in division (A)
above so as to enable them to obtain the resulting federal and state tax
deferments and other benefits.
(Prior Code, § 254.11) (Ord. 69-1984, passed 4-23-1984; Ord. 136-1985, passed
7-22-1985)
§ 254.13 POLICE AND FIREMEN’S DISABILITY AND PENSION FUND PICK-UP.
   (A)   Pursuant to present federal and state law, all full-time employees of
the Police and Fire Divisions of the city who contribute to the Police and
Firemen’s Disability and Pension Fund of Ohio could defer the federal and state
income taxes on a portion of their wages and salaries if the city would pick up
the statutorily required contribution by such employees to the Police and
Firemen’s Disability and Pension Fund.
   (B)   The city will not incur any additional costs in the deferment of
federal and state income taxes.
   (C)   (1)   Effective 4-1-1984, and subject to division (D) below, the full
amount of the statutorily required contribution to the Police and Firemen’s
Disability and Pension Fund shall be withheld from the gross pay of each
employee and shall be “picked up” (assumed and paid to the Police and Firemen’s
Disability and Pension Fund). Such pick-up shall be designated as the public
employee’s contribution and shall be in lieu of contributions to the Fund by
each employee. No employee subject to such pick-up shall have the option of
choosing to receive the statutorily required contribution to the Fund directly
instead of having it picked up by the city, or of being excluded from the pick-
up.
      (2)   The city shall, in reporting and making remittance to the Fund,
report that the public employee’s contribution for each person subject to such
pick-up has been made as provided by statute.
   (D)   If any person within the classes established in division (A) above is
subject to a pick-up by the city of his or her statutorily required
contribution to the Fund, other than as provided by this section, the pick-up
provided herein shall apply only to an amount equal to the difference between
the full amount of that person’s statutorily required contribution to the Fund
and the amount which is picked up by the city, other than as provided by this
section.
   (E)   The gross wage or salary of any person subject to the pick-up provided
by this section shall not change as a result of such pick-up.
   (F)   The Director of Finance is hereby directed to implement this section
to effect the pick-up of the statutorily required contributions to the Fund for
those employees within the classes established in division (A) above so as to
enable them to obtain the resulting federal and state tax deferments and other
benefits.
   (G)   (1)   Ohio Police and Fire Pension Fund has adopted new procedures for
reporting picked-up contributions in order to properly prepare 1099-R forms for
its members.
      (2)   The Council wishes to reaffirm, amend and/or restate its prior
resolution in order to continue the pick-up under the new procedures.
      (3)   The city will pick up all of the mandatory contributions required
to be paid under Ohio R.C. 742.31 for participating employees of the Fire and
Police Department who are members of the Ohio Police and Fire Pension Fund.
(Prior Code, § 254.12) (Ord. 47-1984, passed 4-2-1984; Res. 74-2013, passed 5-
13-2013)
§ 254.14 EQUAL OPPORTUNITY POLICY.
   (A)   The city maintains a policy of non-discrimination with all employees
and applicants for employment. All aspects of employment with the city will be
governed on the basis of merit, competence and qualifications and will not be
influenced in any manner by race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin,
handicap or any other basis prohibited by statute.
   (B)   All decisions made with respect to recruiting, hiring and promotions
for all job classifications will be based solely on individual qualifications
related to the requirements of the position. Likewise, all other personnel
matters such as compensation, benefits, transfers, reduction-in-force, recall,
training, education and social/recreation programs will be administered free
from any illegal discriminatory practices.
(Prior Code, § 254.14) (Ord. 174-2001, passed 9-10-2001)
§ 254.15 VEHICLE, WIRELESS PHONES AND CREDIT CARD POLICY.
   The Council hereby adopts, by reference, as if fully set out herein, the
city policies regarding the use of vehicles, wireless phones and credit cards.
(Prior Code, § 254.15) (Ord. 201-2004, passed 12-20-2004)
CHAPTER 256: RESIDENTIAL ANTI-DISPLACEMENT
AND RELOCATION PLAN
Section
256.01   Policy adopted.
§ 256.01 POLICY ADOPTED.
   (A)   Adoption. The following “Anti-Displacement and Relocation Assistance
Plan” and the provisions within are adopted as policies of the city.
      (1)   The city utilizes the Community Development Block Grant (CDBG)
funds in an attempt to improve the quality of life for lower income residents.
This takes shape in a variety of projects and programs, from infrastructure
improvements through down-payment assistance loans for first time home buyers.
      (2)   It is the intent of the city to minimize, and where possible, to
eliminate hardship to anyone affected by these projects and programs. Several
project types could potentially cause displacement; however, it is the specific
policy of the city to avoid displacement if at all possible.
      (3)   In situations involving the acquisition of real property, all
acquisition and permanent involuntary displacement activities are carried out
in accordance with the Relocation Plan and the specific requirements of the
source of funding. The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development’s
(HUD’s) regulations must be followed by the city and are HUD’s implementation
requirements of the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition
Policies Act of 1970, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 4601 et seq. (as amended).
   (B)   Temporary involuntary displacement. In the event that temporary
involuntary displacement should become unavoidable, the city or its agent, in
conformance with the appropriate regulations, would arrange and absorb all
activities and expenses associated with temporary relocation. Considerations
given to selection of temporary housing include, but are not limited to, the
proximity to the site from which the displacement occurred; availability of
rental units; safety and sanitary conditions of the unit and proximity to
amenities.
   (C)   Permanent involuntary displacement. In the event permanent relocation
is necessary, the city or its agent, in conformance with the appropriate
regulations, would arrange and absorb all activities and expenses associated
with the relocation. Such expenses include storage, moving and housing.
Considerations given to selection of housing include, but are not limited to,
the proximity to the site from which the displacement occurred; comparability
to the unit from which the displacement occurred; availability of units; safety
and sanitary conditions of the unit; and proximity to amenities.
   (D)   Summary. The city’s policy is to avoid permanent involuntary
displacement if at all possible. If unavoidable, it is the city’s obligation to
ensure relocation is carried out according to the regulations and to ensure any
inconveniences are minimized during the execution of the particular project.
(Prior Code, § 256.01) (Res. 64-2006, passed 4-24-2006)
TITLE EIGHT: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 260: PLANNING COMMISSION
Editor’s note:
   The Planning Department exists as an adjunct of the Planning Commission. It
is not created by the Charter and has not been formally established by
ordinance.
   There are no sections in Ch. 260. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross-    references and any future legislation.
Cross-reference:
   Appointment and qualifications of Director of City Planning, see CHTR. §
6.01(b), (d)
   Establishment, membership and organization, see CHTR. §
6.01(a)
   Mandatory referral, see CHTR. §
6.01(c)
   Powers and duties, see CHTR. §
6.01(b)
   Responsibility regarding urban renewal, see ADM. Ch.
252
CHAPTER 262: BOARD OF ZONING AND BUILDING APPEALS
Editor’s note:
    Provisions relating to the Board of Zoning and Building Appeals are
codified in § 1350.04 of the Barberton Development Code, which is separately
published by the city. This chapter has been established to provide a place for
cross-references only.
Cross-reference:
   Appeals to the Board, see CHTR. §
6.02(d)
   Establishment, membership and organization, see CHTR. §
6.02(a)
   Jurisdiction, see CHTR. §
6.02(b)
   Meetings and procedure, see CHTR. §
6.02(c)
CHAPTER 264: PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
Section
264.01   Coordination of engineering and inspection services.
Editor’s note:
   The Parks and Recreation Department exists as an adjunct of the Parks and
Recreation Commission. It is not created by the Charter and has not been
formally established by ordinance.
Cross-reference:
   Appointment and qualifications of Director, see CHTR. §
6.03(b),(c)
   Establishment, membership and organization, see CHTR. §
6.03(a)
   Parks and recreation areas, see S.U. & P.S. Ch.
1068
   Powers and duties, see CHTR. §
6.03(b)
   Unguarded swimming prohibited, see GEN. OFF.
660.19
   Vacation or sale of park property, see CHTR. §
5.15
§ 264.01 COORDINATION OF ENGINEERING AND INSPECTION SERVICES.
   (A)   The Parks and Recreation Commission, through the Director of Public
Service and the City Engineer, shall coordinate all engineering and inspection
services, including, but not limited to, the preparation of bid specifications
needed for the lands or buildings owned or used for park and recreation
purposes.
   (B)   The Director of Public Service and the City Engineer shall provide
engineering and inspection services to the Parks and Recreation Commission or
hire an outside engineering firm to provide such services.
(Prior Code, § 264.01) (Ord. 198-1997, passed 12-8-1997)
CHAPTER 266: BOARD OF HEALTH
Section
266.01   Non-smoking area designation.
266.02   Hospital bed deposits.
266.03   Clothing allowance for nurse.
266.04   Self-insurance.
Editor’s note:
   The Health Department exists as an adjunct of the Board of Health. It is not
created by the Charter and has not been formally established by ordinance.
   The Board of Health enforces the provisions of the Ohio Sanitary Code and
the City Health District Sanitary Code. Copies of such codes are available, at
cost, at the office of the Board.
Cross-reference:
   Appointment and administration, see CHTR. §
6.04(a)
   Authority to establish, see CHTR. §
6.05
   Consent and approval of appointment of Director of Akron-Barberton Air
Pollution Control Agency, see GEN. OFF.
610.03
   Safety, sanitation and health, see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 660
§ 266.01 NON-SMOKING AREA DESIGNATION.
   Council hereby appoints the Health Commissioner of the city as the official
responsible for designating non-smoking areas in buildings owned by the city,
pursuant to Ohio law.
(Prior Code, § 266.01) (Ord. 13-1977, passed 1-17-1977)
§ 266.02 HOSPITAL BED DEPOSITS.
   (A)   A security deposit of $25 is required by the Health Department for the
rental of a hospital bed from the Health Department by residents of the city.
   (B)   Such deposit is to be placed in Trust Fund 34 to be used for the
repair or replacement of the hospital beds, mattresses and mattress covers.
Such deposit will be refunded if beds are returned in good condition.
(Prior Code, § 266.02) (Ord. 254-1980, passed 11-24-1980)
§ 266.03 CLOTHING ALLOWANCE FOR NURSES.
   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and directed to draw his or her
warrants for the nurses of the Health Department in the amount of $100 per year
for a clothing allowance.
(Prior Code, § 266.03) (Ord. 160-1980, passed 7-21-1980)
§ 266.04 SELF-INSURANCE.
   The city shall henceforth act as its own insurer with regard to any
liability which may be incurred by the Board of Health, the Health Commissioner
and the employees of the Health Department, for false arrest, bodily injury or
property damage in the performance of their official duties in the scope of
their employment. In any action brought against the Board of Health, the Health
Commissioner or the employees of the Health Department, the Law Director shall
act as legal counsel. An insuror of record will be the primary insurer in every
case.
(Prior Code, § 266.04) (Res. 59-1980, passed 3-17-1980)
CHAPTER 268: CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
Editor’s note:
   There are no sections in Ch. 268. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross-references and any future legislation.
Cross-reference:
   Application to police and fire personnel, see Ohio R.C. 737.051, 737.10,
737.11
   Civil service, see Ohio Const. Art. XV, § 10
   Civil Service Law, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 124
   Employees generally, see ADM. Ch.
254
   Establishment, see CHTR. §
6.04(b)
CHAPTER 270: BOARD OF CONTROL
Editor’s note:
   There are no sections in Ch. 270. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross-references and any future legislation.
Cross-reference:
   Conflict of interest, see CHTR. §
11.07
   Contracts and purchasing, see CHTR. §
10.02
   Contracts for work on public buildings and improvements see Ohio R.C. 153.50
et seq.
   Establishment, function and membership, see CHTR. §
4.01
   Preparation of contracts by Law Director, see CHTR. §
4.05(c)
   Restrictions, see Ohio R.C. 715.68, 731.48
CHAPTER 272: CHARTER REVIEW COMMISSION
Editor’s note:
   There are no sections in Ch. 272. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross-references and any future legislation.
Cross-reference:
   Amendments submitted to electors by Council, see CHTR. §§
12.01,
12.02
   Appointment, membership and duties, see CHTR. §
12.02
   Effect of Charter, see CHTR. §
11.04
   Meetings open to the public, see CHTR. §§
11.09,
12.02
   Separability of Charter, see CHTR. §
11.08
   Special and general elections, see CHTR. §
7.01
CHAPTER 274: TREE COMMISSION
Section
274.01   Establishment; members.
274.02   Term of office.
274.03   Compensation.
274.04   Powers and duties.
274.05   Procedure.
Cross-reference:
   Authority to establish, see CHTR. §
6.05
   Injuring vines, bushes, trees or crops, see GEN. OFF.
642.06
   Protection in park and recreation areas, see S. U. & P. S.
1068.02(c), (d),(e),(f)
   Protection of trees during excavating, see S. U. & P. S.
1020.08(h)
   Trees, weeds and grass, see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 670
§ 274.01 ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERS.
   There is hereby created a Tree Commission for the city, which shall consist
of the following five members: the Chairperson of Council’s City Property, Park
and Playground Committee; the President of the Parks and Recreation Commission;
and three resident electors of the city who shall be appointed by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 276.01) (Ord. 225-1973, passed 9-4-1973)
§ 274.02 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The terms of the three persons to be appointed by the Mayor shall be three
years; except that, the initial Commission shall include one person to be
appointed for a three-year term, one person to be appointed for a two-year term
and one person to be appointed for a one-year term; thereafter, each member
shall be appointed for a three-year term. In the event that a vacancy occurs
during the term of any member, his or her successor, a resident elector of the
city, shall be appointed by the Mayor for the unexpired portion of the term.
(Prior Code, § 276.02) (Ord. 225-1973, passed 9-4-1973)
§ 274.03 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the Tree Commission shall serve without compensation.
(Prior Code, § 276.03) (Ord. 225-1973, passed 9-4-1973)
§ 274.04 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Tree Commission shall have the power to study, investigate, plan,
advise, report and recommend to the Director of Public Service any action,
program, plan or legislation which it finds or determines to be necessary or
advisable for the care, preservation, trimming, planting, replanting, removal
or disposition of trees, shrubs and other plant materials in public ways and
upon properties owned, leased or in any other manner controlled by the city.
(Prior Code, § 276.04) (Ord. 225-1973, passed 9-4-1973)
§ 274.05 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The Tree Commission shall choose its own officers, make its own rules
and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the
members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. All plans, findings,
advices, reports and recommendations made by the Commission shall be in writing
and designate by name those members of the Commission approving or concurring
therein; members who do not so approve or concur therein shall have the right,
as a part of such report, to state their reasons for refusing to approve or
concur.
   (B)   The Commission, when requested by Council or the Mayor, shall
consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special
matter or question coming within the scope of its work.
(Prior Code, § 276.05) (Ord. 225-1973, passed 9-4-1973)
CHAPTER 276: BARBERTON COMMUNITY FOUNDATION
Section
276.01   Establishment, incorporation and organization; articles of
incorporation; purposes.
276.02   Designation of Mayor and President of Council as Trustees.
276.03   Code of regulations.
276.04   Authority of Mayor, President of Council, Director of Law and Clerk of
Council.
Cross-reference:
   Charitable trusts, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 1719
   Legal assistance foundations, see Ohio R.C. 120.52, 120.53
   Medical quality foundation, see Ohio R.C. 3701.89
   Registration of names of foundations, see Ohio R.C. 1329.01 et seq.
   Solicitation of contributions, see Ohio R.C. 1716.01 et seq.
§ 276.01 ESTABLISHMENT, INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION; ARTICLES OF
INCORPORATION; PURPOSES.
   (A)   (1)   The Mayor is hereby authorized and directed to participate in
the establishment, incorporation and organization of a non-profit charitable
corporation, to be known as the Barberton Community Foundation, through
execution of the articles of incorporation of the Barberton Community
Foundation, substantially in the form on file with the Clerk of Council, with
such changes, if any, as may be necessary or appropriate to achieve tax-exempt
status for the Foundation as other than a private foundation or to comply with
applicable laws or otherwise, and as are determined by the Mayor to be not
inconsistent with this chapter and not substantially adverse to the city.
      (2)   The execution of those articles of incorporation by the Mayor shall
conclusively evidence his or her determination that any changes are not
inconsistent with this chapter and are not substantially adverse to the city.
   (B)   The purpose of the Foundation is to receive the proceeds from the sale
of Barberton Citizens Hospital that remain after payment of certain liabilities
and to use such proceeds for charitable, educational, public health, public
recreation or other public purposes benefitting the citizens of Barberton.
(Prior Code, § 277.01) (Ord. 138-1996, passed 7-22-1996)
§ 276.02 DESIGNATION OF MAYOR AND PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL AS TRUSTEES.
   (A)   The Mayor and the President of Council shall participate in the
Foundation by serving as members of the Board of Trustees of the Foundation.
   (B)   The Mayor and the President of Council are hereby designated to serve
as Trustees of the Foundation to represent the city and the interests of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 277.02) (Ord. 138-1996, passed 7-22-1996)
§ 276.03 CODE OF REGULATIONS.
   The Mayor and the President of Council are hereby authorized and directed to
provide for the code of regulations of the Barberton Community Foundation,
substantially in the form of the code of regulations on file with the Clerk of
Council, with such changes, if any, as may be determined by the Mayor or the
President of Council to be necessary or appropriate to achieve tax-exempt
status for the Foundation or to comply with applicable laws or otherwise, and
as are not inconsistent with this chapter and not substantially adverse to the
city. The affirmative vote of the Mayor or the President of Council to adopt
the code of regulations shall conclusively evidence the determination that any
changes are not inconsistent with this chapter and are not substantially
adverse to the city.
(Prior Code, § 277.03) (Ord. 138-1996, passed 7-22-1996; Res. 158-2012, passed
9-24-2012; Res. 215-2012, passed 12-17-2012)
§ 276.04 AUTHORITY OF MAYOR, PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL, DIRECTOR OF LAW AND CLERK OF
COUNCIL.
   The Mayor, the President of Council, the Director of Law, the Clerk of
Council and other appropriate officials of the city are hereby authorized and
directed, for and in the name and on behalf of the city, to execute any
instruments or to take any and all other actions which are necessary or
appropriate to consummate the incorporation and creation of the Barberton
Community Foundation, to obtain a determination by the Internal Revenue Service
that the Foundation is a tax-exempt entity, to qualify the Foundation or its
activities under all applicable laws and to accomplish such other transactions
relating to the sale of the Barberton Citizens Hospital and the organization
and operation of the Foundation which are not substantially adverse to the city
and which are permitted by applicable laws.
(Prior Code, § 277.04) (Ord. 138-1996, passed 7-22-1996)
CHAPTER 278: INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER REVIEW BOARD
Editor’s note:
   There are no sections in Ch. 283. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross-references and any future legislation.
Cross-reference:
   Industrial waste discharges, see S.U. & P.S. Ch.
1054
   Industrial waste prohibited in Barberton Reservoir and Wolf Creek, see S.U.
& P.S.
1072.02
   Industrial Wastewater Review Board, see S.U. & P.S.
1054.03
   Sewers, see S.U. & P.S. Ch.
1040
CHAPTER 280: TAX INCENTIVE REVIEW BOARD
Section
280.01   Establishment.
Cross-reference:
   Division of Taxation, see ADM.
234.01
   Earned income tax, see B. R. & T. Ch.
880
   Taxation generally, see CHTR. Art.
10
   Urban renewal tax exemption, see ADM.
252.15
§ 280.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby established a Tax Incentive Review Board, which shall
consist of the Chairperson of the City Council’s Development Committee, the
Chairperson of City Council’s Planning Committee and two members of the City
Board of Education, who shall be appointed by said Board for two-year terms.
The Board shall generally review all applications for tax relief and/or tax
abatement within the city.
(Prior Code, § 285.01) (Ord. 105-1988, passed 5-23-1988)
CHAPTER 282: TREASURY INVESTMENT BOARD
Section
282.01   Composition.
Cross-reference:
   Finance Department, see CHTR. §
4.04; ADM. Ch.
234
   Finances generally, see CHTR. Art.
10
   Purchasing, see CHTR. §
10.02
   Investment of city funds, see ADM.
234.03
§ 282.01 COMPOSITION.
   The Mayor, the Director of Law and the Director of Finance shall constitute
the Treasury Investment Board of the city, and that Board and the Director of
Finance shall exercise on behalf of the city the powers and duties with respect
to the investment of moneys in the City Treasury as provided for in Ohio R.C.
731.56 through 731.59 and in §
234.03 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 287.01) (Ord. 101-1991, passed 6-10-1991)
CHAPTER 284: LITTER CONTROL ADVISORY BOARD
Section
284.01   Establishment.
Cross-reference:
   Filthy accumulations, see GEN. OFF.
660.04
   Garbage and rubbish collection and disposal, see S.U. & P.S. Ch.
1060
   Littering from motor vehicles, see TRAF.
331.43
   Littering, see GEN. OFF.
660.05
   Trash deposits, see GEN. OFF.
660.03
   Trash on sidewalks, see GEN. OFF.
668.04
§ 284.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   A Litter Control Advisory Board, consisting of nine members, is hereby
established to operate according to the Litter Control Grant requirements.
(Prior Code, § 288.01) (Ord. 222-1982, passed 9-27-1982)
CHAPTER 286: BEAUTIFICATION COMMITTEE
Section
286.01   Establishment; composition; duties.
286.02   Authority of Director of Public Service.
Editor’s note:
   This chapter, previously titled Beautification Commission, was re-enacted in
its entirety by Ord. 199-1995, passed 12-18-1995.
Cross-reference:
   Authority to establish, see CHTR. §
6.05
   Littering, see GEN. OFF.
660.05
   Parks and recreation areas, see S.U. & P.S. Ch.
1068
   Removal of members, see CHTR. §
6.06
   Tree Commission, see ADM. Ch.
276
§ 286.01 ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION; DUTIES.
   A Beautification Committee is hereby established as follows.
   (A)   Committee members shall be appointed by the Mayor.
   (B)   There shall be no more than six resident members of the Committee. One
member of Council having responsibility for this subject matter shall serve as
an ex-officio member. The Mayor shall be a voting member of the Committee.
Committee members shall be appointed to three-year terms to be staggered the
first year with two members appointed for full three-year terms; two members
appointed for two-year terms and two members appointed for one-year terms.
   (C)   The Commission shall make recommendations concerning the following
projects:
      (1)   Clean-up and litter prevention projects;
      (2)   Flower and tree plantings, except for city parks;
      (3)   General beautification projects; and
      (4)   Such other duties as required by ordinance or executive order of
the Mayor or the Director of Public Service.
   (D)   The Committee shall serve as the strategic planning arm of the annual
MUM Fest.
(Prior Code, § 289.01) (Ord. 199-1995, passed 12-18-1995)
§ 286.02 AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SERVICE.
   The Director of Public Service will oversee the Beautification Committee.
(Prior Code, § 289.02) (Ord. 199-1995, passed 12-18-1995)
TITLE TEN: JUDICIAL
CHAPTER 298: MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
298.01   Department of Probation.
298.02   Representation of indigents; attorney fees.
298.03   Parking fine schedule.
298.04   Collection service fee.
Editor’s note:
   The Barberton Municipal Court is established by Ohio R.C. Ch. 1901. Ohio
R.C. 1901.02 provides that the jurisdiction of the court extends, in addition
to the corporate limits of the city, to Copley, Coventry, Franklin, Green and
Norton Townships and within the corporate limits of the Municipalities of
Clinton and Norton in Summit County.
Cross-reference:
   Bond for bailiff, see Ohio R.C. 1901.32(A); ADM.
254.01
   Bond for Court Clerk required, see Ohio R.C. 1901.31(D); ADM.
254.01
   Judicial powers of Mayor, see CHTR. §
3.05(c)
   Law Director to serve as Prosecuting Attorney and represent the city in
legal proceedings, see
    CHTR. §
4.05(c)
   Municipal Court, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 1901
   Notification to Ohio Director of Liquor Control of liquor law convictions,
see Ohio R.C. 4301.991
   Power to establish schedule of fees and costs, see Ohio R.C. 1901.26
   Record of traffic violations, see Ohio R.C. 4513. 37
   Release of Court Clerk’s liability for loss of funds, see Ohio R.C. 131.18
et seq.
   Suspension of driver’s license, see TRAF.
303.99(c); GEN. OFF.
698.07
   Use of personal automobile by Outside Bailiff, see ADM.
254.03
   Using sham legal process, see GEN. OFF.
606.29
§ 298.01 DEPARTMENT OF PROBATION.
   There is hereby created a Department of Probation in the Barberton Municipal
Court.
(Prior Code, § 290.01) (Ord. 269-1973, passed 10-29-1973)
§ 298.02 REPRESENTATION OF INDIGENTS; ATTORNEY FEES.
   (A)   The Finance Director is hereby authorized and directed to pay attorney
fees to those attorneys who have been appointed by the Municipal Court to
represent indigents who are charged under this code of ordinances.
   (B)   The Finance Director is hereby authorized and directed to draw his or
her warrants in payment thereof.
(Prior Code, § 290.02) (Ord. 85-1980, passed 4-21-1980)
§ 298.03 PARKING FINE SCHEDULE.
   The following schedule of fines for parking violations is hereby
established:
 
   VIOLATIONS BUREAU - BARBERTON MUNICIPAL COURT
   Schedule of Fines - Fines Increase If Not Paid Within Three Days
   NOTE: AN ADDITIONAL PENALTY MAY BE ASSESSED IF IT IS NECESSARY
   TO ISSUE A SUMMONS FOR YOUR COURT APPEARANCE.
 
                 IF YOU PAY
                 Within After  After
Violation Number 5 Days 5 Days 30 Days
                                                                     IF YOU PAY
                                                                     Within After After
Violation Number                                                     5 Days 5     30
                                                                            Days  Days
1 -   Time - non-meter violations in 15-, 30-, 60- and 120-minute $15    $20   $30
zones
2 -   No parking 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.                          $15    $20   $30
3 -   Restricted Area Violations
   A.   No parking within 10 ft. of fire hydrant               $15    $20   $30
   B.   No parking within 20 ft. of crosswalk                  $15    $20   $30
   C.   No parking within 30 ft. of stop sign                  $15    $20   $30
   D.   Parking more than 12 inches from curb                  $15    $20   $30
   E.   Parked against traffic                                 $15    $20   $30
   F.   Parked on devil strip                                  $15    $20   $30
   G.   Parked in restricted area                              $15    $20   $30
   H.   No parking in alley                                    $15    $20   $30
   I.   No parking 3:00 to 5:00 p.m.                           $15    $20   $30
   J.   Blocking driveway                                      $15    $20   $30
   K.   Fire lane                                              $15    $20   $30
   L.   Handicapped parking                                    $250   $250  $250
   M.   Other ________                                         $15    $20   $30
 
(Prior Code, § 290.03) (Ord. 161-1993, passed 10-25-1993; Ord. 44-2009, passed
3-23-2009)
§ 298.04 COLLECTION SERVICE FEE.
   (A)   The City Council hereby establishes a collection service fee of up to
33-1/3% of the balance to be assessed to past due court fines and costs, and
unpaid utility bills, which are turned over to a collection agency.
   (B)   The Council hereby authorizes said collection service fee to be
automatically assessed once any past due account is turned over to a collection
agency.
(Prior Code, § 290.04) (Ord. 48-2002, passed 3-25-2002)
PART THREE: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
TITLE ONE: ADMINISTRATION
      
303.   Enforcement, Impounding and Penalty
      
305.   Traffic Control
TITLE THREE: STREETS AND TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
      
311.   Street Obstructions and Special Uses
      
313.   Traffic-Control Devices
TITLE FIVE: VEHICLES
      
331.   Operation Generally
      
333.   O.V.I.; Reckless Operation; Speed
      
335.   Licensing; Accidents
      
337.   Safety and Equipment
      
339.   Commercial and Heavy Vehicles
      
341.   Drivers of Commercial Vehicles
      
343.   Offenses Relating to Theft and Fraud
TITLE SEVEN: PARKING
      
351.   Parking Generally
      
353.   Parking Meters
      
355.   Municipal Parking Lots
      
357.   Snow Emergencies
      
359.   Parking Commission
TITLE NINE: PEDESTRIANS, BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES
      
371.   Pedestrians
      
373.   Bicycles and Motorcycles Generally
      
375.   Snowmobiles, Off-Highway Motorcycles and All-Purpose Vehicles
TITLE ONE: ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 301: DEFINITIONS
Section
301.01   Meaning of words and phrases.
301.02   Agricultural tractor.
301.03   Alley.
301.035   Beacon.
301.04   Bicycle.
301.05   Bus.
301.06   Business district.
301.065   Chauffeured limousine.
301.067   Child care center.
301.07   Commercial tractor.
301.08   Controlled-access highway.
301.09   Crosswalk.
301.10   Driver or operator.
301.11   Emergency vehicle.
301.12   Explosives.
301.13   Expressway.
301.14   Flammable liquid.
301.15   Freeway.   
301.155   Funeral escort vehicle.
301.16   Gross weight.
301.163   Highway maintenance vehicle.
301.165   Highway traffic signal.
301.167   Hybrid beacon.
301.17   Intersection.
301.18   Laned highway.
301.183   Low-speed micromobility device.
301.185   Median.
301.19   Motorcycle.
301.195   Motorized bicycle or moped.
301.197   Motorized wheelchair.
301.20   Motor vehicle.
301.205   Multi-wheel agricultural tractor.
301.207   Operate.
301.21   Parking.
301.22   Pedestrian.
301.23   Person.
301.24   Pole trailer.
301.245   Police division.
301.25   Police officer.
301.255   Predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense.
301.257   Private road open to public travel.
301.26   Private road or driveway.
301.27   Public safety vehicle.
301.28   Railroad.
301.29   Railroad sign or signal.
301.30   Railroad train.
301.31   Residence district.
301.315   Ridesharing arrangement.
301.32   Right-of-way.
301.325   Road service vehicle.
301.33   Roadway.
301.335   Rural mail delivery vehicle.
301.34   Safety zone.
301.35   School bus.
301.36   Semitrailer.
301.365   Shared-use path.
301.37   Sidewalk.
301.375   State highway.
301.38   State route.
301.39   Stop (when required).
301.40   Stopping and standing.
301.41   Stop intersection.
301.42   Street or highway; arterial street.
301.43   Through street or highway.
301.44   Thruway.
301.45   Traffic.
301.455   Traffic authority.
301.46   Traffic-control device.
301.47   Traffic-control signal.
301.475   Traffic Division.
301.48   Trailer.
301.49   Truck.
301.495   Type A family child care home.
301.50   Urban district.
301.51   Vehicle.
301.52   Waste collection vehicle.
Cross-reference:
   “Blind person” defined, see TRAF.
371.02
   “Commercial car” defined, see TRAF.
341.01
   “Funeral procession” defined, see TRAF.
331.24
   “School zones” defined, see TRAF.
333.03
   See section histories for similar state law
   “Snowmobile”, “off-highway motorcycle” and “all-purpose vehicle” defined,
see TRAF.
375.01
   “Street racing” defined, see TRAF.
333.07
§ 301.01 MEANING OF WORDS AND PHRASES.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, the definitions set forth in Ohio R.C.
4501.01 shall apply to this traffic code and the penal laws of the
municipality.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided, the following words and phrases, when
used in this traffic code, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them in this chapter.
§ 301.02 AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR.
   AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR means every self-propelled vehicle designed or used for
drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery, but having no provision for
carrying loads independently of such other vehicles, and used principally for
agricultural purposes.
(ORC 4511.01(J))
§ 301.03 ALLEY.
   ALLEY means a street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or
side of lots or buildings in urban districts, and not intended for the purpose
of through vehicular traffic, and any street or highway that has been declared
an “alley” by the Council.
(ORC 4511.01(XX))
§ 301.035 BEACON.
   BEACON means a highway traffic signal with one or more signal sections that
operate in a flashing mode.
(ORC 4511.01(KKK))
§ 301.04 BICYCLE.
   BICYCLE means every device, other than a device that is designed solely for
use as a play vehicle by a child, that is propelled solely by human power upon
which a person may ride, and that has two or more wheels, any of which is more
than 14 inches in diameter.
(ORC 4511.01(G))
§ 301.05 BUS.
   BUS means every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than nine
passengers, and used for the transportation of persons other than in a
ridesharing arrangement, and every motor vehicle, automobile for hire or
funeral car, other than a taxicab or motor vehicle used in a ridesharing
arrangement, designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
(ORC 4511.01(L))
§ 301.06 BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT means the territory fronting upon a street or highway,
including the street or highway, between successive intersections within the
municipality, where 50% or more of the frontage between successive
intersections is occupied by buildings in use for business, or within or
outside the municipality where 50% or more of the frontage for a distance of
300 feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business, and the
character of the territory is indicated by official traffic-control devices.
(ORC 4511.01(NN))
§ 301.065 CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE.
   CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE means a motor vehicle that is designed to carry nine
or fewer passengers and is operated for hire pursuant to a prearranged contract
for the transportation of passengers on public roads and highways along a route
under the control of the person hiring the vehicle and not over a defined and
regular route. “Prearranged contract” means an agreement, made in advance of
boarding, to provide transportation from a specific location in a chauffeured
limousine. CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE does not include any vehicle that is used
exclusively in the business of funeral directing.
(ORC 4501.01(LL))
§ 301.067 CHILD CARE CENTER.
   CHILD CARE CENTER. Has the same meaning as set forth in Ohio R.C. 5104.01.
(ORC 4511.01(FFF))
§ 301.07 COMMERCIAL TRACTOR.
   COMMERCIAL TRACTOR means every motor vehicle having motive power designed or
used for drawing other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry any load
thereon, or designed or used for drawing other vehicles while carrying a
portion of the other vehicles, or the load thereon, or both.
(ORC 4511.01(I))
§ 301.08 CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY.
   CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY means every street or highway in respect to which
owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right or
access to or from the same except at certain points only and in a manner as may
be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over the street or
highway.
(ORC 4511.01(CC))
§ 301.09 CROSSWALK.
   CROSSWALK.
      (1)   That part of a roadway at intersections ordinarily included within
the real or projected prolongation of property lines and curb lines or, in the
absence of curbs, the edges of the traversable roadway;
      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere,
distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the
surface; and
      (3)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this definition, there
shall not be a crosswalk where the legislative authority has placed signs
indicating no crossing.
(ORC 4511.01(LL))
§ 301.10 DRIVER OR OPERATOR.
   DRIVER or OPERATOR means every person who drives or is in actual physical
control of a vehicle.
(ORC 4511.01(Y))
§ 301.11 EMERGENCY VEHICLE.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE means emergency vehicles of municipal, township or county
departments or public utility corporations, when identified as such as required
by law, the Director of Public Safety or local authorities and motor vehicles
when commandeered by a police officer.
(ORC 4511.01(D))
§ 301.12 EXPLOSIVES.
   EXPLOSIVES means any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is
intended for the purpose of producing an explosion that contains any oxidizing
and combustible units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities or
packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion or
by a detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause a sudden
generation of highly heated gases, such that the resultant gaseous pressures
are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects, or of
destroying life or limb. Manufactured articles shall not be held to be
EXPLOSIVES when the individual units contain explosives in limited quantities
of such nature or in such packing that it is impossible to procure a
simultaneous or a destructive explosion of the units, to the injury of life,
limb or property by fire, friction concussion, percussion or by a detonator,
such as fixed ammunition for small arms, firecrackers or safety fuse matches.
(ORC 4511.01(T))
§ 301.13 EXPRESSWAY.
   EXPRESSWAY means a divided arterial highway for through traffic with full or
partial control of access with an excess of 50% of all crossroads separated in
grade.
(ORC 4511.01(ZZ))
§ 301.14 FLAMMABLE LIQUID.
   FLAMMABLE LIQUID means any liquid which has a flash point of 70°F or less,
as determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed cup test device.
(ORC 4511.01(U))
§ 301.15 FREEWAY.
   FREEWAY means a divided multi-lane highway for through traffic with
crossroads separated in grade and with full control of access.
(ORC 4511.01(YY))
§ 301.155 FUNERAL ESCORT VEHICLE.
   FUNERAL ESCORT VEHICLE means any motor vehicle, including a funeral hearse,
while used to facilitate the movement of a funeral procession.
(ORC 4511.01(WW))
§ 301.16 GROSS WEIGHT.
   GROSS WEIGHT means the weight of a vehicle plus the weight of any load
thereon.
(ORC 4511.01(V))
§ 301.163 HIGHWAY MAINTENANCE VEHICLE.
   HIGHWAY MAINTENANCE VEHICLE means a vehicle used in snow and ice removal or
road surface maintenance, including a snow plow, traffic line striper, road
sweeper, mowing machine, asphalt distributing vehicle or other such vehicle
designed for use in specific highway maintenance activities.
(ORC 4511.01(QQQ))
§ 301.165 HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SIGNAL.
   HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SIGNAL means a power-operated traffic-control device by
which traffic is warned or directed to take some specific action. The term does
not include a power-operated sign, steadily illuminated pavement marker,
warning light or steady burning electric lamp.
(ORC 4511.01(MMM))
§ 301.167 HYBRID BEACON.
   HYBRID BEACON means a type of beacon that is intentionally placed in a dark
mode between periods of operation where no indications are displayed and, when
in operation, displays both steady and flashing traffic-control signal
indications.
(ORC 4511.01(LLL))
§ 301.17 INTERSECTION.
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines or, if none, the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of
two highways that join one another at, or approximately at, right angles or the
area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways that join at any
other angle might come into conflict. The junction of an alley or driveway with
a roadway or highway does not constitute an INTERSECTION unless the roadway or
highway at the junction is controlled by a traffic-control device.
      (2)   If a highway includes two roadways that are 30 feet or more apart,
then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway constitutes a separate intersection. If both intersecting highways
include two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of any two
roadways of such highways constitutes a separate INTERSECTION.
      (3)   At a location controlled by a traffic-control signal, regardless of
the distance between the separate intersections as described in division (2)
above:
         (a)   If a stop line, yield line or crosswalk has not been designated
on the roadway within the median between the separate intersections, the two
intersections and the roadway and median constitute one intersection.
         (b)   Where a stop line, yield line or crosswalk line is designated on
the roadway on the intersection approach, the area within the crosswalk and any
area beyond the designated stop line or yield line constitute part of the
INTERSECTION.
         (c)   Where a crosswalk is designated on a roadway on the departure
from the INTERSECTION, the INTERSECTION includes the area that extends to the
far side of the crosswalk.
(ORC 4511.01(KK))
§ 301.18 LANED HIGHWAY.
   LANED HIGHWAY means a highway the roadway of which is divided into two or
more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
(ORC 4511.01(GG))
§ 301.183 LOW-SPEED MICROMOBILITY DEVICE.
   LOW-SPEED MICROMOBILITY DEVICE means a device weighing less than 100 pounds
that has handlebars, is propelled by an electric motor or human power, and has
an attainable speed on a paved level surface of not more than 20 miles per hour
when propelled by the electric motor.
(R.C. § 4511.01(WWW))
§ 301.185 MEDIAN.
   MEDIAN means the area between two roadways of a divided highway, measured
from edge of traveled way to edge of traveled way, but excluding turn lanes.
The width of a MEDIAN may be different between intersections, between
interchanges and at opposite approaches of the same intersection.
(ORC 4511.01(NNN))
§ 301.19 MOTORCYCLE.
   MOTORCYCLE means every motor vehicle, other than a tractor, having a seat or
saddle for the use of the operator and designed to travel on not more than
three wheels in contact with the ground, including, but not limited to, motor
vehicles known as “motor-driven cycle”, “motor scooter”, “autocycle”, “cab-
enclosed motorcycle” or “motorcycle”, without regard to weight or brake
horsepower.
(ORC 4511.01(C))
§ 301.195 MOTORIZED BICYCLE OR MOPED.
   MOTORIZED BICYCLE means any vehicle having either two tandem wheels or one
wheel in the front and two wheels in the rear, that may be capable of being
pedaled, and that is equipped with a helper motor of not more than 50 cubic
centimeters piston displacement that produces not more than one brake
horsepower, and is capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed of not greater
than 20 miles per hour on a level surface.
(ORC 4511.01(H))
§ 301.197 MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR.
   MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR means any self-propelled vehicle designed for, and used
by, a person with a disability and that is incapable of a speed in excess of
eight miles per hour.
(ORC 4511.01(EEE))
§ 301.20 MOTOR VEHICLE.
   MOTOR VEHICLE means every vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than
muscular power or power collected from overhead electric trolley wires, except
motorized bicycles, road rollers, traction engines, power shovels, power cranes
and other equipment used in construction work, and not designed for or employed
in general highway transportation, hole-digging machinery, well-drilling
machinery, ditch-digging machinery, farm machinery and trailers designed and
used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina,
or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a
distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
(ORC 4511.01(B))
§ 301.205 MULTI-WHEEL AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR.
   MULTI-WHEEL AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR means a type of agricultural tractor that
has two or more wheels or tires on each side of one axle at the rear of the
tractor, is designed or used for drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery,
has no provision for carrying loads independently of the drawn vehicles or
machinery, and is used principally for agricultural purposes.
(ORC 4511.01(GGG))
§ 301.207 OPERATE.
   OPERATE means to cause or have caused movement of a vehicle.
(ORC 4511.01(HHH)
§ 301.21 PARKING.
   PARKING, when prohibited, means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied
or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
§ 301.22 PEDESTRIAN.
   PEDESTRIAN means any natural person afoot. The term includes a personal
delivery device, as defined in R.C. 4511.513, unless the context clearly
suggests otherwise.
(ORC 4511.01(X))
§ 301.23 PERSON.
   PERSON means every natural person, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.
(ORC 4511.01(W))
§ 301.24 POLE TRAILER.
   POLE TRAILER means every trailer or semitrailer attached to the towing
vehicle by means of a reach, pole or by being boomed or otherwise secured to
the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregular
shaped loads such as poles, pipes or structural members capable, generally, of
sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
(ORC 4511.01(O))
§ 301.245 POLICE DIVISION.
   POLICE DIVISION means the Traffic Division, but shall not be construed to
deprive any authorized police officer of authority to direct traffic and to
make arrests for a violation of any traffic regulation.
(Ord. 23-1950, passed 4-3-1950)
§ 301.25 POLICE OFFICER.
   POLICE OFFICER means every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic,
or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
(ORC 4511.01(Z))
§ 301.255 PREDICATE MOTOR VEHICLE OR TRAFFIC OFFENSE.
   PREDICATE MOTOR VEHICLE OR TRAFFIC OFFENSE means any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12, 4511.132,
4511.16, 4511.20, 4511.201, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.214, 4511.22,
4511.23, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31,
4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39,
4511.40, 4511.41, 4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441,
4511.451, 4511.452, 4511.46, 4511.47, 4511.48, 4511.481, 4511.49, 4511.50,
4511.511, 4511.53, 4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.56, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59,
4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.64, 4511.66, 4511.661, 4511.68, 4511.70, 4511.701,
4511.71, 4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, 4511.73, 4511.763, 4511.771,
4511.78 or 4511.84;
      (2)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.17(A)(2), 4511.51(A) to (D) or
4511.74(A);
      (3)   A violation of any provision of Ohio R.C. 4511.01 to 4511.76 for
which no penalty otherwise is provided in the section that contains the
provision violated; and/or
      (4)   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any section or provision set forth or described in divisions (1),
(2) or (3) above.
(ORC 4511.01(III)
§ 301.257 PRIVATE ROAD OPEN TO PUBLIC TRAVEL.
   PRIVATE ROAD OPEN TO PUBLIC TRAVEL.
      (1)   A private toll road or road, including any adjacent sidewalks that
generally run parallel to the road, within a shopping center, airport, sports
arena or other similar business or recreation facility that is privately owned,
but where the public is allowed to travel without access restrictions.
      (2)   The term includes a gated toll road but does not include a road
within a private gated property where access is restricted at all times, a
parking area, a driving aisle within a parking area or a private grade
crossing.
(ORC 4511.01(OOO))
§ 301.26 PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY.
   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY means every way or place in private ownership used
for vehicular travel by the owner, and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
(ORC 4511.01(DD))
§ 301.27 PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE.
   PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE means any of the following:
      (1)   Ambulances, including private ambulance companies under contract to
a municipality, township or county and private ambulances and non-transport
vehicles bearing license plates issued under Ohio R.C. 4503.49;
      (2)   Motor vehicles used by public law enforcement officers or other
persons sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state;
      (3)   Any motor vehicle when properly identified as required by the
Director of Public Safety, when used in response to fire emergency calls or to
provide emergency medical service to ill or injured persons, and when operated
by a duly qualified person who is a member of a volunteer rescue service or a
volunteer fire department, and who is on duty pursuant to the rules or
directives of that service. The State Fire Marshal shall be designated by the
Director of Public Safety as the certifying agency for all public safety
vehicles described herein;
      (4)   Vehicles used by fire departments, including motor vehicles when
used by volunteer firefighters responding to emergency calls in the fire
department service when identified as required by the Director of Public
Safety;
      (5)   Any vehicle used to transport or provide emergency medical service
to an ill or injured person, when certified as a “public safety vehicle”, shall
be considered such a vehicle when transporting an ill or injured person to a
hospital, regardless of whether such vehicle has already passed a hospital;
and/or
      (6)   Vehicles used by the Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit for the
enforcement of orders and rules of the Public Utilities Commission as specified
in Ohio R.C. 5503.34.
(ORC 4511.01(E))
§ 301.28 RAILROAD.
   RAILROAD means a carrier of persons or property operating upon rails placed
principally on a private right-of-way.
(ORC 4511.01(P))
§ 301.29 RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL.
   RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL means any sign, signal or device erected by
authority of a public body or official or by a railroad, and intended to give
notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.
(ORC 4511.01(SS))
§ 301.30 RAILROAD TRAIN.
   RAILROAD TRAIN means a steam engine or an electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated by a railroad.
(ORC 4511.01(Q))
§ 301.31 RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT means the territory, not comprising a business district,
fronting on a street or highway, including the street or highway, where, for a
distance of 300 feet or more, the frontage is improved with residences or
residences and buildings in use for business.
(ORC 4511.01(OO))
§ 301.315 RIDESHARING ARRANGEMENT.
   RIDESHARING ARRANGEMENT includes the transportation of persons in a motor
vehicle where the transportation is incidental to another purpose of a
volunteer driver, and includes ridesharing arrangements, known as carpools,
vanpools and buspools.
(ORC 4511.01(DDD))
§ 301.32 RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY means either of the following, as the context requires:
      (1)   The right of a vehicle or pedestrian to proceed uninterruptedly in
a lawful manner in the direction in which it, he or she is moving, in
preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching from a different
direction into its, his or her path; or
      (2)   A general term denoting land, property or the interest therein,
usually in the configuration of a strip, acquired for or devoted to
transportation purposes. When used in this context, RIGHT-OF-WAY includes the
roadway, shoulders or berm, ditch and slopes extending to the right-of-way
limits under the control of the state or local authority.
(ORC 4511.01(UU))
§ 301.325 ROAD SERVICE VEHICLE.
   ROAD SERVICE VEHICLE means wreckers, utility repair vehicles and state,
county and municipal service vehicles equipped with visual signals by means of
flashing, rotating or oscillating lights.
(ORC 4511.01(JJJ))
§ 301.33 ROADWAY.
   ROADWAY.
      (1)   That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder.
      (2)   If a highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term
ROADWAY means any roadway separately, but not all the roadways collectively.
(ORC 4511.01(EE))
§ 301.335 RURAL MAIL DELIVERY VEHICLE.
   RURAL MAIL DELIVERY VEHICLE means every vehicle used to deliver United
States mail on a rural mail delivery route.
(ORC 4511.01(VV))
§ 301.34 SAFETY ZONE.
   SAFETY ZONE means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusive use of pedestrians and protected or marked or indicated by
adequate signs so as to be plainly visible at all times.
(ORC 4511.01(MM))
§ 301.35 SCHOOL BUS.
   SCHOOL BUS. Every bus designed for carrying more than nine passengers which
is owned by a public, private or governmental agency or institution of
learning, and operated for the transportation of children to or from a school
session or a school function, or owned by a private person and operated for
compensation for the transportation of children to or from a school session or
a school function; provided, "school bus" does not include a bus operated by a
municipally owned transportation system, a mass transit company operating
exclusively within the territorial limits of a municipality, or within those
limits and the territorial limits of municipalities immediately contiguous to
the municipality, nor a common passenger carrier certified by the Public
Utilities Commission unless the bus is devoted exclusively to the
transportation of children to and from a school session or a school function,
and "school bus" does not include a van or bus used by a licensed child care
center or type A family child care home to transport children from the child
care center or type A family child care home to a school if the van or bus does
not have more than 15 children in the van or bus at any time.
(ORC 4511.01(F))
§ 301.36 SEMITRAILER.
   SEMITRAILER means every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or
property with another and separate motor vehicle so that in operation a part of
its own weight or that of its load, or both, rests upon and is carried by
another vehicle.
(ORC 4511.01(N))
§ 301.365 SHARED-USE PATH.
   SHARED-USE PATH means a bikeway outside the traveled way and physically
separated from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and
either within the highway right-of-way or within an independent alignment. A
SHARED-USE PATH also may be used by pedestrians, including skaters, joggers,
users of manual and motorized wheelchairs and other authorized motorized and
non-motorized users.
(ORC 4511.01(PPP))
§ 301.37 SIDEWALK.
   SIDEWALK means that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the
lateral line of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the
use of pedestrians.
(ORC 4511.01(FF))
§ 301.375 STATE HIGHWAY.
   STATE HIGHWAY means a highway under the jurisdiction of the Department of
Transportation, outside the limits of municipalities; provided that, the
authority conferred upon the Director of Transportation in Ohio R.C. 5511.01 to
erect state highway route markers and signs directing traffic shall not be
modified by Ohio R.C. 4511.01 through 4511.79 and 4511.99.
(ORC 4511.01(II))
§ 301.38 STATE ROUTE.
   STATE ROUTE means every highway which is designated with an official state
route number and so marked.
(ORC 4511.01(JJ))
§ 301.39 STOP (WHEN REQUIRED).
   STOP, when required, means a complete cessation of movement.
§ 301.40 STOPPING AND STANDING.
   STOPPING and STANDING, when prohibited, mean any halting of a vehicle, even
momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic-control device.
§ 301.41 STOP INTERSECTION.
   STOP INTERSECTION means any intersection at one or more entrances of which
stop signs are erected.
(ORC 4511.01(BBB))
§ 301.42 STREET OR HIGHWAY; ARTERIAL STREET.
   (A)   STREET or HIGHWAY means the entire width between the boundary lines of
every way open to the use of the public as a thoroughfare for purposes of
vehicular travel.
(ORC 4511.01(BB))
   (B)   ARTERIAL STREET means any United States or State numbered route,
controlled-access highway, or other major radial or circumferential street or
highway designated by local authorities within their respective jurisdictions
as part of a major arterial system of streets or highways.
(ORC 4511.01(CCC))
§ 301.43 THROUGH STREET OR HIGHWAY.
   THROUGH STREET OR HIGHWAY means every street or highway as provided in Ohio
R.C. 4511.65, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(ORC 4511.01(HH))
§ 301.44 THRUWAY.
   THRUWAY means a through street or highway whose entire roadway is reserved
for through traffic and on which roadway parking is prohibited.
(ORC 4511.01(AAA))
§ 301.45 TRAFFIC.
   TRAFFIC means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars
and other devices, either singly or together, while using for purposes of
travel any highway or private road open to public travel.
(ORC 4511.01(TT))
§ 301.455 TRAFFIC AUTHORITY.
   TRAFFIC AUTHORITY means the Director of Public Safety.
(Ord. 23-1950, passed 4-3-1950)
§ 301.46 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE.
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE means a flagger, sign, signal, marking or other
device used to regulate, warn or guide traffic, placed on over or adjacent to a
street, highway, private road open to public travel, pedestrian facility or
shared-use path by authority of a public agency or official having
jurisdiction, or, in the case of a private road open to public travel, by
authority of the private owner or private official having jurisdiction.
(ORC 4511.01(QQ))
§ 301.47 TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL.
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL means any highway traffic signal by which traffic is
alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed.
(ORC 4511.01(RR))
§ 301.475 TRAFFIC DIVISION.
   TRAFFIC DIVISION means the Traffic Division of the Police Division of the
city.
(Ord. 23-1950, passed 4-3-1950)
§ 301.48 TRAILER.
   TRAILER means every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or
property wholly on its own structure, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle,
including any vehicle when formed by or operated as a combination of a
semitrailer and a vehicle of the dolly type, such as that commonly known as a
trailer dolly, a vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural
production materials between a local place of storage or supply and the farm
when drawn or towed on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per
hour and a vehicle designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a
place of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed
on a street or highway for a distance of more than ten miles or at a speed of
more than 25 miles per hour.
(ORC 4511.01(M))
§ 301.49 TRUCK.
   TRUCK means every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers, designed
and used to carry property.
(ORC 4511.01(K))
§ 301.495 TYPE A FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME.
   TYPE A FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME has the same meaning as set forth in Ohio R.C.
5104.01.
(ORC 4511.01)
§ 301.50 URBAN DISTRICT.
   URBAN DISTRICT means the territory contiguous to and including any street or
highway which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry or
dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of
one-quarter of a mile or more, and the character of the territory is indicated
by official traffic- control devices.
(ORC 4511.01(PP))
§ 301.51 VEHICLE.
   VEHICLE means every device, including a motorized bicycle, in, upon or by
which any person or property may be transported or drawn upon a highway; except
that, VEHICLE does not include any motorized wheelchair, any electric personal
assistive mobility device, any low-speed micromobility device, any personal
delivery device as defined in R.C. 4511.513, any device that is moved by power
collected from overhead electric trolley wire or that is used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks, or any device, other than a bicycle, that is moved
by human power.
(ORC 4511.01(A))
§ 301.52 WASTE COLLECTION VEHICLE.
   WASTE COLLECTION VEHICLE is a vehicle used in the collection of garbage,
refuse, trash or recyclable materials.
(ORC 4511.01(RRR))
CHAPTER 303: ENFORCEMENT, IMPOUNDING AND PENALTY
Section
303.01   Compliance with lawful order of police officer; fleeing.
303.02   Traffic direction in emergencies; obedience to school guards.
303.03   Officer may remove ignition key.
303.035   Emergency, public safety and coroners’ vehicles excepted.
303.04   Road workers, motor vehicles and equipment excepted.
303.05   Application to persons riding, driving animals upon roadway.
303.06   Freeway use prohibited by pedestrians, bicycles and animals.
303.07   Application to drivers of government vehicles.
303.08   Impounding of vehicles; redemption.
303.09   Willfully leaving vehicles on private or public property.
303.10   Use of radar.
303.11   Deposit of drivers’ licenses as security for traffic offenses.
303.12   Furnishing false information incident to traffic citation.
303.99   Traffic code penalties; suspension of driver’s license.
Cross-reference:
   Arrest without warrant for misdemeanor, see Ohio R.C. 2935.03
   Authority of arresting officer when radar, electrical or mechanical timing
device used, see
    Ohio R.C. 4511.091
   Burden of proof, see Ohio R.C. 2901.05
   Criteria for probation; conditions for probation, see Ohio R.C. 2951.02
   Definition of “dangerous offender”, see GEN. OFF.
698.01
   Definition of “imprisoned”, see Ohio R.C. 1.05
   Definition of “repeat offender”, see GEN. OFF.
698.01
   Dereliction of duty, see GEN. OFF.
606.19
   Discharge for delay in trial, see Ohio R.C. 2945.73
   Disposition of property held by Police Department, see GEN. OFF.
606.24
   Disposition of unclaimed vehicles, see Ohio R.C. 737.32, 4513.61 et seq.
   Distinctive uniform required for traffic officers, see Ohio R.C. 4549.15
   Exceptions for emergency or public safety vehicles, see TRAF.
331.20,
333.06
   Extension of time for hearing or trial, see Ohio R.C. 2945.72
   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer, see GEN. OFF.
606.13
   Imposing sentence for misdemeanor, see GEN. OFF.
698.03
   Impounding of bicycles, see TRAF.
373.10
   Limitation on criminal prosecutions, see GEN. OFF.
606.06
   Marking motor vehicles used by traffic officers, see Ohio R.C. 4549.13
   Multiple sentences, see GEN. OFF.
698.05
   Obstructing justice, see GEN. OFF.
606.15
   Obstructing official business, see GEN. OFF.
606.14
   Organizational penalties, see GEN. OFF.
698.04
   Power of trial court of record to suspend license for certain violations,
see Ohio R.C. 4510.05, 4510.15
   Resisting arrest, see GEN. OFF.
606.16
   Right of trial by jury, see Ohio R.C. 2945.17
   Satisfaction of fine; credit for time served, see Ohio R.C. 2947.14
   See section histories for similar state law
   Soliciting or receiving improper compensation, see GEN. OFF.
606.18
   State point system suspension, see Ohio R.C. 4507.021
   Time within which hearing or trial must be held, see Ohio R.C. 2945.71
   Uniform application of Ohio Traffic Law, see Ohio R.C. 4511.06
   Use of private property for vehicular travel, see Ohio R.C. 4511.08
§ 303.01 COMPLIANCE WITH LAWFUL ORDER OF POLICE OFFICER; FLEEING.
Editor’s note:
   Section 303.01 was recodified as part of the 1992 updating and revision of
this code of ordinances. See §
606.165 of the General Offenses Code.
§ 303.02 TRAFFIC DIRECTION IN EMERGENCIES; OBEDIENCE TO SCHOOL GUARDS.
   (A)   Police officers shall direct or regulate traffic in accordance with
the provisions of this traffic code; provided that, in the event of fire or
other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, they are
authorized to direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the
provisions of this traffic code. Firefighters, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity. The direction of traffic may be by word or audible signal, by gesture
or visible signal or by any combination thereof. No person shall fail to comply
with any lawful order or direction of any police officer or firefighter issued
pursuant to this section.
   (B)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any school crossing guard invested with authority to direct, control or
regulate traffic in the vicinity of the school to which such guard may be
assigned.
§ 303.03 OFFICER MAY REMOVE IGNITION KEY.
   A law enforcement officer may remove the ignition key left in the ignition
switch of an unlocked and unattended motor vehicle parked on a street or
highway. The officer removing the key shall place notification upon the vehicle
detailing his or her name and badge number, the place where the key may be
reclaimed and the procedure for reclaiming the key. The key shall be returned
to the owner of the motor vehicle upon presentation of proof of ownership.
(ORC 4549.05)
§ 303.035 EMERGENCY, PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORONERS’ VEHICLES EXCEPTED.
   (A)   The provisions of Ohio R.C. 4511.12, 4511.13, 4511.131, 4511.132,
4511.14, 4511.202, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25, 4511.26,
4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.34,
4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41, 4511.42,
4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59,
4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.62, 4511.66, 4511.68, 4511.681 and 4511.69, and any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do not apply to the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle if the emergency vehicle or public
safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle and if the driver of the vehicles is giving an audible signal by siren,
exhaust whistle or bell. This section does not relieve the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(ORC 4511.041)
   (B)   The provisions of Ohio R.C. 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28,
4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38
and 4511.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do not apply
to a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator operating a motor
vehicle in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4513.171 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. This division (B) does not relieve a coroner, deputy
coroner or coroner’s investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to
drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the
highway.
(ORC 4511.042)
§ 303.04 ROAD WORKERS, MOTOR VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT EXCEPTED.
   (A)   The provisions of this traffic code, except for §
333.01, do not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles and other equipment
while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway within an area
designated by traffic-control devices, but apply to those persons and vehicles
when traveling to or from such work.
   (B)   The driver of a highway maintenance vehicle owned by the state or any
political subdivision of the state, while the driver is engaged in the
performance of official duties upon a street or highway; provided, the highway
maintenance vehicle is equipped with flashing lights and such other markings as
are required by law and such lights are in operation when the driver and
vehicle are so engaged, shall be exempt from criminal prosecution for
violations of Ohio R.C. 4511.22, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30,
4511.31, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.66, 4513.02 and 5577.01 to 5577.09, and any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (C)   (1)   This section does not exempt a driver of a highway maintenance
vehicle from civil liability arising from a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.22,
4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.66
or 4513.02 or Ohio R.C. 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
      (2)   This section does not exempt a driver of a vehicle who is not a
state employee and who is engaged in the transport of highway maintenance
equipment from criminal liability for a violation of R.C. 5577.01 through
5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (D)   As used in this section, ENGAGED IN THE PERFORMANCE OF OFFICIAL DUTIES
includes driving a highway maintenance vehicle to and from the manufacturer or
vehicle maintenance provider and transporting a highway maintenance vehicle,
equipment or materials to and from a work location.
(ORC 4511.04)
§ 303.05 APPLICATION TO PERSONS RIDING, DRIVING ANIMALS UPON ROADWAY.
   Every person riding, driving, or leading an animal upon a roadway is subject
to the provisions of this traffic code, applicable to the driver of a vehicle,
except those provisions of this traffic code which, by their nature, are
inapplicable.
(ORC 4511.05)
§ 303.06 FREEWAY USE PROHIBITED BY PEDESTRIANS, BICYCLES AND ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, shall:
      (1)   As a pedestrian, occupy any space within the limits of the right-
of-way of a freeway, except: in a rest area; on a facility that is separated
from the roadway and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately
marked for pedestrian use; in the performance of public works or official
duties; as a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of a
motor vehicle; or to obtain assistance; or
      (2)   Occupy any space within the limits of the right-of-way of a
freeway, with an animal-drawn vehicle, a ridden or led animal, herded animals,
a pushcart, a bicycle, except on a facility that is separated from the roadway
and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately marked for
bicycle use, a bicycle with motor attached, a motor-driven cycle with a motor
which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower, an agricultural tractor or
farm machinery, except in the performance of public works or official duties.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   If, within on year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this chapter.
(ORC 4511.051)
§ 303.07 APPLICATION TO DRIVERS OF GOVERNMENT VEHICLES.
   The provisions of this traffic code applicable to the drivers of vehicles
shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United
States, any state or any political subdivision thereof, including the
municipality, except as may be otherwise provided by law and subject to such
specific exceptions as are set forth with reference to authorized emergency and
public safety vehicles.
§ 303.08 IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES; REDEMPTION.
   (A)   Police officers and the Building Department are authorized to provide
for the removal and impounding of a vehicle under the following circumstances:
      (1)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any street, bridge or
causeway and is so illegally parked so as to constitute a hazard or obstruction
to the normal movement of traffic, or so as to unreasonably interfere with
street cleaning or snow removal operations;
      (2)   When any motor vehicle, including an abandoned junk motor vehicle,
as defined in Ohio R.C. 4513.63, is left on private residential property, as
defined in §
303.09(D) of this chapter, or on private agricultural property, for at least
four consecutive hours without the permission of the person having the right to
the possession of the property, or on a public street or other property open to
the public for purposes of vehicular travel, or upon or within the right of way
of any road or highway, for 48 consecutive hours or longer, without
notification to the Police Chief of the reasons for leaving such vehicle in
such place; except that, when such a motor vehicle constitutes an obstruction
to traffic, it may be ordered into storage immediately;
      (3)   When any vehicle has been stolen or operated without the consent of
the owner;
      (4)   When any vehicle displays illegal license plates or fails to
display the current lawfully required license plates;
      (5)   When any vehicle has been used in or connected with the commission
of a felony;
      (6)   When any vehicle has been damaged or wrecked so as to be inoperable
or violates equipment provisions of this traffic code whereby its continued
operation would constitute a condition hazardous to life, limb or property;
      (7)   When any vehicle is left unattended due to the removal of an ill,
injured or arrested operator;
      (8)   When any vehicle has been operated by any person who has failed to
stop in case of an accident or collision;
      (9)   When any vehicle has been operated by any person who is driving
without a lawful license or while his or her license has been suspended or
revoked;
      (10)   When any vehicle is found for which two or more citation tags for
violations of this traffic code have been issued and the owner or operator
thereof has failed to respond to such citation tags as lawfully required; and/
or
      (11)   When any vehicle is found to be in violation of any of the
provisions of §§
351.03,
351.04(A),
351.05,
351.11,
351.12,
351.13,
351.14 or
351.15(A) and
Ch. 632 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any vehicle removed under authority of division (A)(2) above
shall be ordered into storage and/or disposed of as provided under Ohio R.C.
4513.60 et seq. Any other vehicle removed under authority of this section shall
be ordered into storage and the Police Division shall forthwith notify the
registered vehicle owner of the fact of such removal and impounding, reasons
therefor and the place of storage.
      (2)   Any person desiring to redeem an impounded vehicle shall appear at
the Police Division to furnish satisfactory evidence of identity and ownership
or right to possession. Prior to issuance of a release form, the claimant,
owner or operator shall either pay the amount due for any fines for violations
on account of which such vehicle was impounded or, as the court may require,
post a bond in an amount set by the court, to appear to answer to such
violations. The Police Division shall release such vehicle upon the receipt of
the release form and payment of all towage and storage charges. No fee will be
charged for removal of non-vehicle personal property during regular business
hours.
   (C)   No owner or operator shall remove an impounded vehicle from the place
of storage without complying with the above procedure. Possession of a vehicle
which has been impounded and unlawfully taken from the place of storage, by the
owner or operator, shall constitute prima facie evidence that it was so removed
by the owner or operator.
(Adopting Ordinance)
   (D)   The following schedule represents the maximum rates to be charged by
the Police Division and Building Department to tow and store vehicles within a
three-mile limit from the city corporate limits, as determined by the City
Engineering Department:
      (1)   Police/Building Department impounded vehicles: $115, at any time;
      (2)   Vehicles overturned, submerged in water, rolled over embankment or
similar mishap: $115 per hour, one-hour minimum, billed in half-hour increments
thereafter, plus towing charges to the yard; unless this calls for two men and
two trucks, in which case, charges will be rated accordingly;
      (3)   If, due to vehicle size or type, services of another tow company
are required, those fees shall be in addition to the standard tow fee of $115;
      (4)   Minor debris cleanup is included in towing charge. A cleanup fee
not to exceed $25 may be charged for debris cleanup of substantial vehicle
glass or fluids. If the time required exceeds one hour, debris cleanup: $25 per
hour;
      (5)   Storage: $15 per day or any fraction of a day in a fenced-in area;
and
      (6)   A $65 administrative fee for all tows.
   (E)   The company entering into an agreement to tow vehicles at the
direction of the Police Division or other authorized city official shall have a
valid permit to operate a towing company within the city issued by the Safety
Director. The towing company vehicle(s) location must be located within a
three-mile limit from the city corporate limits, as determined by the City
Engineering Department, and company vehicles shall comply with and carry the
equipment listed in division (F) below.
   (F)   Minimum requirements for towing companies contracting with the city.
Any towing company entering into an agreement with the city as described in
division (E) above shall meet all of the following minimum requirements.
      (1)   All towing companies shall maintain in operable condition the
following equipment:
         (a)   At least three approved tow trucks, one of which must be
equipped to tow front wheel drive vehicles without damage; and
         (b)   A motorcycle trailer or other acceptable means of carrying a
motorcycle in an upright position.
      (2)   Tow truck chassis shall be rated by the manufacturer at one ton or
more. Each vehicle must be equipped with:
         (a)   One rear-view mirror on each side;
         (b)   A winch or boom rated by the manufacturer as having a four-ton
capacity and equipped with steel cable having a minimum diameter of three-
eighths inch;
         (c)   At least one amber flashing light, and one work light, situated
so as to illuminate the winching or craning operations at night;
         (d)   The following additional equipment:
            1.   Two pickup chains at least eight feet in length;
            2.   One broom and shovel;
            3.   One all-purpose fire extinguisher maintained in operable
condition;
            4.   Three flares;
            5.   One snatch block;
            6.   A set of hand-tools, such as screwdrivers, pliers, wire
cutters and wrenches;
            7.   Rope or line to tie the steering wheel;
            8.   Three triangle reflectors;
            9.   Jumper cables;
                10.   Operable two-way radio;
            11.   Fifty-pound bag of sand or oil dry; and
                12.   Any other equipment that may be deemed necessary in the
future by the Director of Public Safety.
      (3)   The towing company shall be responsible for providing towing
services for all vehicles that they are called to tow. Should the towing
company require special equipment not readily available for larger vehicles
(e.g., buses, recreational vehicles, commercial trucks), the towing company
must arrange for those towing services through another company, at the towing
company’s expense.
      (4)   Any vehicle storage facility shall:
         (a)   Be located within a three-mile limit from the city corporate
limits, as determined by the City Engineering Department;
         (b)   Provide on-site storage for a minimum of 20 vehicles outside,
plus storage space for a minimum of four additional vehicles inside. All
storage areas shall be secured by a solid fence or wall not less than eight
feet in height or six feet if provided with arm extensions and barbed wire. The
fence shall be well- maintained and in good appearance at all times.
(Ord. 61-1997, passed 4-14-1997; Ord. 199-2000, passed 10-9-2000; Ord. 43-2004,
passed 3-8-2004; Ord. 204-2007, passed 12-17-2007; Ord. 18-2012, passed 2-13-
2012; Ord. 41-2012, passed 3-26-2012; Ord. 159-2014, passed 11-24-2014; Ord.
42-2016, passed 5-9-2016)
§ 303.09 WILLFULLY LEAVING VEHICLES ON PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   The chief of a law enforcement agency of the municipal corporation,
within the chief's territorial jurisdiction, or a state highway patrol trooper,
upon notification to the chief of such action and of the location of the place
of storage, may order into storage any motor vehicle, including an abandoned
junk motor vehicle as defined in Ohio R.C. 4513.63, that:
      (1)   Has come into the possession of the chief or state highway patrol
trooper as a result of the performance of the chief's or trooper's duties; or
      (2)   Has been left on a public street or other property open to the
public for purposes of vehicular travel, or upon or within the right-of-way of
any road or highway, for 48 hours or longer without notification to the chief
of the reasons for leaving the motor vehicle in such place. However, when such
a motor vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic it may be ordered into
storage immediately unless either of the following applies:
         (a)   The vehicle was involved in an accident and is subject to Ohio
R.C. 4513.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
         (b)   The vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle. If the vehicle is a
commercial motor vehicle, the chief or state highway patrol trooper shall allow
the owner or operator of the vehicle the opportunity to arrange for the removal
of the motor vehicle within a period of time specified by the chief or state
highway patrol trooper. If the chief or state highway patrol trooper determines
that the vehicle cannot be removed within the specified period of time, the
chief or state highway patrol trooper shall order the removal of the vehicle.
      (3)   Subject to division (C) of this section, the chief shall designate
the place of storage of any motor vehicle so ordered removed.
   (B)   If the chief or a state highway patrol trooper issues an order under
division (A) of this section and arranges for the removal of a motor vehicle by
a towing service, the towing service shall deliver the motor vehicle to the
location designated by the chief not more than two hours after the time it is
removed.
   (C)   (1)   The chief shall cause a search to be made of the records of an
applicable entity listed in Ohio R.C. 4513.601(F)(1) to ascertain the identity
of the owner and any lienholder of a motor vehicle ordered into storage by the
chief or a state highway patrol trooper within five business days of the
removal of the vehicle. Upon obtaining such identity, the chief shall send or
cause to be sent to the owner or lienholder at the owner's or lienholder's last
known address by certified or express mail with return receipt requested, by
certified mail with electronic tracking, or by a commercial carrier service
utilizing any form of delivery requiring a signed receipt. The notice shall
inform the owner or lienholder that the motor vehicle will be declared a
nuisance and disposed of if not claimed within ten days of the date of the
sending of the notice.
      (2)   (a)   The owner or lienholder of the motor vehicle may reclaim the
motor vehicle upon payment of any expenses or charges incurred in its removal
and storage, and presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by
a certificate of title or memorandum certificate of title to the motor vehicle,
a certificate of registration for the motor vehicle, or a lease agreement. Upon
presentation of proof of ownership evidenced as provided above, the owner of
the motor vehicle also may retrieve any personal items from the vehicle without
retrieving the vehicle and without paying any fee. However, a towing service or
storage facility may charge an after-hours retrieval fee established by the
Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted under Ohio R.C. 4921.25 if the
owner retrieves the personal items after hours, unless the towing service or
storage facility fails to provide the notice required under Ohio R.C. 4513.69
(B)(3), if applicable. However, the owner shall not do either of the following:
            1.   Retrieve any personal item that has been determined by the
chief or a state highway patrol trooper, as applicable, to be necessary to a
criminal investigation;
            2.   Retrieve any personal item from a vehicle if it would endanger
the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees to sign a waiver of liability.
         (b)   For purposes of division (C)(2) of this section, "personal
items" do not include any items that are attached to the vehicle.
      (3)   If the owner or lienholder of the motor vehicle reclaims it after a
search of the applicable records has been conducted and after notice has been
sent to the owner or lienholder as described in this section, and the search
was conducted by the place of storage, and the notice was sent to the motor
vehicle owner by the place of storage, the owner or lienholder shall pay to the
place of storage a processing fee of $25, in addition to any expenses or
charges incurred in the removal and storage of the vehicle.
   (D)   If the owner or lienholder makes no claim to the motor vehicle within
ten days of the date of sending the notice, and if the vehicle is to be
disposed of at public auction as provided in Ohio R.C. 4513.62 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the chief, without charge to any
party, shall file with the clerk of courts of the county in which the place of
storage is located an affidavit showing compliance with the requirements of
this section. Upon presentation of the affidavit, the clerk, without charge,
shall issue a salvage certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and
encumbrances, to the chief. If the vehicle is to be disposed of to a motor
vehicle salvage dealer or other facility as provided in Ohio R.C. 4513.62 or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the chief shall execute in
triplicate an affidavit, as prescribed by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles,
describing the motor vehicle and the manner in which it was disposed of, and
that all requirements of this section have been complied with. The chief shall
retain the original of the affidavit for the chief's records, and shall furnish
two copies to the motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility. Upon
presentation of a copy of the affidavit by the motor vehicle salvage dealer,
the clerk of courts, within 30 days of the presentation, shall issue a salvage
certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances.
   (E)   Whenever a motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility receives an
affidavit for the disposal of a motor vehicle as provided in this section, the
dealer or facility shall not be required to obtain an Ohio certificate of title
to the motor vehicle in the dealer's or facility's own name if the vehicle is
dismantled or destroyed and both copies of the affidavit are delivered to the
clerk of courts.
   (F)   No towing service or storage facility shall fail to comply with this
section.
(ORC 4513.61)
   (G)   (1)   (a)   No person shall willfully leave an abandoned junk motor
vehicle, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4513.63, on private property for more than 72
hours without the permission of the person having the right to the possession
of the property, or on a public street or other property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking, or upon or within the right-of-way of
any road or highway for 48 hours or longer without notification to the chief of
a law enforcement agency of the municipal corporation of the reason for leaving
the motor vehicle in that place.
         (b)   For purposes of this division (G)(1), the fact that a motor
vehicle has been so left without permission or notification is prima facie
evidence of abandonment.
         (c)   Nothing contained in this section and Ohio R.C. 4513.60, 4513.61
and 4513.63 shall invalidate or prevent the enactment of further provisions of
municipal ordinances regulating or prohibiting the abandonment of motor
vehicles on streets, highways, public property or private property within the
municipality.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (G) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
and shall also be assessed any costs incurred by the municipality in disposing
of the abandoned junk motor vehicle, less any money accruing to the
municipality from the disposal.
(ORC 4513.64)
§ 303.10 USE OF RADAR.
   The driver of any motor vehicle which has been checked by radar or by any
electrical or mechanical timing device to determine the speed of the motor
vehicle over a measured distance of the street or highway and who is found to
be in violation of any of the provisions of §
333.03 of this chapter may be arrested until a warrant can be obtained;
provided, such officer has observed the recording of the speed of such motor
vehicle by the radio microwaves, electrical or mechanical timing device, or has
received a radio message from the officer who observed the speed of the motor
vehicle recorded by the radio microwaves, electrical or mechanical timing
device; provided that, in case of an arrest based on such a message, such radio
message has been dispatched immediately after the speed of the motor vehicle
was recorded and the arresting officer is furnished a description of the motor
vehicle for proper identification and the recorded speed.
(Ord. 102-1972, passed 5-30-1972)
§ 303.11 DEPOSIT OF DRIVERS’ LICENSES AS SECURITY FOR TRAFFIC OFFENSES.
   (A)   A law enforcement officer who issues a citation to a person pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 2935.26 may, in addition to issuing the citation, if the minor
misdemeanor offense for which the citation is issued is an act prohibited by
Ch.
313,
331,
333,
335,
337,
339,
341 or
373 of this traffic code, and if the person to whom the citation is issued does
not reside within the jurisdiction of the court with which the officer is
required to file the citation under Ohio R.C. 2935.26(D), do one of the
following:
      (1)   Require the person, if he or she has a current valid Ohio
operator’s or chauffeur’s license and has been notified of the alternative
under division (A)(2) below, and of the possible consequences of his or her
actions as required under division (G) below, to deposit the license with the
officer to serve as security to ensure the person’s appearance at the time and
place stated in the citation or his or her compliance with Ohio R.C. 2935.26
(c), if the person chooses to do so; or
      (2)   If the person does not have a current valid Ohio operator’s or
chauffeur’s license or if the person does not agree to the deposit of his or
her license after being notified of the possible consequences of his or her
actions as required under division (G) below, bring the person before the court
with which the citation is required to be filed for the setting of a reasonable
security by the court pursuant to division (H) below.
   (B)   A person who deposits his or her license as security under division
(A)(1) above shall be given a receipt for the license, which receipt shall note
the date and time of the issuance of the citation, specifically identify the
citation for which the deposit was required, state the time set for the
appearance of the person as contained on the citation, state the license number
and contain a statement that the license is being held as security. Such
receipt shall be signed by the officer issuing the citation and shall serve as
a valid license until the time of appearance stated on the receipt.
   (C)   A person who appears before a court to have security set under
division (A)(2) above shall be given a receipt or other evidence of the deposit
of the security by the court.
   (D)   An officer who issues a citation shall immediately file any license
received as security under this section with the same court with which he or
she is required to file the citation.
   (E)   (1)   Upon the appearance of a person who was issued a citation at the
time and place specified on the citation, the court shall immediately return
any sum of money, license or other security deposited in relation to the
citation to the person or to any other person who deposited the security.
      (2)   Upon compliance with Ohio R.C. 2935.26(C) by a person who was
issued a citation, the Clerk of the Court shall notify the court. The court
shall immediately return any sum of money, license or other security deposited
in relation to the citation to the person, or to any other person who deposited
the security.
   (F)   (1)   If a person who was issued a citation fails to appear at the
time and place specified on the citation and fails to comply with Ohio R.C.
2935.26(C), the court shall forward, after 30 days, the person’s license, if he
or she has deposited it as security, to the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles.
The Registrar shall cancel the license and notify the person of the
cancellation by certified mail at his or her last known address. No valid
operator’s or chauffeur’s license shall be granted to the person for a period
of one year after the cancellation, unless the court having jurisdiction of the
offense that led to the cancellation requests the Registrar to reissue the
license to its original date of expiration without an additional fee or to
permit the person to apply for a new license.
      (2)   If the person who was issued the citation fails to appear at the
time and place specified on the citation and fails to comply with Ohio R.C.
2935.26(C), and the person has deposited a sum of money or other security in
relation to the citation under division (A)(2) above, the deposit shall
immediately be forfeited to the court.
      (3)   This section does not preclude further action as authorized by Ohio
R.C. 2935.26(F).
   (G)   No license shall be taken as security by an officer issuing a citation
until the officer has notified the person of the following: if the person
deposits the license with the officer and does not appear at the time and place
stated on the citation, or comply with Ohio R.C. 2935.26(C), the license will
be canceled, the person will not be eligible for a license for one year after
cancellation and the person is subject to any applicable criminal penalties.
   (H)   A court setting security under division (A)(2) above shall do so in
conformity with Ohio R.C. 2937.22 and 2937.23 and the Ohio Rules of Criminal
Procedure.
(Ord. 70-1984, passed 4-23-1984)
§ 303.12 FURNISHING FALSE INFORMATION INCIDENT TO TRAFFIC CITATION.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly present, display or orally communicate a
false name, Social Security number or date of birth to a law enforcement
officer who is in the process of issuing to the person a traffic ticket or
complaint.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4513.361)
§ 303.99 TRAFFIC CODE PENALTIES; SUSPENSION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this traffic code for which no
penalty otherwise is provided in the section violated is guilty of one of the
following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (B) or (C) below, a minor
misdemeanor;
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; and
      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more predicate motor vehicle or
traffic offenses, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.99)
   (B)   (1)   As used in this section and each section referenced in division
(B)(2) below, all of the following apply:
         (a)   DISTRACTED means doing either of the following while operating a
vehicle:
            1.   Using an electronic wireless communications device, as defined
in Ohio R.C. 4511.204, in violation of that section.
            2.   Engaging in any activity that is not necessary to the
operation of a vehicle and impairs, or reasonably would be expected to impair,
the ability of the operator to drive the vehicle safely.
         (b)   DISTRACTED does not include operating a motor vehicle while
wearing an earphone or earplug over or in both ears at the same time. A person
who so wears earphones or earplugs may be charged with a violation of R.C.
4511.84, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
         (c)   DISTRACTED does not include conducting any activity while
operating a utility service vehicle or a vehicle for or on behalf of a utility,
provided that the driver of the vehicle is acting in response to an emergency,
power outage, or a circumstance affecting the health or safety of individuals.
As used in this division (B)(1)(c):
            1.   “Utility” means an entity specified in R.C. § 4905.03(A), (C),
(D), (E) or (G); and
            2.   “Utility service vehicle” means a vehicle owned or operated by
a utility.
      (2)   If an offender violates R.C. 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12, 4511.121,
4511.132, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25, 4511.26,
4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.34,
4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41, 4511.42,
4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451, 4511.46, 4511.47, 4511.54,
4511.55, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.64, 4511.71,
4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72 or 4511.73, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, while distracted and the distracting activity
is a contributing factor to the commission of the violation, the offender is
subject to the applicable penalty for the violation and, notwithstanding R.C.
2929.28, is subject to an additional fine of not more than $100 as follows:
         (a)   1.   Subject to Traffic Rule 13, if a law enforcement officer
issues an offender a ticket, citation, or summons for a violation of any of the
aforementioned sections of the Ohio Revised Code, or any substantially similar
municipal ordinance, that indicates that the offender was distracted while
committing the violation and that the distracting activity was a contributing
factor to the commission of the violation, the offender may enter a written
plea of guilty and waive the offender’s right to contest the ticket, citation,
or summons in a trial provided that the offender pays the total amount of the
fine established for the violation and pays the additional fine of $100.
            2.   In lieu of payment of the additional fine of $100, the
offender instead may elect to attend a distracted driving safety course, the
duration and contents of which shall be established by the Ohio Director of
Public Safety. If the offender attends and successfully completes the course,
the offender shall be issued written evidence that the offender successfully
completed the course. The offender shall be required to pay the total amount of
the fine established for the violation, but shall not be required to pay the
additional fine of $100, so long as the offender submits to the court both the
offender’s payment in full and such written evidence within 90 days of the
underlying violation that resulted in the imposition of the additional fine
under division (B) of this section.
         (b)   1.   If the offender appears in person to contest the ticket,
citation, or summons in a trial and the offender pleads guilty to or is
convicted of the violation, the court, in addition to all other penalties
provided by law, may impose the applicable penalty for the violation and may
impose the additional fine of not more than $100.
            2.   If the court imposes upon the offender the applicable penalty
for the violation and an additional fine of not more than $100, the court shall
inform the offender that, in lieu of payment of the additional fine of not more
than $100, the offender instead may elect to attend the distracted driving
safety course described in division (B)(2)(a) above. If the offender elects the
course option and attends and successfully completes the course, the offender
shall be issued written evidence that the offender successfully completed the
course. The offender shall be required to pay the total amount of the fine
established for the violation, but shall not be required to pay the additional
fine of not more than $100, so long as the offender submits to the court the
offender’s payment and such written evidence within 90 days of the underlying
violation that resulted in the imposition of the additional fine under division
(B) of this section.
      (3)   If a law enforcement officer issues an offender a ticket, citation,
or summons for a violation of any of the sections of the Revised Code listed in
division (B)(2) of this section that indicates that the offender was distracted
while committing the violation and that the distracting activity was a
contributing factor to the commission of the violation, the officer shall do
both of the following:
         (a)   Report the issuance of the ticket, citation, or summons to the
officer's law enforcement agency;
         (b)   Ensure that such report indicates the offender's race.
(ORC 4511.991)
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. 4510.07 or in any other provision
of the Revised Code, whenever an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of any provision of this traffic code that is substantially
equivalent to a provision of the Revised Code, and a court is permitted or
required to suspend a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit for a violation of that provision, a court, in addition to any other
penalties authorized by law, may suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or non-resident operating privilege for the period
of time the court determines appropriate, but the period of suspension imposed
for the violation of the provision of this traffic code shall not exceed the
period of suspension that is permitted or required to be imposed for the
violation of the provision of the Revised Code to which the provision of this
traffic code is substantially equivalent.
(ORC 4510.05)
CHAPTER 305: TRAFFIC CONTROL
Section
305.01   Division of Traffic Engineering and Safety created.
305.02   Authority and considerations for placement of devices.
305.03   Conformity with State Manual.
305.04   Powers of Public Service Director.
305.05   Posting of signs and signals required.
305.06   Director’s powers not limited.
305.07   Records of Director.
305.08   Reservation of power to Council.
305.09   Violations subject to misdemeanor classification.
Cross-reference:
   Alteration of prima facie speed limits, see Ohio R.C. 4511.21, 4511.22,
4511.23
   Designation of through streets and erection of stop or yield signs, see Ohio
R.C. 4511.65
   Placing and maintaining local traffic-control devices, see Ohio R.C.
4511.10, 4511.11
   Power to designate highway as a freeway, expressway or thruway, see Ohio
R.C. 4511.011
   Power to erect stop signs at grade crossings, see Ohio R.C. 4511.61
   “Traffic-control devices” defined, see TRAF.
301.46
   Uniform system of traffic-control devices, see Ohio R.C. 4511.09, 4511.11
§ 305.01 DIVISION OF TRAFFIC ENGINEERING AND SAFETY CREATED.
   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 737.021 and 737.022, a Division of Traffic Engineering
and Safety is hereby created, and the Director of Public Safety shall be the
executive head of such Division.
§ 305.02 AUTHORITY AND CONSIDERATIONS FOR PLACEMENT OF DEVICES.
   The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized to place and maintain
traffic-control devices upon any street or highway under municipal jurisdiction
as are necessary to effectuate the provisions of this traffic code, or to
regulate, warn or guide traffic and such other traffic-control devices as such
person shall deem necessary for the proper control of traffic. The Director of
Public Safety shall determine the location, timing and coordination of such
traffic-control devices upon the basis of an applicable engineering or traffic
investigation and shall consider the following:
   (A)   The maximum safety and protection of vehicular and pedestrian traffic
from physical injury or property damage;
   (B)   The existing and potential traffic movement, volume and conditions;
   (C)   The location and frequency of accidents, including studies of remedial
measures;
   (D)   The recommendations of the Chief of Police and Fire Chief;
   (E)   The acceleration of transportation of persons and property by vehicles
so as to expedite travel and promote public safety;
   (F)   The convenience and welfare of the general public in parking,
standing, loading and unloading and the use of the streets as affecting
business concerns and places of assembly; and
   (G)   Economy in the expenditure of money.
§ 305.03 CONFORMITY WITH STATE MANUAL.
   All traffic-control devices placed pursuant to the provisions of this
traffic code shall conform to the Ohio Manual and Specifications for a Uniform
System of Traffic-Control Devices, as set forth in Ohio R.C. 4511.09.
§ 305.04 POWERS OF PUBLIC SAFETY DIRECTOR.
   The Director of Public Safety empowered to:
   (A)   Designate any street or highway as a through street or highway and
require that all vehicles stop or yield the right-of-way as may be required
before entering the same; or in residence districts designate certain streets
or highways or portions thereof not to be through streets or highways despite
the erection of stop signs or other official traffic-control devices at
intersecting streets;
   (B)   Designate any intersection as a stop intersection and require all
vehicles to stop at one or more entrances to such intersection;
   (C)   Designate any intersection as a yield intersection and require all
vehicles to yield the right-of-way as required;
   (D)   Designate any street as a one-way street and require that all vehicles
thereon be moved in one specific direction;
   (E)   Designate and mark lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular
direction regardless of the center line of the roadway;
   (F)   Erect signs directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane or
allocating specified lanes to traffic moving in the same direction;
   (G)   Designate those portions of any street, where overtaking and passing
other traffic or driving to the left of the center or center line of the
roadway would be especially hazardous, by appropriate signs or markings on the
street to indicate the beginning and end of such zones. Such zones may be
marked by an auxiliary yellow line placed parallel and to the right of the
normal center line or offset marked lane line;
   (H)   Place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections
and require that a specific course of direction be traveled by vehicles
proceeding in lanes by either permitting, prohibiting or requiring turns at
such intersections;
   (I)   Install traffic-control devices, signals and signs at any location to
regulate traffic;
   (J)   Establish safety zones, crosswalks, zones of quiet and play streets;
   (K)   Close any street or portion thereof to vehicular traffic which is in
the process of construction, reconstruction or repair;
   (L)   Determine the location of any necessary bus stops and taxicab stands;
   (M)   Determine the location and limiting hours of truck loading zones;
   (N)   Designate dangerous railroad crossings and erect stop signs thereat;
   (O)   Erect “No U Turn” signs at any location to prohibit a vehicle from
being turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction;
   (P)   Regulate or prohibit the stopping, standing and parking of vehicles on
streets, alleys or public property by erecting signs plainly indicating the
prohibitions, restrictions or limitations;
   (Q)   Designate individual parking spaces by markings, which may either be
parallel or at a prescribed angle to the curb or edge of the roadway;
   (R)   Designate truck routes and streets or parts thereof where either a
weight limit restriction or truck exclusion has been imposed by rule or
regulation provided such is not in conflict with any legislation; and
   (S)   Erect signs to prohibit a right turn against a steady red signal at
any intersection.
§ 305.05 POSTING OF SIGNS AND SIGNALS REQUIRED.
   No provision of this chapter shall be effective until signs, signals,
markings or other devices giving notice of such local traffic regulations are
posted upon or at the entrance to the street or part thereof affected, as may
be most appropriate, so that in a proper position they are sufficiently legible
to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
§ 305.06 DIRECTOR’S POWERS NOT LIMITED.
   The powers of the Director of Public Safety shall not be limited by the
specific enumeration of subjects contained in this chapter.
§ 305.07 RECORDS OF DIRECTOR.
   Director of Public Safety shall keep a record of all rules, regulations and
proceedings promulgated in connection with this chapter.
§ 305.08 RESERVATION OF POWER TO COUNCIL.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, Council may override any
decision of the Director of Public Safety and may assume any of the powers
delegated to the Director, by a resolution adopted by a vote of a majority of
the members duly elected thereto. Upon the adoption of any such resolution, the
same may be changed only by an amending or repealing resolution adopted by
Council.
§ 305.09 VIOLATIONS SUBJECT TO MISDEMEANOR CLASSIFICATION.
   Except as otherwise provided, any person violating the rules and regulations
promulgated in connection with this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor which
shall be classified as provided in §
303.99 of this code of ordinances.
TITLE FOUR: STREETS AND TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
CHAPTER 311: STREET OBSTRUCTION AND SPECIAL USES
Section
311.01   Placing injurious material or obstruction in street.
311.02   Parades and assemblages.
311.03   Toy vehicles on streets.
311.04   Zones of quiet.
311.05   Play streets.
311.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Loads dropping or leaking; tracking mud; removal required, see TRAF.
339.08
   Parking in alleys or narrow streets; exceptions, see TRAF.
351.11
   Power to regulate processions or assemblages, see Ohio R.C. 4511.07
   See section histories for similar state law
   Selling, washing or repairing vehicle upon roadway, see TRAF.
351.06
§ 311.01 PLACING INJURIOUS MATERIAL OR OBSTRUCTION IN STREET.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a
highway, lane, road, street or alley or right-of-way any tacks, bottles, wire,
glass, nails or other articles which may damage or injure any person, vehicle
or animal traveling along or upon the highway, except such substances that may
be placed upon the roadway by proper authority for the repair or construction
thereof.
      (2)   Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any
highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the
same.
      (3)   Any person authorized to remove a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a
highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the
highway from such vehicle.
      (4)   No person shall place any obstruction, alter and/or construct any
improvement in or upon a highway, street, road, lane, alley or right-of-way
without proper authority.
   (B)   No person, with intent to cause physical harm to a person or a
vehicle, shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a highway, lane, road,
street or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or other articles which
may damage or injure any person, vehicle or animal traveling along or upon such
highway, except such substances that may be placed upon the roadway by proper
authority for the repair or construction thereof.
   (C)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A) above is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates division (A) above
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (A) above is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
(ORC 4511.74(C)) (Ord. 21-2015, passed 2-9-2015)
§ 311.02 PARADES AND ASSEMBLAGES.
   (A)   No person, group of persons or organization shall conduct or
participate in any parade, procession or assemblage upon any street or highway,
or block off any street or highway area, without first obtaining a permit from
the Director of Public Safety.
   (B)   Applications for such permits shall be made on such forms as may be
prescribed and shall contain such information as is reasonably necessary to a
fair determination of whether a permit should be issued. Applications shall be
filed not less than five days before the time intended for such parade,
procession or assemblage.
   (C)   The permit may be refused or canceled if:
      (1)   The time, place, size or conduct of the parade including the
assembly areas and route of march would unreasonably interfere with the public
convenience and safe use of the streets and highways;
      (2)   The parade would require the diversion of so great a number of
police officers to properly police the line of movement, assembly area and
areas contiguous thereto so as to deny normal police protection to the
municipality;
      (3)   The parade route of march or assembly areas would unreasonably
interfere with the movement of police vehicles, firefighting equipment or
ambulance service to other areas of the municipality;
      (4)   The parade would unreasonably interfere with another parade for
which a permit has been issued;
      (5)   The information contained in the application is found to be false,
misleading or incomplete in any material detail; or
      (6)   An emergency such as a fire or storm would prevent the proper
conduct of the parade.
   (D)   The permit or any order accompanying it may limit or prescribe
reasonable conditions, including the hours, the places of assembly and of
dispersal, the route of march or travel and the streets, highways or portions
thereof which may be used or occupied.
§ 311.03 TOY VEHICLES ON STREETS.
   No person riding upon any coaster, roller skates, sled, toy vehicle or other
similar device shall go upon any roadway, except while crossing a street on a
crosswalk and when so crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights
and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This
section shall not apply to any street set aside as a play street.
§ 311.04 ZONES OF QUIET.
   The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized, where it is necessary to
preserve health, to establish zones of quiet. Whenever authorized signs are
erected indicating a zone of quiet, no person operating a motor vehicle within
any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning device of such vehicle,
except in an emergency.
§ 311.05 PLAY STREETS.
   The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized to establish play
streets. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part
thereof is a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street
or portion thereof, except drivers of vehicles having business or whose
residences are within such closed area, and then such drivers shall exercise
the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
§ 311.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
303.99 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 313: TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
Section
313.01   Obedience to traffic-control devices.
313.02   Through streets; stop and yield right-of- way signs.
313.03   Traffic-control signal terms and lights.
313.04   Lane-use control signals over individual lanes.
313.05   Pedestrian control signals.
313.06   Flashing traffic signals. (Repealed)
313.07   Unauthorized signs and signals, hiding from view, advertising.
313.08   Alteration, injury, removal of traffic- control devices.
313.09   Avoiding traffic-control devices.
313.10   Unauthorized possession or sale of devices.
313.11   Signal preemption devices; prohibitions.
313.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Authority and considerations for placing of devices, see TRAF.
305.02
   Criminal mischief (tampering), see GEN. OFF.
642.11
   Designation of through streets or stop intersections, see Ohio R.C. 4511.07,
4511.65
   Intersections at which traffic-control signals fail or malfunction, see
TRAF.
331.165
   Placing and maintaining local traffic-control devices, see Ohio R.C.
4511.10, 4511.11
   Posting of signs and signals required, see TRAF.
305.05
   See section histories for similar state law
   “Traffic-control devices” defined, see TRAF.
301.46
   Traffic law photo-monitoring devices, state regulations, see Ohio R.C.
4511.092 et seq.
   Uniform system of traffic-control devices, see Ohio R.C. 4511.09, 4511.11;
TRAF.
305.02
§ 313.01 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   (1)   No pedestrian or driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
instructions of any traffic-control device placed in accordance with the
provisions of this traffic code, unless at the time otherwise directed by a
police officer.
      (2)   No provision of this traffic code for which signs are required
shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the
alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular
section of this traffic code does not state that signs are required, that
section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place.
(ORC 4511.12(A))
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C) below, any operator of a
commercial motor vehicle, upon approaching a scale location established for the
purpose of determining the weight of the vehicle and its load, shall comply
with any traffic-control device or the order of a peace officer directing the
vehicle to proceed to be weighed or otherwise inspected.
      (2)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle, upon bypassing a scale
location in accordance with division (C) below, shall comply with an order of a
peace officer to stop the vehicle to verify the use and operation of an
electronic clearance device.
   (C)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle that is equipped with an
electronic clearance device authorized by the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol under Ohio R.C. 4549.081 may bypass a scale location, regardless
of the instruction of a traffic-control device to enter the scale facility, if
either of the following apply:
      (1)   The in-cab transponder displays a green light or other affirmative
visual signal and also sounds an affirmative audible signal; and
      (2)   Any other criterion established by the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol is met.
   (D)   Any peace officer may order the operator of a commercial motor vehicle
that bypasses a scale location to stop the vehicle to verify the use and
operation of an electronic clearance device.
   (E)   As used in this section, COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE means any
combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating or an actual gross
vehicle weight of more than 10,000 pounds if the vehicle is used in interstate
or intrastate commerce to transport property and also means any vehicle that is
transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is required pursuant to
49 C.F.R. parts 100 to 180.
(ORC 4511.121(A)-(C), (E))
   (F)   No person shall use an electronic clearance device if the device or
its use is not in compliance with rules of the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol.
(ORC 4549.081(B))
   (G)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A) above is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates division (A) above
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (A) above is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender commits the
offense while distracted and the distracting activity is a contributing factor
to the commission of the offense, the offender is subject to the additional
fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.12(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B) above or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, whoever violates
division (B) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (B) above or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, whoever violates
division (B) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. If the
offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting activity is a
contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the offender is subject
to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.121(D))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (F) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the third degree on
each subsequent offense.
(ORC 4549.081(C))
§ 313.02 THROUGH STREETS; STOP AND YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY SIGNS.
   (A)   All state routes are hereby designated as through highways; provided
that, stop signs, yield signs or traffic-control signals shall be erected at
all intersections with such through highways by the Department of
Transportation as to highways under its jurisdiction and by local authorities
as to highways under their jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this
section. Where two or more state routes that are through highways intersect,
and no traffic-control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall
be erected at one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local
authorities having jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section.
Whenever the Director of Transportation determines on the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation that stop signs are necessary to stop
traffic on a through highway for safe and efficient operation, nothing in this
section shall be construed to prevent such installations. When circumstances
warrant, the Director also may omit stop signs on roadways intersecting through
highways under his or her jurisdiction. Before the Director either installs or
removes a stop sign under this division (A), he or she shall give notice, in
writing, of that proposed action to the affected local authority at least 30
days before installing or removing the stop sign.
   (B)   Other streets or highways, or portions thereof, are hereby designated
as through highways if they are within the municipality, if they have a
continuous length of more than one mile between the limits of the street or
highway or portion thereof, and if they have stop or yield signs or traffic-
control signals at the entrances of the majority of intersecting streets or
highways. For purposes of this section, the limits of the street or highway, or
portion thereof, shall be the municipal corporation line, the physical terminus
of the street or highway or any point on the streets or highway at which
vehicular traffic thereon is required by regulatory signs to stop or yield to
traffic on the intersecting street; provided that, in residence districts, the
municipality may by ordinance designate such street or highway, or portion
thereof, not to be a through highway and thereafter the affected residence
district shall be indicated by official traffic-control devices. Where two or
more through highways designated under this division (B) intersect and no
traffic-control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall be
erected at one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local
authorities having jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section.
   (C)   The Department or local authorities having jurisdiction need not erect
stop signs at intersections they find to be so constructed as to permit traffic
to safely enter a through highway without coming to a stop. Signs shall be
erected at such intersections indicating that the operator of a vehicle shall
yield the right-of-way to or merge with all traffic proceeding on the through
highway.
   (D)   Local authorities, with reference to highways under their
jurisdiction, may designate additional through highways, and shall erect stop
signs, yield signs or traffic-control signals at all streets and highways
intersecting such through highways, or may designate any intersection as a stop
or yield intersection, and shall erect like signs at one or more entrances to
the intersection.
(ORC 4511.65)
§ 313.03 TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL TERMS AND LIGHTS.
   Highway traffic signal indications for vehicles and pedestrians shall have
the following meanings.
   (A)   Steady green signal indication.
      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal indication
are permitted to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a u-
turn movement except as such movement is modified by a lane-use sign, turn
prohibition sign, lane marking, roadway design, separate turn signal indication
or other traffic-control device. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles
turning right or left or making a U-turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way
to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk; and
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn
movement to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching
from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard
during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the
intersection.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal indication, displayed
alone or in combination with another signal indication, are permitted to
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications displayed at
the same time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left
or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the
following:
         (a)   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk; and
         (b)   Other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (3)   (a)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication,
as provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.14, pedestrians facing a circular green signal
indication are permitted to proceed across the roadway within any marked or
unmarked associated crosswalk. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection or so close as to create an immediate
hazard at the time that the green signal indication is first displayed.
         (b)   Pedestrians facing a green arrow signal indication, unless
otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic-control
device, shall not cross the roadway.
   (B)   Steady yellow signal indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow signal indication
are thereby warned that the related green movement or the related flashing
arrow movement is being terminated or that a steady red signal indication will
be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the
intersection. The provisions governing vehicular operation under the movement
being terminated shall continue to apply while the steady circular yellow
signal indication is displayed.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow arrow signal indication is
thereby warned that the related green arrow movement or the related flashing
arrow movement is being terminated. The provisions governing vehicular
operation under the movement being terminated shall continue to apply while the
steady yellow arrow signal indication is displayed.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal
indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.14 or other traffic-control device, shall not start
to cross the roadway.
   (C)   Steady red signal indication.
      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal
indication, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted
by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, traffic shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before
entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication
to proceed is displayed except as provided in divisions (C)(1), (C)(2) and (C)
(3) of this section.
         (b)   Except when a traffic-control device is in place prohibiting a
turn on red or a steady red arrow signal indication is displayed, vehicular
traffic facing a steady circular red signal indication is permitted, after
stopping, to enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-
way street into a one-way street. The right to proceed with the turn shall be
subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a stop
sign.
      (2)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal indication
shall not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow
and, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted by
another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but, if
there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection; or, if there is no crosswalk, then before entering the
intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication or other
traffic-control device permitting the movement indicated by such red arrow is
displayed.
         (b)   When a traffic-control device is in place permitting a turn on a
steady red arrow signal indication, vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow
indication is permitted, after stopping, to enter the intersection to turn
right or to turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street. The right to
proceed with the turn shall be limited to the direction indicated by the arrow
and shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop
at a stop sign.
      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.14 or other traffic-control device, pedestrians
facing a steady circular red or steady red arrow signal indication shall not
enter the roadway.
      (4)   Local authorities by ordinance, or the Director of Transportation
on state highways, may prohibit a right or a left turn against a steady red
signal at any intersection, which shall be effective when signs giving notice
thereof are posted at the intersection.
   (D)   Flashing green signal indication. A flashing green signal indication
has no meaning and shall not be used.
   (E)   Flashing yellow signal indication.
      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing
a flashing circular yellow signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter
the intersection to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a U-
turn movement except as such movement is modified by lane-use signs, turn
prohibition signs, lane markings, roadway design, separate turn signal
indications or other traffic-control devices. Such vehicular traffic, including
vehicles turning right or left or making a U-turn movement, shall yield the
right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk; and
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a U-turn
to the left shall yield the right- of-way to other vehicles approaching from
the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during
the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (2)   (a)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing
a flashing yellow arrow signal indication, displayed alone or in combination
with another signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or other such
movement as is permitted by other signal indications displayed at the same
time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or
making a U-turn, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk; and
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a U-turn
to the left shall yield the right- of-way to other vehicles approaching from
the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during
the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing any flashing yellow signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic-control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing yellow signal indication is first displayed.
      (4)   When a flashing circular yellow signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic-control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory or warning requirements of the other traffic-
control device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently
applicable.
   (F)   Flashing red signal indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing circular red signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. The right to proceed
shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing any flashing red signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic-control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing red signal indication is first displayed.
      (3)   When a flashing circular red signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic-control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory requirements of the other traffic-control
device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently applicable.
Use of this signal indication shall be limited to supplementing stop, do not
enter or wrong way signs, and to applications where compliance with the
supplemented traffic- control device requires a stop at a designated point.
   (G)   Applicability generally. In the event an official traffic-control
signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the
provisions of this section shall be applicable, except as to those provisions
which, by their nature, can have no application. Any stop required shall be
made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be
made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at
the signal.
   (H)   Railroad applicability. This section does not apply at railroad grade
crossings. Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings
shall be governed by Ohio R.C. 4511.61 and 4511.62.
(ORC 4511.13)
§ 313.04 LANE-USE CONTROL SIGNALS OVER INDIVIDUAL LANES.
   The meanings of lane-use control signal indications are as follows.
   (A)   Steady downward green arrow. A road user is permitted to drive in the
lane over which the arrow signal indication is located.
   (B)   Steady yellow “X”. A road user is to prepare to vacate the lane over
which the signal indication is located because a lane control change is being
made to a steady red “X” signal indication.
   (C)   Steady white two-way left-turn arrow. A road user is permitted to use
a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, but not for
through travel, with the understanding that common use of the lane by oncoming
road users for left turns also is permitted.
   (D)   Steady white one-way left-turn arrow. A road user is permitted to use
a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, without
opposing turns in the same lane, but not for through travel.
   (E)   Steady red “X”. A road user is not permitted to use the lane over
which the signal indication is located and that this signal indication shall
modify accordingly the meaning of other traffic controls present.
(ORC 4511.131)
§ 313.05 PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words “walk” or
“don’t walk,” or the symbol of a walking person or an upraised palm are in
place, these signals shall indicate the following instructions.
   (A)   A steady walking person signal indication, which symbolizes “walk”,
means that a pedestrian facing the signal indication is permitted to start to
cross the roadway in the direction of the signal indication, possibly in
conflict with turning vehicles. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the walking person
signal indication is first shown.
   (B)   A flashing upraised hand signal indication, which symbolizes “don’t
walk”, means that a pedestrian shall not start to cross the roadway in the
direction of the signal indication, but that any pedestrian who has already
started to cross on a steady walking person signal indication shall proceed to
the far side of the traveled way of the street or highway, unless otherwise
directed by a traffic-control device to proceed only to the median of a divided
highway or only to some other island or pedestrian refuge area.
   (C)   A steady upraised hand signal indication means that a pedestrian shall
not enter the roadway in the direction of the signal indication.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the continued
use of pedestrian control signals utilizing the word “wait” if those signals
were installed prior to 3-28-1985.
   (E)   A flashing walking person signal indication has no meaning and shall
not be used.
(ORC 4511.14)
§ 313.06 FLASHING TRAFFIC SIGNALS (REPEALED).
Editor’s note:
   Section 313.06 was repealed as part of the 2013 updating and revision of
this code of ordinances because substantially identical state law (Ohio R.C.
4511.15) was repealed by the Ohio General Assembly.
§ 313.07 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS AND SIGNALS, HIDING FROM VIEW, ADVERTISING.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of
any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to
be, is an imitation of, or resembles a traffic-control device or railroad sign
or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or hides from
view or interferes with the effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any
railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall any
public authority permit, upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing
thereon any commercial advertising. This section does not prohibit either the
erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful
directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for traffic-
control devices, or the erection upon private property of traffic-control
devices by the owner of real property in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4511.211 and
4511.432.
      (2)   Every prohibited sign, signal, marking or device is a public
nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway may remove the
same or cause it to be removed.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.16)
§ 313.08 ALTERATION, INJURY, REMOVAL OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   No person, without lawful authority, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy or otherwise improperly
tamper with any traffic- control device, any railroad sign or signal, or any
inscription, shield or insignia on the device, sign or signal, or any part of
the device, sign or signal;
      (2)   Knowingly drive upon or over any freshly applied pavement marking
material on the surface of a roadway while the marking material is in an
undried condition, and is marked by flags, markers, signs or other devices
intended to protect it; and
      (3)   Knowingly move, damage, destroy or otherwise improperly tamper with
a manhole cover.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
divisions (A)(1) or (A)(3) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. If a violation of divisions (A)(1) or (A)(3) above creates a risk of
physical harm to any person, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If a violation of divisions (A)(1) or (A)(3) above causes serious
physical harm to property that is owned, leased or controlled by a state or
local authority, the offender is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A)(2) above is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates division (A)
(2) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (A)(2)
above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.17)
§ 313.09 AVOIDING TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   No operator of a vehicle using the streets of the city shall avoid or
disregard any traffic-control device by passing through private property
adjacent to the place where the traffic-control device is placed or is in
operation.
(Ord. 79-1967, passed 4-17-1967)
§ 313.10 UNAUTHORIZED POSSESSION OR SALE OF DEVICES.
   (A)   As used in this section, TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE means any sign,
traffic-control signal or other device conforming to and placed or erected in
accordance with the manual adopted under Ohio R.C. 4511.09 by authority of a
public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic, including signs denoting the names of streets and
highways, but does not mean any pavement marking.
   (B)   No individual shall buy or otherwise possess, or sell, a traffic-
control device, except when one of the following applies:
      (1)   In the course of the individual’s employment by the state or a
local authority for the express or implied purpose of manufacturing, providing,
erecting, moving or removing such a traffic-control device;
      (2)   In the course of the individual’s employment by any manufacturer of
traffic-control devices other than a state or local authority;
      (3)   For the purpose of demonstrating the design and function of a
traffic-control device to state or local officials;
      (4)   When the traffic-control device has been purchased from the state
or a local authority at a sale of property that is no longer needed or is unfit
for use; or
      (5)   When the traffic-control device has been properly purchased from a
manufacturer for use on private property and the person possessing the device
has a sales receipt for the device or other acknowledgment of sale issued by
the manufacturer.
   (C)   This section does not preclude, and shall not be construed as
precluding, prosecution for theft in violation of Ohio R.C. 2913.02, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or for receiving stolen property
in violation of Ohio R.C. 2913.51, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(ORC 4511.18)
§ 313.11 SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICES; PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall possess a portable signal preemption device.
      (2)   No person shall use a portable signal preemption device to affect
the operation of a traffic-control device.
   (B)   Division (A)(1) above does not apply to any of the following persons
and division (A)(2) above does not apply to any of the following persons when
responding to an emergency call:
      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in Ohio R.C. 109.71;
      (2)   A state highway patrol officer; and
      (3)   A person while occupying a public safety vehicle as defined in Ohio
R.C. 4511.01(E)(1), (E)(3) or (E)(4).
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree. Whoever violates division (A)(2) above is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (D)   As used in this section, PORTABLE SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICE means a
device that, if activated by a person, is capable of changing a traffic-control
signal to green out of sequence.
(ORC 4511.031)
§ 313.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
303.99 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
TITLE FIVE: VEHICLES
CHAPTER 331: OPERATION GENERALLY
Section
331.01   Driving upon right side of roadway; exceptions.
331.02   Passing to right when proceeding in opposite directions.
331.03   Overtaking, passing to left; driver’s duties.
331.04   Overtaking and passing upon right.
331.05   Overtaking, passing to left of center.
331.06   Additional restrictions on driving upon left side of roadway.
331.07   Hazardous or no passing zones.
331.08   Driving in marked lanes or continuous lines of traffic.
331.09   Following too closely.
331.10   Turning at intersections.
331.11   Turning into private driveway, alley or building.
331.12   “U-turns” restricted.
331.13   Starting and backing vehicles.
331.14   Signals before changing course, turning or stopping.
331.15   Hand and arm signals.
331.16   Right-of-way at intersections.
331.165   Intersections at which traffic-control signals fail or malfunction.
331.17   Right-of-way when turning left.
331.18   Operation of vehicle at stop and yield signs.
331.19   Operation of vehicle at stop signs. (Recodified)
331.20   Emergency or public safety vehicles at stop signals or signs.
331.21   Right-of-way of public safety or coroner’s vehicle.
331.215   Driving while approaching stationary public safety vehicle and
certain other vehicles with flashing lights.
331.22   Right-of-way at private driveway, alley or building.
331.23   Driving onto roadway from place other than roadway; stopping at
sidewalk. (Recodified)
331.235   Stop signs on private roads and driveways.
331.24   Right-of-way of funeral procession.
331.25   Driver’s view and control to be unobstructed by load or persons.
331.26   Driving upon street posted as closed for repair.
331.27   Following and parking near emergency or safety vehicles.
331.28   Driving over fire hose.
331.29   Driving through safety zone.
331.30   One-way streets and rotary traffic islands.
331.31   Driving upon divided roadways.
331.32   Entering and exiting controlled-access highway.
331.33   Obstructing intersections, crosswalks or grade crossings.
331.34   Failure to control; weaving; full time and attention.
331.35   Occupying travel trailer, fifth wheel vehicle, or manufactured or
mobile home while in motion.
331.36   Squealing tires, “peeling”; cracking exhaust noises.
331.37   Driving upon sidewalks, tree lawns or curbs.
331.38   Stopping for school bus; actuating visual signals; discharging
children.
331.39   Driving across grade crossings.
331.40   Stopping at grade crossings.
331.41   Slow-moving vehicles or equipment at grade crossings.
331.42   Operation on paths set aside for bicycles.
331.43   Littering from motor vehicles.
331.44   Use of earphones while driving.
331.45   Text messaging while driving prohibited.
331.46   Use of electronic wireless communication devices by minors or
probationary drivers while driving prohibited.
331.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Obedience to traffic-control devices, see TRAF.
313.01
   Operation of bicycles and motorcycles generally, see TRAF.
373.01 et seq.
   Operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles and all-purpose vehicles,
see TRAF.
375.04
   See section histories for similar state law
   Yielding right-of-way to pedestrians on sidewalks, see TRAF.
371.07
§ 331.01 DRIVING UPON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction, or when making a left turn under the rules governing such movements;
      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left
of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an
immediate hazard;
      (3)   When driving upon a roadway divided into three or more marked lanes
for traffic under the rules applicable thereon;
      (4)   When driving upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for
one-way traffic; or
      (5)   When otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic-control
device.
   (B)   (1)   Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the
prevailing and lawful speed of traffic at the time and place and under the
conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available
for traffic, and far enough to the right to allow passing by faster vehicles if
such passing is safe and reasonable, except under any of the following
circumstances:
         (a)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction;
         (b)   When preparing for a left turn; or
         (c)   When the driver must necessarily drive in a lane other than the
right-hand lane to continue on the driver’s intended route.
      (2)   Nothing in division (B)(1) above requires a driver of a slower
vehicle to compromise the driver’s safety to allow overtaking by a faster
vehicle.
   (C)   Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and
providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the
left of the center line of the roadway, except when authorized by official
traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left of the center of
the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use the lanes, or
except as permitted under division (A)(2) above. This division (C) shall not be
construed as prohibiting the crossing of the center line in making a left turn
into or from an alley, private road or driveway.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (D), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.25)
§ 331.02 PASSING TO RIGHT WHEN PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
   (A)   Operators of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass
each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one
line of traffic in each direction, each operator shall give to the other one-
half of the main traveled portion of the roadway or as nearly one-half as is
reasonably possible.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.26)
§ 331.03 OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT; DRIVER’S DUTIES.
   (A)   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction:
      (1)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction shall, except as provided in division (A)(3) below, signal
to the vehicle to be overtaken, shall pass to the left thereof at a safe
distance, and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until
safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. When a motor vehicle overtakes and
passes a bicycle, three feet or greater is considered a safe passing distance.
      (2)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
operator of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle at the latter’s audible signal, and the operator shall not
increase the speed of the operator’s vehicle until completely passed by the
overtaking vehicle.
      (3)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction on a divided highway as defined in R.C.
4511.35, a limited access highway as defined in R.C. 5511.02, or a highway with
four or more traffic lanes is not required to signal audibly to the vehicle
being overtaken and passed.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.27)
§ 331.04 OVERTAKING AND PASSING UPON RIGHT.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass on the right of another
vehicle only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
or
      (2)   Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for
two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being traveled
by the overtaking vehicle.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle only
under conditions permitting the movement in safety. The movement shall not be
made by driving off the roadway.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.28)
§ 331.05 OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT OF CENTER.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center of the roadway in
overtaking and passing traffic proceeding in the same direction, unless the
left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be completely made
without interfering with the safe operation of any traffic approaching from the
opposite direction or any traffic overtaken. In every event, the overtaking
vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable, and
in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for the
traffic approaching from the opposite direction, before coming within 200 feet
of any approaching vehicle.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.29)
§ 331.06 ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS ON DRIVING UPON LEFT SIDE OF ROADWAY.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven upon the left side of the roadway under the
following conditions:
      (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
highway, where the operator’s view is obstructed within such a distance as to
create a hazard in the event traffic might approach from the opposite
direction;
      (2)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any
bridge, viaduct or tunnel; or
      (3)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection
or railroad grade crossing.
   (B)   This section does not apply to vehicles upon a one-way roadway, upon a
roadway where traffic is lawfully directed to be driven to the left side, or
under the conditions described in Ohio R.C. 4511.25(A)(2) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.30)
§ 331.07 HAZARDOUS OR NO PASSING ZONES.
   (A)   The Department of Transportation may determine those portions of any
state highway where overtaking and passing other traffic or driving to the left
of the center or center line of the roadway would be especially hazardous, and
may, by appropriate signs or markings on the highway, indicate the beginning
and end of such zones. When signs or markings are in place and clearly visible,
every operator of a vehicle shall obey the directions of the signs or markings,
notwithstanding the distances set out in Ohio R.C. 4511.30.
   (B)   Division (A) above does not apply when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The slower vehicle is proceeding at less than half the speed of the
speed limit applicable to that location;
      (2)   The faster vehicle is capable of overtaking and passing the slower
vehicle without exceeding the speed limit; and
      (3)   There is sufficient clear sight distance to the left of the center
or center line of the roadway to meet the overtaking and passing provisions of
Ohio R.C. 4511.29, considering the speed of the slower vehicle.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.31)
§ 331.08 DRIVING IN MARKED LANES OR CONTINUOUS LINES OF TRAFFIC.
   (A)   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic, or wherever within the municipality traffic is lawfully
moving in two or more substantially continuous lines in the same direction, the
following rules apply.
      (1)   A vehicle shall be driven, as nearly as is practicable, entirely
within a single lane or line of traffic and shall not be moved from the lane or
line until the driver has first ascertained that the movement can be made with
safety.
      (2)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for
the two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center
lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is
clearly visible and the center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance,
or when preparing for a left turn, or where the center lane is at the time
allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is
proceeding, and is posted with signs to give notice of such allocation.
      (3)   Official signs may be erected directing specified traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction, regardless of the center of the roadway, or restricting
the use of a particular lane to only buses during certain hours or during all
hours, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of such signs.
      (4)   Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting the
changing of lanes on sections of roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey
the directions of every such device.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.33)
§ 331.09 FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   (A)   (1)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle
more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of
the vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.
      (2)   The driver of any truck, or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle,
when traveling upon a roadway outside a business or residence district, shall
maintain a sufficient space, whenever conditions permit, between the vehicle
and another vehicle ahead so an overtaking motor vehicle may enter and occupy
the space without danger. This division (A) does not prevent overtaking and
passing nor does it apply to any lane specially designated for use by trucks.
      (3)   Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business
or residence district in a caravan or motorcade shall maintain a sufficient
space between the vehicles so an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy the
space without danger. This division (A) shall not apply to funeral processions.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.34)
§ 331.10 TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall be
governed by the following rules.
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both
directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left
turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
center line thereof and by passing to the right of the center line where it
enters the intersection and, after entering the intersection, the left turn
shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line
of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made
in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection.
      (3)   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on
one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at
any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand
lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of the
vehicle and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as
to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left hand lane of
the roadway being entered lawfully available to traffic moving in that lane.
   (B)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities may cause
markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections, and
thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in this
section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when markers,
buttons or signs are so placed, no operator of a vehicle shall turn the vehicle
at an intersection other than as directed and required by the markers, buttons
or signs.
   (C)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.36)
§ 331.11 TURNING INTO PRIVATE DRIVEWAY, ALLEY OR BUILDING.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn into a private road or
driveway, alley or building from a public street or highway shall be governed
by the following rules.
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   Upon a roadway where traffic is permitted to proceed in opposite
directions, approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made from that
portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof.
      (3)   Upon a roadway where traffic is restricted to one direction,
approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made as close as practicable
to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle entering a private
road or driveway, alley or building to yield the right-of-way to pedestrians
lawfully using the sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across any alleyway.
(Ord. 310-1977, passed 11-21-1977; Ord. 56-1981, passed 4-13-1981)
§ 331.12 “U-TURNS” RESTRICTED.
   (A)   Except as provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.13 and division (B) below, no
vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any
curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, if such vehicle
cannot be seen within 500 feet by the driver of any other vehicle approaching
from either direction.
   (B)   The driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, may turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction. This division (B) applies only when the emergency vehicle
or public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with
and displaying at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible
under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of
the vehicle, and when the driver of the vehicle is giving an audible signal by
siren, exhaust whistle or bell. This division (B) does not relieve the driver
of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with
due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.37)
   (E)   Except as provided in division (B) above, no vehicle shall be turned
so as to proceed in the opposite direction within an intersection, or upon any
street in a business district, or upon a freeway, expressway or controlled-
access highway, or where authorized signs are erected to prohibit such
movement, or at any other location unless such movement can be made with
reasonable safety to other users of the public way and without interfering with
the safe operation of any traffic that may be affected by such movement.
§ 331.13 STARTING AND BACKING VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or
parked until the movement can be made with reasonable safety.
      (2)   Before backing, operators of vehicles shall give ample warning and,
while backing, they shall exercise vigilance not to injure person or property
on the street or highway.
      (3)   No person shall back a motor vehicle on a freeway, except:
   (a)   In a rest area;
   (b)   In the performance of public works or official duties; or
   (c)   As a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of a
motor vehicle.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.38)
§ 331.14 SIGNALS BEFORE CHANGING COURSE, TURNING OR STOPPING.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall turn a vehicle or move right or left upon a
highway unless and until the person has exercised due care to ascertain that
the movement can be made with reasonable safety, nor without giving an
appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided.
      (2)   When required, a signal of intention to turn or move right or left
shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by
the vehicle before turning, except that in the case of a person operating a
bicycle, the signal shall be made not less than one time, but is not required
to be continuous. A bicycle operator is not required to make a signal if the
bicycle is in a designated turn lane, and a signal shall not be given when the
operator’s hands are needed for the safe operation of the bicycle.
      (3)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear, when there is opportunity to
give a signal.
      (4)   Any stop or turn signal required by this section shall be given
either by means of the hand and arm, or by signal lights that clearly indicate
to both approaching and following traffic the intention to turn or move right
or left; except that, any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped
with, and the required signal shall be given by, signal lights when the
distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside
limit of the body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds 24 inches, or when
the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit
of the body or load thereof exceeds 14 feet, whether a single vehicle or a
combination of vehicles.
      (5)   The signal lights required by this section shall not be flashed on
one side only on a disabled vehicle, flashed as a courtesy or “do pass” signal
to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear, nor be flashed on one
side only of a parked vehicle, except as may be necessary for compliance with
this section.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.39)
§ 331.15 HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, all signals required by the
provisions of this traffic code, when given by hand and arm, shall be given
from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and the signals
shall indicate as follows:
      (1)   Left turn, hand and arm extended horizontally;
      (2)   Right turn, hand and arm extended upward; and
      (3)   Stop or decrease speed, hand and arm extended downward.
   (B)   As an alternative to division (A)(2) above, a person operating a
bicycle may give a right turn signal by extending the right hand and arm
horizontally and to the right side of the bicycle.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.40)
§ 331.16 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different
streets or highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle
on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
   (B)   The right-of-way rule declared in division (A) above is modified at
through highways and otherwise as stated in this traffic code or Ohio R.C. Ch.
4511.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.41)
§ 331.165 INTERSECTIONS AT WHICH TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS FAIL OR MALFUNCTION.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle who approaches an intersection where traffic
is controlled by traffic-control signals shall do all of the following if the
signal facing the driver exhibits no colored lights or colored lighted arrows,
exhibits a combination of such lights or arrows that fails to clearly indicate
the assignment of right-of- way or, if the vehicle is a bicycle, the signals
are otherwise malfunctioning due to the failure of a vehicle detector to detect
the presence of the bicycle:
      (1)   Stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, stop
before entering the intersection;
      (2)   Yield the right-of-way to all vehicles in the intersection or
approaching on an intersecting road, if the vehicles will constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways; and
      (3)   Exercise ordinary care while proceeding through the intersection.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.132)
§ 331.17 RIGHT-OF-WAY WHEN TURNING LEFT.
   (A)   The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an
intersection or into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right-
of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within
the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.42)
§ 331.18 OPERATION OF VEHICLE AT STOP AND YIELD SIGNS.
   (A)   Except when directed to proceed by a law enforcement officer, every
driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering it. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-
way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so
closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is
moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow down to a
speed reasonable for the existing conditions, and if required for safety to
stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but, if none, before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it. After
slowing, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways. Whenever a driver is involved in a
collision with a vehicle in the intersection or junction of roadways, after
driving past a yield sign without stopping, the collision shall be prima facie
evidence of the driver’s failure to yield the right-of-way.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.43)
§ 331.19 OPERATION OF VEHICLE AT STOP SIGNS. (RECODIFIED)
Editor’s note:
   Sections 331.18 and 331.19 were combined as part of the 2003 updating and
revision of this code of ordinances. For provisions regarding operation of
vehicle at stop signs, please see §
331.18.
§ 331.20 EMERGENCY OR PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES AT STOP SIGNALS OR SIGNS.
   (A)   The driver of any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, upon approaching a red or stop signal or any
stop sign, shall slow down as necessary for safety to traffic, but may proceed
cautiously past the red or stop sign or signal with due regard for the safety
of all persons using the street or highway.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.03)
§ 331.21 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY OR CORONER’S VEHICLE.
   (A)   Upon the approach of a public safety vehicle or coroner’s vehicle,
equipped with at least one flashing, rotating or oscillating light visible
under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of
the vehicle, and the driver is giving an audible signal by siren, exhaust
whistle or bell, no driver of any other vehicle shall fail to yield the right-
of-way, immediately drive, if practical, to a position parallel to, and as
close as possible to, the right edge or curb of the highway clear of any
intersection, and stop and remain in that position until the public safety
vehicle or coroner’s vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer.
   (B)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle or
coroner’s vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons and property upon the highway.
   (C)   This section applies to a coroner’s vehicle only when the vehicle is
operated in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4513.171, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. As used in this section, CORONER’S VEHICLE means a vehicle
used by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator that is equipped
with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and a siren, exhaust
whistle or bell capable of giving an audible signal.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (D) or division (E)
below, whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.45)
   (E)   (1)   When the failure of a motor vehicle operator to yield the right-
of-way to a public safety vehicle as required by division (A) above impedes the
ability of the public safety vehicle to respond to an emergency, any emergency
personnel in the public safety vehicle may report the license plate number and
a general description of the vehicle and the operator of the vehicle to the law
enforcement agency exercising jurisdiction over the area where the alleged
violation occurred.
      (2)   (a)   Upon receipt of a report under division (E)(1) above, the law
enforcement agency may conduct an investigation to attempt to determine or
confirm the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged
violation.
         (b)   If the identity of the operator at the time of an alleged
violation of division (A) above is established, the law enforcement agency has
probable cause to issue either a written warning or a citation for that
violation, and the agency shall issue a written warning or a citation to the
operator.
         (c)   If the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation cannot be established, the law enforcement agency may
issue a written warning to the person who owned the vehicle at the time of the
alleged violation. However, in the case of a leased or rented vehicle, the law
enforcement agency shall issue the written warning to the person who leased or
rented the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation.
      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A) above based on a report filed
under division (E)(1) above is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined
$150.
         (b)   If a person who is issued a citation for a violation of division
(A) above based on a report filed under division (E)(1) above does not enter a
written plea of guilty and does not waive the person’s right to contest the
citation, but instead appears in person in the proper court to answer the
charge, the trier of fact cannot find beyond a reasonable doubt that the person
committed that violation unless the emergency personnel who filed the report
appears in person in the court and testifies.
      (4)   For the purpose of this division (E), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         LICENSE PLATE. Includes any temporary motor vehicle license
registration issued under R.C. § 4503.182 or similar law of another
jurisdiction.
         PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Does not include an unmarked public safety
vehicle or a vehicle used by a public law enforcement officer or other person
sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state or a vehicle used
by the motor carrier enforcement unit for the enforcement of orders and rules
of the Public Utilities Commission.
(ORC 4511.454)
§ 331.215 DRIVING WHILE APPROACHING STATIONARY PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE AND
CERTAIN OTHER VEHICLES WITH FLASHING LIGHTS.
   (A)   The driver of a motor vehicle, upon approaching a stationary public
safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, waste collection
vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor
vehicle inspections in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a
highway maintenance vehicle that is displaying the appropriate visual signals
by means of flashing, oscillating or rotating lights, as prescribed in Ohio
R.C. 4513.17, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   If the driver of the motor vehicle is traveling on a highway that
consists of at least two lanes that carry traffic in the same direction of
travel as that of the driver’s motor vehicle, the driver shall proceed with due
caution and, if possible and with due regard to the road, weather and traffic
conditions, shall change lanes into a lane this is not adjacent to that of the
stationary public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle,
waste collection vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to
conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4923.04 and
4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle.
      (2)   If the driver is not traveling on a highway of a type described in
division (A)(1) above, or if the driver is traveling on a highway of that type
but it is not possible to change lanes or if to do so would be unsafe, the
driver shall proceed with due caution, reduce the speed of the motor vehicle
and maintain a safe speed for the road, weather and traffic conditions.
   (B)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle,
emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, waste collection vehicle, vehicle used
by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor vehicle inspections in
accordance with Ohio R.C. 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle
from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and
property upon the highway.
   (C)   No person shall fail to drive a motor vehicle in compliance with
divisions (A)(1) or (A)(2) above when so required by division (A) above.
   (D)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (D), whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Notwithstanding §
698.02 of this code of ordinances or Ohio R.C. 2929.28, upon a finding that a
person operated a motor vehicle in violation of division (C) above, the court,
in addition to all other penalties provided by law, shall impose a fine of two
times the usual amount imposed for the violation.
      (3)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
   (E)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and Ohio R.C. 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense
as a strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
(ORC 4511.213)
§ 331.22 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT PRIVATE DRIVEWAY, ALLEY OR BUILDING.
   (A)   (1)   The operator of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from
any place other than another roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all
traffic approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (A), whoever violates
this division (A) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this division (A)
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this division (A) is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.44)
   (B)   (1)   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building,
private road or driveway within a business or residence district shall stop the
vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area
extending across the alley, building entrance, road or driveway, or in the
event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the street to
be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic thereon.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates
this division (B) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this division (B)
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this division (B) is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.431)
   (C)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn into a private road or
driveway, alley or building from a public street or highway shall be governed
by the following rules.
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   Upon a roadway where traffic is proceeding in opposite directions,
approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made from that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof.
      (3)   Upon a roadway where traffic is restricted to one direction,
approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made as close as practicable
to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle entering a private
road or driveway, alley or building to yield the right-of-way to pedestrians
lawfully using the sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across the private road
or driveway, alley or building.
§ 331.23 DRIVING ONTO ROADWAY FROM PLACE OTHER THAN ROADWAY; STOPPING AT
SIDEWALK. (RECODIFIED)
Editor’s note:
   Sections 331.22 and 331.23 were combined as part of the 2003 updating and
revision of this code of ordinances. For provisions regarding driving onto
roadway from place other than roadway; stopping at sidewalk, please see §
331.22.
§ 331.235 STOP SIGNS ON PRIVATE ROADS AND DRIVEWAYS.
   (A)   The owner of a private road or driveway located in a private
residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units may erect stop signs at
places where the road or driveway intersects with another private road or
driveway in the residential area, in compliance with all of the following
requirements:
      (1)   The stop sign is sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily
observant person and meets the specifications of and is placed in accordance
with the manual adopted by the Department of Transportation pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 4511.09.
      (2)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road or
driveway that is in plain view and clearly informs persons entering the road or
driveway that they are entering private property, stop signs have been posted
and must be obeyed, and the signs are enforceable by law enforcement officers
under State law. The sign required by this division (A)(2), where appropriate,
may be incorporated with the sign required by Ohio R.C. 4511.211(A)(2), or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (B)   Ohio R.C. 4511.43(A) and Ohio R.C. 4511.46, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be deemed to apply to the driver of a
vehicle on a private road or driveway where a stop sign is placed in accordance
with division (A) above and to a pedestrian crossing such a road or driveway at
an intersection where a stop sign is in place.
   (C)   When a stop sign is placed in accordance with division (A) above, any
law enforcement officer may apprehend a person found violating the stop sign
and may stop and charge the person with violating the stop sign.
   (D)   As used in this section, and for the purpose of applying Ohio R.C.
4511.43(A) and Ohio R.C. 4511.46, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, to conduct under this section:
      INTERSECTION.
         (a)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways
of two private roads or driveways which join one another at, or approximately
at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
private roads or driveways joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
         (b)   Where a private road or driveway includes two roadways 30 feet
or more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such private roads or
driveways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
      OWNER and PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL AREA CONTAINING 20 OR MORE DWELLING UNITS.
Have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4511.211.
(ORC 4511.432(A) - (C), (E))
      ROADWAY. That portion of a private road or driveway improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder. If a private
road or driveway includes two or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY means
any such roadway separately, but not all such roadways collectively.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (E), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.432(D))
§ 331.24 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF FUNERAL PROCESSION.
   (A)   As used in this section, FUNERAL PROCESSION means two or more vehicles
accompanying the cremated remains or the body of a deceased person in the
daytime when each of the vehicles has its headlights lighted and is displaying
a purple and white or an orange and white pennant attached to each vehicle in
such a manner as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from any
direction.
   (B)   Excepting public safety vehicles proceeding in accordance with Ohio
R.C. 4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or when
directed otherwise by a police officer, pedestrians and the operators of all
vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to each vehicle that is a part of a
funeral procession. Whenever the lead vehicle in a funeral procession lawfully
enters an intersection, the remainder of the vehicles in the procession may
continue to follow the lead vehicle through the intersection, notwithstanding
any traffic-control devices or right-of-way provisions of the Revised Code;
provided that, the operator of each vehicle exercises due care to avoid
colliding with any other vehicle or pedestrian.
   (C)   No person shall operate any vehicle as a part of a funeral procession
without having the headlights of the vehicle lighted and without displaying a
purple and white or an orange and white pennant in such a manner as to be
clearly visible to traffic approaching from any direction.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (D), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.451)
§ 331.25 DRIVER’S VIEW AND CONTROL TO BE UNOBSTRUCTED BY LOAD OR PERSONS.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there
are in the front seat such number of persons, as to obstruct the view of the
driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or to interfere with the driver’s
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in a position as to interfere
with the driver’s view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with the driver’s
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (C)   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
   (D)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.70)
§ 331.26 DRIVING UPON STREET POSTED AS CLOSED FOR REPAIR.
   (A)   No person shall drive upon, along or across a street or highway, or
any part of a street or highway that has been closed in the process of its
construction, reconstruction or repair, and posted with appropriate signs by
the authority having jurisdiction to close the highway.
(ORC 4511.71(A))
   (B)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on or onto a public street or
highway that is temporarily covered by a rise in water level, including ground
water or an overflow of water, and that is clearly marked by a sign that
specifies that the road is closed due to the rise in water level and that any
person who uses the closed portion of the road may be fined up to $2,000.
      (2)   A person who is issued a citation for a violation of division (B)
(1) above is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty and waive the
person’s right to contest the citation in court, but instead must appear in
person in the proper court to answer the charge.
(ORC 4511.714(A), (B))
   (C)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (A) above is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (A) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (A)
above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
         (b)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.71(B))
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
         (b)   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required
under Ohio R.C. 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required under
any provision of law, the court imposing the sentence upon an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (B) above shall order
the offender to reimburse one or more rescuers for the cost any such rescuer
incurred in rescuing the person, excluding any cost of transporting the rescued
person to a hospital or other facility for treatment of injuries, up to a
cumulative maximum of $2,000. If more than one rescuer was involved in the
emergency response, the court shall allocate the reimbursement proportionately,
according to the cost each rescuer incurred. A financial sanction imposed under
this section is a judgment in favor of the rescuer and, subject to a
determination of indigency under Ohio R.C. 2929.28(B), a rescuer may collect
the financial sanction in the same manner as provided in Ohio R.C. 2929.28.
(ORC 4511.714(C))
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE ORGANIZATION. Has the same meanings as in Ohio
R.C. 9.60.
      FIREFIGHTING AGENCY. Has the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 9.60.
      PRIVATE FIRE COMPANY. Has the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 9.60.
      RESCUER. A state agency, political subdivision, firefighting agency,
private fire company or emergency medical service organization.
(ORC 4511.714(D))
§ 331.27 FOLLOWING AND PARKING NEAR EMERGENCY OR SAFETY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle or public
safety vehicle on official business, shall not follow any emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle traveling in response to an alarm closer than 500 feet,
or drive into or park the vehicle within the block where the fire apparatus has
stopped in answer to a fire alarm, unless directed to do so by a police officer
or a firefighter.
(ORC 4511.72(A))
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.72(B))
§ 331.28 DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
   (A)   No vehicle shall, without the consent of the Fire Department official
in command, be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department that is
laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of
fire.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.73)
§ 331.29 DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE.
   (A)   No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety
zone.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.60)
§ 331.30 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   (A)   (1)   Upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for one-way
traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
      (2)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven
only to the right of the rotary traffic island.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.32)
§ 331.31 DRIVING UPON DIVIDED ROADWAYS.
   (A)   Whenever any highway has been divided into two roadways by an
intervening space, or by a physical barrier, or a clearly indicated dividing
section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be
driven only upon the right-hand roadway, and no vehicle shall be driven over,
across or within any dividing space, barrier or section, except through an
opening, crossover or intersection established by public authority. This
section does not prohibit the occupancy of the dividing space, barrier or
section for the purpose of an emergency stop, or in compliance with an order of
a police officer.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.35)
§ 331.32 ENTERING AND EXITING CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY.
   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access highway
except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
§ 331.33 OBSTRUCTING INTERSECTIONS, CROSSWALKS OR GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (A)   No driver shall enter an intersection or marked crosswalk, or drive
onto any railroad grade crossing, unless there is sufficient space on the other
side of the intersection, crosswalk or grade crossing to accommodate the
vehicle the driver is operating without obstructing the passage of other
vehicles, pedestrians or railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.712)
§ 331.34 FAILURE TO CONTROL; WEAVING; FULL TIME AND ATTENTION.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, agricultural tractor or
agricultural tractor that is towing, pulling or otherwise drawing a unit of
farm machinery on any street, highway or property open to the public for
vehicular traffic without being in reasonable control of the vehicle,
agricultural tractor or unit of farm machinery.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of operating a motor
vehicle or agricultural trailer without being in control of it, a minor
misdemeanor.
(ORC 4511.202)
   (C)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle upon any street
or highway in a weaving or zigzag course unless such irregular course is
necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law.
   (D)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle without giving
his or her full time and attention to the operation of such vehicle.
§ 331.35 OCCUPYING TRAVEL TRAILER, FIFTH WHEEL VEHICLE, OR MANUFACTURED OR
MOBILE HOME WHILE IN MOTION.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, no person shall
occupy any travel trailer, fifth wheel trailer, or manufactured or mobile home
while it is being used as a conveyance upon a street or highway.
   (B)   (1)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a fifth wheel
trailer when both of the following apply:
         (a)   Any child riding in the fifth wheel trailer is properly secured
in the manner provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.81.
         B.   The operator of the vehicle towing the fifth wheel trailer has
some means of viable communication with the passengers riding in the trailer.
      (2)   As used in this division, "viable communication" includes a
cellular or satellite telephone, a radio, or any other similar electronic
wireless communications device.
   (C)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and Ohio R.C. 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense
as a strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
(ORC 4511.701)
§ 331.36 SQUEALING TIRES; “PEELING”; CRACKING EXHAUST NOISES.
   No person shall operate any motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe
operation, or in compliance with law, in such a manner that the vehicle is so
rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped position, or in the shifting of
gears while in motion, that the exhaust system emits a loud, cracking or
chattering noise unusual to its normal operation or that the rubber tires of
such vehicle squeal or leave tire marks on the roadway, commonly known as
“peeling”.
§ 331.37 DRIVING UPON SIDEWALKS, TREE LAWNS OR CURBS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall drive any vehicle, other than a bicycle, upon a
sidewalk or sidewalk area, except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary
driveway.
      (2)   This prohibition does not apply to a law enforcement officer, or
other person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state, using
an electric bicycle with the motor engaged while in the performance of the
officer’s duties.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting local
authorities from regulating the operation of bicycles; except that, no local
authority may require that bicycles be operated on sidewalks.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.711)
   (D)   No person shall drive a vehicle on a tree lawn area or the curb of a
street, except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway or when
otherwise lawfully authorized.
§ 331.38 STOPPING FOR SCHOOL BUS; ACTUATING VISUAL SIGNALS; DISCHARGING
CHILDREN.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle, upon meeting or overtaking from either
direction any school bus stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging
any school child, person attending programs offered by community boards of
mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child
attending a program offered by a head start agency, shall stop at least ten
feet from the front or rear of the school bus and shall not proceed until such
school bus resumes motion, or until signaled by the school bus driver to
proceed. It is no defense to a charge under this division (A) that the school
bus involved failed to display or be equipped with an automatically extended
stop warning sign as required by division (B) above.
   (B)   Every school bus shall be equipped with amber and red visual signals
meeting the requirements of Ohio R.C. 4511.771 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and an automatically extended stop warning sign of a type
approved by the Ohio Department of Education and Workforce, which shall be
actuated by the driver of the bus whenever but only whenever the bus is stopped
or stopping on the roadway for the purpose of receiving or discharging school
children, persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental
health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or children attending
programs offered by head start agencies. A school bus driver shall not actuate
the visual signals or the stop warning sign in designated school bus loading
areas where the bus is entirely off the roadway or at school buildings when
children or persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental
health and county boards of developmental disabilities are loading or unloading
at curbside or at buildings when children attending programs offered by head
start agencies are loading or unloading at curbside. The visual signals and
stop warning sign shall be synchronized or otherwise operated as required by
the Ohio Administrative Code.
   (C)   Where a highway has been divided into four or more traffic lanes, a
driver of a vehicle need not stop for a school bus approaching from the
opposite direction which has stopped for the purpose of receiving or
discharging any school child, persons attending programs offered by community
boards of mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities or
children attending programs offered by head start agencies. The driver of any
vehicle overtaking the school bus shall comply with division (A) above.
   (D)   School buses operating on divided highways or on highways with four or
more traffic lanes shall receive and discharge all school children, persons
attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and county
boards of developmental disabilities and children attending programs offered by
head start agencies on their residence side of the highway.
   (E)   No school bus driver shall start the driver’s bus until after any
child, person attending programs offered by community boards of mental health
and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child attending a program
offered by a head start agency who may have alighted therefrom has reached a
place of safety on the child’s or person’s residence side of the road.
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of an unclassified
misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A) above may be fined an amount not to
exceed $750. A person who is issued a citation for a violation of division (A)
above is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty and waive the person’s
right to contest the citation in a trial but instead must appear in person in
the proper court to answer the charge.
      (3)   In addition to and independent of any other penalty provided by
law, the court or Mayor may impose upon an offender who violates this section a
class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or non-resident
operating privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(7) and/or
a sentence up to 30 days in jail. When a license is suspended under this
section, the court or Mayor shall cause the offender to deliver the license to
the court, and the court or Clerk of the Court immediately shall forward the
license to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, together with notice of the court’s
action.
   (G)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      HEAD START AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3301.32.
      SCHOOL BUS. As used in relation to children who attend a program offered
by a head start agency, means a bus that is owned and operated by a head start
agency, is equipped with an automatically extended stop warning sign of a type
approved by the Ohio Department of Education and Workforce, is painted the
color and displays the markings described in Ohio R.C. 4511.77, and is equipped
with amber and red visual signals meeting the requirements of Ohio R.C.
4511.77, irrespective of whether or not the bus has 15 or more children aboard
at any time. The term does not include a van owned and operated by a head start
agency, irrespective of its color, lights or markings.
(ORC 4511.75) (Ord. 100-2019, passed 9-9-2019)
§ 331.39 DRIVING ACROSS GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad
grade crossing, the person shall stop within 50 feet, but not less than 15 feet
from the nearest rail of the railroad if any of the following circumstances
exist at the crossing:
         (a)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a train;
         (b)   A crossing gate is lowered;
         (c)   A flagperson gives or continues to give a signal of the approach
or passage of a train;
         (d)   There is insufficient space on the other side of the railroad
grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the person is operating without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles, pedestrians or railroad trains,
notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed;
         (e)   An approaching train is emitting an audible signal or is plainly
visible and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing; and
         (f)   There is insufficient undercarriage clearance to safely
negotiate the crossing.
      (2)   A person who is driving a vehicle and who approaches a railroad
grade crossing shall not proceed as long as any of the circumstances described
in divisions (A)(1)(a) through (A)(1)(f) above exist at the crossing.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(ORC 4511.62)
§ 331.40 STOPPING AT GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (A(2) below, the operator of any
bus, any school vehicle, or any vehicle transporting material required to be
placarded under 49 C.F.R. parts 100 through 185, before crossing at grade any
track of a railroad, shall stop the vehicle and, while so stopped, shall listen
through an open door or open window, and look in both directions along the
track for any approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of a
train, and shall proceed only upon exercising due care after stopping, looking
and listening as required by this section. Upon proceeding, the operator of
such a vehicle shall cross only in a gear that will ensure there will be no
necessity for changing gears while traversing the crossing, and shall not shift
gears while crossing the tracks.
      (2)   Division (A)(1) above does not apply at grade crossings when any
local authority has filed an application with the Public Utilities Commission
requesting the approval of an exempt crossing, and the Public Utilities
Commission has authorized and approved an exempt crossing as provided Ohio R.C.
4511.63(B).
      (3)   For the purpose of division (A)(1) above, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         BUS. Any vehicle originally designed by its manufacturer to transport
16 or more passengers, including the driver, or carries 16 or more passengers,
including the driver.
         EXEMPT CROSSING. A highway rail grade crossing authorized and approved
by the Public Utilities Commission under Ohio R.C. 4511.63(B) at which vehicles
may cross without making the stop otherwise required by this section.
         SCHOOL VEHICLE. Any vehicle used for the transportation of pupils to
and from a school or school-related function if the vehicle is owned or
operated by, or operated under contract with, a public or non- public school.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (A)(4), whoever
violates division (A)(1) above is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more
violations of division (A)(1) above or Ohio R.C. 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761,
4511.762, 4511.764, 4511.77 or 4511.79, or a municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates division
(A)(1) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 4511.63)
   (B)   (1)   As used in this section, ACTIVE GRADE CROSSING WARNING DEVICE
means signs, signals, gates, or other protective devices erected or installed
at a public highway-railway crossing at common grade and activated by an
electrical circuit.
      (2)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities, with the
approval of the Department, may designate dangerous highway crossings over
railroad tracks and erect stop signs thereat.
      (3)   (a)   The Department and local authorities shall erect stop signs
at a railroad highway grade crossing in either of the following circumstances:
            1.   New warning devices that are not active grade crossing warning
devices are being installed at the grade crossing, and railroad crossbucks were
the only warning devices at the grade crossing prior to the installation of the
new warning devices; or
            2.   The grade crossing is constructed after 7-1-2013 and only
warning devices that are not active grade crossing warning devices are
installed at the grade crossing.
         (b)   Division (B)(3)(a) above does not apply to a railroad highway
grade crossing that the Director of Transportation has exempted from that
division because of traffic flow or other considerations or factors.
      (4)   When stop signs are erected pursuant to divisions (B)(2) or (B)(3)
above, the operator of any vehicle shall stop within 50, but not less than 15,
feet from the nearest rail of the railroad tracks and shall exercise due care
before proceeding across such grade crossing.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (B)(4) above is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (6)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.61)
§ 331.41 SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES OR EQUIPMENT AT GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (A)   No person shall operate or move any crawler-type tractor, steam
shovel, derrick, roller or any equipment or structure having a normal operating
speed of six or less miles per hour or a vertical body or load clearance of
less than nine inches above the level surface of a roadway, upon or across any
tracks at a railroad grade crossing without first complying with divisions (A)
(1) and (A)(2) below.
      (1)   Before making any such crossing, the person operating or moving any
such vehicle or equipment shall first stop the same and, while stopped, the
person shall listen and look in both directions along the track for any
approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of a train and shall
proceed only upon exercising due care.
      (2)   No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by automatic
signal, crossing gates or a flagperson, or otherwise of the immediate approach
of a railroad train or car.
   (B)   (1)   If the normal sustained speed of the vehicle, equipment or
structure is not more than three miles per hour, the person owning, operating
or moving the same shall also give notice of the intended crossing to a station
agent or superintendent of the railroad, and a reasonable time shall be given
to the railroad to provide proper protection for the crossing.
      (2)   Where the vehicles or equipment are being used in constructing or
repairing a section of highway lying on both sides of a railroad grade
crossing, and in this construction or repair it is necessary to repeatedly move
the vehicles or equipment over the crossing, one daily notice specifying when
the work will start and stating the hours during which it will be prosecuted is
sufficient.
   (C)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.64) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 331.42 OPERATION ON PATHS SET ASIDE FOR BICYCLES.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, snowmobile or all-
purpose vehicle upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, when
an appropriate sign giving notice of such use is posted on the path.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect any rule of
the Director of Natural Resources governing the operation of motor vehicles,
snowmobiles, all-purpose vehicles and bicycles on lands under the Director’s
jurisdiction.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.713(A), (B))
§ 331.43 LITTERING FROM MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   No operator or occupant of a motor vehicle shall, regardless of
intent, throw, drop, discard or deposit litter from any motor vehicle in
operation upon any street, road or highway, except into a litter receptacle in
a manner that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (B)   No operator of a motor vehicle in operation upon any street, road or
highway shall allow litter to be thrown, dropped, discarded or deposited from
the motor vehicle, except into a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents
its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (C)   As used in this section, LITTER means garbage, trash, waste, rubbish,
ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts, furniture,
glass or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
(ORC 4511.82(A), (B), (D))
   (D)   Whoever violates divisions (A) or (B) above is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(ORC 4511.82(C))
§ 331.44 USE OF EARPHONES WHILE DRIVING.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      (1)   EARPHONES. Any device that covers all or a portion of both ears and
that does either of the following:
         (a)   Through either a physical connection to another device or a
wireless connection, provides the listener with radio programs, music, or other
information;
         (b)   Provides hearing protection.
         EARPHONES does not include speakers or other listening devices that
are built into protective headgear.
      (2)   EARPLUGS. Any device that can be inserted into one or both ears and
that does either of the following:
         (a)   Through either a physical connection to another device or a
wireless connection, provides the listener with radio programs, music, or other
information;
         (b)   Provides hearing protection.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle while wearing earphones over,
or earplugs in, both ears.
   (C)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   Any person wearing a hearing aid;
      (2)   Law enforcement personnel while on duty;
      (3)   Fire Department personnel and emergency medical service personnel
while on duty;
      (4)   Any person engaged in the operation of equipment for use in the
maintenance or repair of any highway;
      (5)   Any person engaged in the operation of refuse collection equipment;
      (6)   Any person wearing earphones or earplugs for hearing protection
while operating a motorcycle.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.84)
§ 331.45 TEXT MESSAGING WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      HANDS-FREE. The manner in which a wireless handset is operating for the
purpose of composing, reading or sending text messages, by using an internal
feature or function, or through an attachment or addition, including, but not
limited to, an ear piece, head set, remote microphone or short-range wireless
connection, thereby allowing the user to operate said device without the use of
hands.
      INOPERABILITY. A motor vehicle that is incapable of being operated or
being operated in a safe and prudent manner due to mechanical failure,
including, but not limited to, engine overheating or tire failure.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle that is self-propelled by a motor, including,
but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, vans, construction vehicles and the
like.
      PERSON. Any natural person, corporation, unincorporated association,
firm, partnership, joint venture, joint stock association or other entity or
business organization of any kind.
      STOPPED. Not in motion.
      TEXT MESSAGE. Also referred to as SHORT MESSAGING SERVICE (SMS). The
process by which users send, read or receive messages on a wireless handset,
including, but not limited to, text messages, instant messages, electronic
messages or e-mails, in order to communicate with any person or device.
      USE. To hold a wireless handset in one’s hand.
      WIRELESS HANDSET. A portable electronic or computing device, including,
but not limited to, cellular telephones, laptop computers and personal digital
assistants (PDAs), or other similar electronic or computing device capable of
transmitting data to the form of a text message.
   (B)   Text messaging while driving prohibited.
      (1)   No person shall use a wireless handset to compose, read or send
text messages while operating a motor vehicle on any public street or public
highway within the city.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (B)(1) above, this law shall not be
construed to prohibit the use of any wireless handset by:
         (a)   Any law enforcement, public safety or police officers, emergency
services officials, first aid, emergency medical technicians and personnel and
fire safety officials in the performance of duties arising out of, and in the
course of, their employment as such;
         (b)   A person using a wireless handset to contact an individual
listed in division (B)(1) above; or
         (c)   A person using a wireless handset inside a motor vehicle while
such motor vehicle is parked, standing or stopped and is removed from the flow
of traffic, in accordance with applicable laws, rules or ordinances, or is
stopped due to the inoperability of such motor vehicle.
      (3)   Notwithstanding division (B)(1) above, this law shall not be
construed to prohibit a person operating a motor vehicle from utilizing a
hands-free wireless handset.
   (C)   Enforcement and penalties. A violation of any provisions of this
section shall constitute a minor misdemeanor and be punishable by a fine not
exceeding $150 for each single violation. Each such violation shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense.
   (D)   Preemption. This section shall be null and void on the day that state-
wide legislation goes into effect, incorporating either the same or
substantially similar provisions as are contained in this law, or in the event
that a pertinent state or federal administrative agency issues and promulgates
regulations preempting such action by the Council.
(Ord. 201-2009, passed 11-9-2009)
§ 331.46 USE OF ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATION DEVICES BY MINORS OR
PROBATIONARY DRIVERS WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit who has not attained the
age of 18 years and no holder of a probationary driver’s license shall drive a
motor vehicle on any street, highway or property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking while using in any manner an
electronic wireless communications device.
   (B)   Division (A) above does not apply to either of the following:
      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device for
emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a law enforcement
agency, hospital or health care provider, fire department or other similar
emergency agency or entity;
      (2)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device whose
motor vehicle is in a stationary position and the motor vehicle is outside a
lane of travel; or
      (3)   A person using a navigation device in a voice-operated or hands-
free manner who does not manipulate the device while driving.
   (C)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) below, whoever violates
division (A) above shall be fined $150. In addition, the court shall impose a
class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license or permit for a
definite period of 60 days.
      (2)   If the person previously has been adjudicated a delinquent child or
a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this section, whoever violates
this section shall be fined $300. In addition, the court shall impose a class
seven suspension of the person’s driver’s license or permit for a definite
period of one year.
   (D)   The filing of a sworn complaint against a person for a violation of
this section does not preclude the filing of a sworn complaint for a violation
of Ohio R.C. 4511.205 for the same conduct. However, if a person is adjudicated
a delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this
section and is also adjudicated a delinquent child or a juvenile traffic
offender for a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.205 for the same conduct, the two
offenses are allied offenses of similar import under Ohio R.C. 2941.25.
   (E)   As used in this section, ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE
includes any of the following:
      (1)   A wireless telephone;
      (2)   A personal digital assistant;
      (3)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
      (4)   A text-messaging device; and
      (5)   Any other substantially similar electronic wireless device that is
designed or used to communicate via voice, image or written word.
(ORC 4511.205)
§ 331.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
303.99 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 333: O.V.I.; RECKLESS OPERATION; SPEED
Section
333.01   Driving or physical control of vehicle while under the influence of
alcohol or drugs.
333.011   Immobilizing or disabling device violation.
333.02   Reckless operation on streets, public or private property.
333.03   Maximum speed limits; assured clear distance ahead.
333.035   Speed limits on private roads and driveways.
333.04   Slow speed; posted minimum speeds.
333.05   Speed limitations over bridges.
333.06   Speed exceptions for emergency or safety vehicles.
333.07   Street racing prohibited.
333.08   Vehicular homicide; vehicular manslaughter.
333.09   Operation restricted for mini-trucks and low-speed, under-speed or
utility vehicles.
333.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   “Alcohol” defined, see Ohio R.C. 4301.01
   Alteration of prima facie speed limits, see Ohio R.C. 4511.21, 4511.22,
4511.23
   Criminal offenses by drivers of commercial vehicles, see TRAF.
331.05,
331.08
   Driving upon sidewalks, tree lawns or curbs, see TRAF.
331.37
   “Drug of abuse” defined, see Ohio R.C. 3719.011
   Failure to control; weaving; full time and attention, see TRAF.
331.34
   Liquor consumption in motor vehicle, see GEN. OFF.
612.04
   “Peeling”, see TRAF.
331.36
   See section histories for similar state law
§ 333.01 DRIVING OR PHYSICAL CONTROL OF VEHICLE WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF
ALCOHOL OR DRUGS.
   (A)   Driving under the influence.
      (1)   No person shall operate any vehicle within the municipality, if, at
the time of the operation, any of the following apply:
         (a)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse or
a combination of them;
         (b)   The person has a concentration of 0.08% or more, but less than
0.17% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood;
         (c)   The person has a concentration of 0.096% or more, but less than
0.204% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma;
         (d)   The person has a concentration of 0.08 grams or more, but less
than 0.17 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath;
         (e)   The person has a concentration of 0.11 grams or more, but less
than 0.238 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s
urine;
         (f)   The person has a concentration of 0.17% or more by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood;
         (g)   The person has a concentration of 0.204% or more by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or plasma;
         (h)   The person has a concentration of 0.17 grams or more by weight
of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath;
         (i)   The person has a concentration of 0.238 grams or more by weight
of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine; or
         (j)   Except as provided in division (K) below, the person has a
concentration of any of the following controlled substances or metabolites of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds any of the following:
            1.   The person has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s
urine of at least 500 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter
of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma;
            2.   The person has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s
urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s urine
or has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma;
            3.   The person has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter
of the person’s urine or has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of
cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma;
            4.   The person has a concentration of heroin in the person’s urine
of at least 2,000 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s urine or
has a concentration of heroin in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma;
            5.   The person has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-
monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s urine of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s urine or has
a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma;
            6.   The person has a concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s urine
of at least 25 nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s urine or a
concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of
at least ten nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma;
            7.   The person has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s
urine of at least ten nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least two nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma;
            8.   Either of the following applies:
               a.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse or a combination of them, and the person has a concentration of marihuana
metabolite in the person’s urine of at least 15 nanograms of marihuana
metabolite per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of
marihuana metabolite in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at
least five nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma; and
               b.   The person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in
the person’s urine of at least 35 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite
in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms
of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma.
            9.   The person has a concentration of methamphetamine in the
person’s urine of at least 500 nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of
the person’s urine or has a concentration of methamphetamine in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of
methamphetamine per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma;
            10.   The person has a concentration of phencyclidine in the
person’s urine of at least 25 nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter of the
person’s urine or has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of phencyclidine per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma; or
            11.   The State Board of Pharmacy has adopted a rule pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 4729.041 that specifies the amount of salvia divinorum and the amount
of salvinorin A that constitute concentrations of salvia divinorum and
salvinorin A in a person’s urine, in a person’s whole blood, or in a person’s
blood serum or plasma at or above which the person is impaired for purposes of
operating any vehicle within this state, the rule is in effect, and the person
has a concentration of salvia divinorum or salvinorin A of at least that amount
so specified by rule in the person’s urine, in the person’s whole blood, or in
the person’s blood serum or plasma.
      (2)   No person who, within 20 years of the conduct described in division
(A)(2)(a) of this section, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of this division or a substantially equivalent State law or
municipal ordinance, division (A)(1) of this section or a substantially
equivalent State law or municipal ordinance, or shall do both of the following:
         (a)   Operate any vehicle within the municipality while under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse or a combination of them; and
         (b)   Subsequent to being arrested for operating the vehicle as
described in division (A)(2)(a) above, being asked by a law enforcement officer
to submit to a chemical test or tests under Ohio R.C. 4511.191 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and being advised by the officer
in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4511.192 or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance of the consequences of the person’s refusal or submission to the test
or tests, refuse to submit to the test or tests.
   (B)   Underage alcohol consumption. No person under 21 years of age shall
operate any vehicle within the municipality if, at the time of the operation,
any of the following apply:
      (1)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02%, but less than
0.08% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood;
      (2)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.03%, but less than
0.096% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma;
      (3)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02 grams, but less
than 0.08 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath; or
      (4)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.028 grams, but less
than 0.11 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
   (C)   Prosecution; limitation on convictions. In any proceeding arising out
of one incident, a person may be charged with a violation of divisions (A)(1)
(a) or (A)(2) above and a violation of divisions (B)(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3)
above, but the person may not be convicted of more than one violation of these
divisions.
   (D)   Evidence; tests.
      (1)   (a)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for
a violation of division (A)(1)(a) above or for an equivalent offense that is
vehicle-related, the result of any test of any blood or urine withdrawn and
analyzed at any health care provider, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2317.02, may be
admitted with expert testimony to be considered with any other relevant and
competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant.
         (b)   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of divisions (A) or
(B) above or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, the court may
admit evidence on the concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse, controlled
substances, metabolites of a controlled substance or a combination of them in
the defendant’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine or other
bodily substance at the time of the alleged violation as shown by chemical
analysis of the substance withdrawn within three hours of the time of the
alleged violation. The three-hour time limit specified in this division (D)(1)
(b) regarding the admission of evidence does not extend or affect the two-hour
time limit specified in Ohio R.C. 4511.192(A) as the maximum period of time
during which a person may consent to a chemical test or tests as described in
that section. The court may admit evidence on the concentration of alcohol,
drugs of abuse or a combination of them as described in this division when a
person submits to a blood test at the request of a law enforcement officer
under Ohio R.C. 4511.191 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or
a blood or urine sample is obtained pursuant to a search warrant. Only a
physician, a registered nurse, an emergency medical technician-intermediate, an
emergency medical technician-paramedic or a qualified technician, chemist or
phlebotomist shall withdraw a blood sample for the purpose of determining the
alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance or
combination content of the whole blood, blood serum or blood plasma. This
limitation does not apply to the taking of breath or urine specimens. A person
authorized to withdraw blood under this division (D)(1)(b) may refuse to
withdraw blood under this division, if in that person’s opinion, the physical
welfare of the person would be endangered by the withdrawing of blood. The
bodily substance withdrawn under this division (D)(1(b) shall be analyzed in
accordance with methods approved by the Director of Health by an individual
possessing a valid permit issued by the Director pursuant to Ohio R.C.
3701.143.
         (c)   As used in division (D)(1)(b) above, EMERGENCY MEDICAL
TECHNICIAN- INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC have the
same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4765.01.
      (2)   In a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (A) above or
for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, if there was at the time the
bodily substance was withdrawn a concentration of less than the applicable
concentration of alcohol specified in divisions (A)(1)(b), (A)(1)(c), (A)(1)(d)
and (A)(1)(e) above or less than the applicable concentration of a listed
controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance specified
for a violation of division (A)(1)(j) above, that fact may be considered with
other competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the
defendant. This division does not limit or affect a criminal prosecution for a
violation of division (B) above.
      (3)   Upon the request of the person who was tested, the results of the
chemical test shall be made available to the person or the person’s attorney,
immediately upon the completion of the chemical test analysis. If the chemical
test was obtained pursuant to division (D)(1)(b) above, the person tested may
have a physician, a registered nurse or a qualified technician, chemist or
phlebotomist of the person’s own choosing administer a chemical test or tests,
at the person’s expense, in addition to any administered at the request of a
law enforcement officer. If the person was under arrest as described in Ohio
R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the arresting officer shall advise the person at the
time of the arrest that the person may have an independent chemical test taken
at the person’s own expense. If the person was under arrest other than
described in Ohio R.C. 4511.191(A)(5), the form to be read to the person to be
tested, as required under division (G) below, shall state that the person may
have an independent test performed at the person’s expense. The failure or
inability to obtain an additional chemical test by a person shall not preclude
the admission of evidence relating to the chemical test or tests taken at the
request of a law enforcement officer.
      (4)   (a)   As used in divisions (D)(4)(b) and (D)(4)(c) below, NATIONAL
HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMINISTRATION means the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration established as an administration of the United States Department
of Transportation under 96 Stat. 2415 (1983), 49 U.S.C. § 105.
         (b)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of divisions (A) or (B) above, of a municipal ordinance relating to
operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse or
alcohol and a drug of abuse, or of a municipal ordinance relating to operating
a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance or
a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or
plasma, breath or urine, if a law enforcement officer has administered a field
sobriety test to the operator of the vehicle involved in the violation and if
it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the officer administered the
test in substantial compliance with the testing standards for any reliable,
credible and generally accepted field sobriety tests that were in effect at the
time the tests were administered, including, but not limited to, any testing
standards then in effect that were set by the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration, all of the following apply.
            1.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
            2.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field
sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding.
            3.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
divisions (D)(4)(b)1. or (D)(4)(b)2. above and if the testimony or evidence is
admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the testimony or
evidence and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the trier of fact
considers to be appropriate.
         (c)   Division (D)(4)(b) above does not limit or preclude a court, in
its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by probable
cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal prosecution or
juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division, from
considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by division
(D)(4)(b) above.
   (E)   Laboratory report.
      (1)   Subject to division (E)(3) below, in any criminal prosecution or
juvenile court proceeding for a violation of divisions (A)(1)(b), (A)(1)(c),
(A)(1)(d), (A)(1)(e), (A)(1)(f), (A)(1)(g), (A)(1)(h), (A)(1)(i) or (A)(1)(j)
or (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3) or (B)(4) above or for an equivalent offense that is
substantially equivalent to any of those divisions, a laboratory report from
any laboratory personnel issued a permit by the Department of Health
authorizing an analysis as described in this division that contains an analysis
of the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine or other bodily
substance tested and that contains all of the information specified in this
division (E) shall be admitted as prima facie evidence of the information and
statements that the report contains. The laboratory report shall contain all of
the following:
         (a)   The signature, under oath, of any person who performed the
analysis;
         (b)   Any findings as to the identity and quantity of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, a controlled substance, a metabolite of a controlled substance or a
combination of them that was found;
         (c)   A copy of a notarized statement by the laboratory director of a
designee of the director that contains the name of each certified analyst or
test performer involved with the report, the analyst’s or test performer’s
employment relationship with the laboratory that issued the report, and a
notation that performing an analysis of the type involved is part of the
analyst’s or test performer’s regular duties; and
         (d)   An outline of the analyst’s or test performer’s education,
training and experience in performing the type of analysis involved and a
certification that the laboratory satisfies appropriate quality control
standards in general and, in this particular analysis, under rules of the
Department of Health.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the admission
of evidence, a report of the type described in division (E)(1) above is not
admissible against the defendant to whom it pertains in any proceeding, other
than a preliminary hearing or a grand jury proceeding, unless the prosecutor
has served a copy of the report on the defendant’s attorney or, if the
defendant has no attorney, on the defendant.
      (3)   A report of the type described in division (E)(1) above shall not
be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity or amount of any substance
if, within seven days after the defendant to whom the report pertains or the
defendant’s attorney receives a copy of the report, the defendant or the
defendant’s attorney demands the testimony of the person who signed the report.
The judge in the case may extend the seven-day time limit in the interest of
justice.
   (F)   Immunity.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (F), any physician,
registered nurse, emergency medical technician-intermediate, emergency medical
technician-paramedic or qualified technician, chemist or phlebotomist who
withdraws blood from a person pursuant to this section or Ohio R.C. 4511.19,
4511.191 or 4511.192, and any hospital, first-aid station or clinic at which
blood is withdrawn from a person pursuant to this section or Ohio R.C. 4511.19,
4511.191 or 4511.192, is immune from criminal liability and civil liability
based upon a claim of assault and battery or any other claim that is not a
claim of malpractice, for any act performed in withdrawing blood from the
person. The immunity provided in this division (F) also extends to an emergency
medical service organization that employs an emergency medical technician-
intermediate or emergency medical technician-paramedic who withdraws blood
under this section. The immunity provided in this division (F)(1) is not
available to a person who withdraws blood if the person engages in willful or
wanton misconduct.
      (2)   As used in division (F)(1), EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-
INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC have the same meanings
as in Ohio R.C. 4765.01.
(ORC 4511.19(A) - (F))
   (G)   Implied consent.
      (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this division (G), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         ALCOHOL MONITORING DEVICE. Any device that provides for continuous
alcohol monitoring, any ignition interlock device, any immobilizing or
disabling device other than an ignition interlock device that is constantly
available to monitor the concentration of alcohol in a person’s system, or any
other device that provides for the automatic testing and periodic reporting of
alcohol consumption by a person and that a court orders a person to use as a
sanction imposed as a result of the person’s conviction of or plea of guilty to
an offense.
         COMMUNITY ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 5119.01.
         PHYSICAL CONTROL. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.194.
      (2)   Implied consent to chemical tests. Any person who operates a
vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for
vehicular travel or parking within the municipality or who is in physical
control of a vehicle shall be deemed to have given consent to a chemical test
or tests of the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine to
determine the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a
controlled substance or combination content of the person’s whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, or urine if arrested for a violation of divisions (A)
or (B) above or (O) below, Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) or (B), 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or any other municipal O.V.I.
ordinance.
      (3)   Request. The chemical test or tests under division (G)(2) above
shall be administered at the request of a law enforcement officer having
reasonable grounds to believe the person was operating or in physical control
of a vehicle in violation of a division, section, or ordinance identified in
division (G)(2) above. The law enforcement agency by which the officer is
employed shall designate which of the tests shall be administered.
      (4)   Effect of death or unconsciousness. Any person who is dead or
unconscious, or who otherwise is in a condition rendering the person incapable
of refusal, shall be deemed to have consented as provided in division (G)(2)
above and the test or tests may be administered, subject to Ohio R.C. 313.12 to
313.16.
      (5)   (a)   If a law enforcement officer arrests a person for a violation
of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) or (B), Ohio R.C. 4511.194 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a municipal O.V.I. ordinance and if the
person if convicted would be required to be sentenced under Ohio R.C. 4511.19
(G)(1)(c), (d) or (e), the law enforcement officer shall request the person to
submit, and the person shall submit, to a chemical test or tests of the
person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine for the purpose of
determining the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a
controlled substance, or combination content of the person’s whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath or urine. A law enforcement officer who makes a request
pursuant to this division (G)(5) that a person submit to a chemical test or
tests is not required to advise the person of the consequences of submitting
to, or refusing to submit to, the test or tests and is not required to give the
person the form described in division (G)(7) below, but the officer shall
advise the person at the time of the arrest that if the person refuses to take
a chemical test the officer may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary
to ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma. The officer shall also advise the person at the
time of the arrest that the person may have an independent chemical test taken
at the person’s own expense. Divisions (G)(3) and (G)(4) above apply to the
administration of a chemical test or tests pursuant to this division.
         (b)   If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test upon a request
made pursuant to division (G)(5)(a) above, the law enforcement officer who made
the request may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary to ensure that
the person submits to a chemical test of the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma. A law enforcement officer who acts pursuant to this division
(G)(5) to ensure that a person submits to a chemical test of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma is immune from criminal and civil liability
based upon a claim for assault and battery or any other claim for the acts,
unless the officer so acted with malicious purpose, in bad faith or in a wanton
or reckless manner.
(ORC 4511.191(A))
      (6)   Advice required. Except as provided in division (G)(5) above, the
arresting law enforcement officer shall give advice in accordance with this
division (G) to any person under arrest for a violation of divisions (A) and
(B) above or (O) below, Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) or (B), Ohio R.C. 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or any other municipal O.V.I.
ordinance. The officer shall give that advice in a written form that contains
the information described in division (G)(7) below and shall read the advice to
the person. The form shall contain a statement that the form was shown to the
person under arrest and read to the person by the arresting officer. One or
more persons shall witness the arresting officer’s reading of the form, and the
witnesses shall certify to this fact by signing the form. The person must
submit to the chemical test or tests, subsequent to the request of the
arresting officer, within two hours of the time of the alleged violation and,
if the person does not submit to the test or tests within that two-hour time
limit, the failure to submit automatically constitutes a refusal to submit to
the test or tests.
      (7)   Certification of arrest. Except as provided in division (G)(5)
above, if a person is under arrest as described in division (G)(6) above,
before the person may be requested to submit to a chemical test or tests to
determine the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a
controlled substance or combination content of the person’s whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath or urine, the arresting officer shall read the
following form to the person: “You now are under arrest for (specifically state
the offense under state law or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance
for which the person was arrested – operating a vehicle under the influence of
alcohol, a drug or a combination of them; operating a vehicle while under the
influence of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a
controlled substance; operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption;
or having physical control of a vehicle while under the influence). If you
refuse to take any chemical test required by law, your Ohio driving privileges
will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay a fee to have the
privileges reinstated. If you have a prior conviction of O.V.I. or operating a
vehicle while under the influence of a listed controlled substance or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance under state or municipal law within the
preceding 20 years, you are now under arrest for state O.V.I., and, if you
refuse to take a chemical test, you will face increased penalties if you
subsequently are convicted of the state O.V.I. (Read this part unless the
person is under arrest for solely having physical control of a vehicle while
under the influence.) If you take any chemical test required by law and are
found to be at or over the prohibited amount of alcohol, a controlled substance
or a metabolite of a controlled substance in your whole blood, blood serum or
plasma, breath or urine as set by law, your Ohio driving privileges will be
suspended immediately, and you will have to pay a fee to have the privileges
reinstated. If you take a chemical test, you may have an independent chemical
test taken at your own expense.”
      (8)   Actions required by arresting officer. If the arresting law
enforcement officer does not ask a person under arrest as described in
divisions (G)(5) or (G)(6) above to submit to a chemical test or tests under
Ohio R.C. 4511.191 or this section, the arresting officer shall seize the Ohio
or out-of-state driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit of the person
and immediately forward it to the court in which the arrested person is to
appear on the charge. If the arrested person is not in possession of the
person’s license or permit or it is not in the person’s vehicle, the officer
shall order the person to surrender it to the law enforcement agency that
employs the officer within 24 hours after the arrest and, upon the surrender,
the agency immediately shall forward the license or permit to the court in
which the person is to appear on the charge. Upon receipt of the license or
permit, the court shall retain it pending the arrested person’s initial
appearance and any action taken under Ohio R.C. 4511.196.
      (9)   Submission.
         (a)   If a law enforcement officer asks a person under arrest as
described in division (G)(5) above to submit to a chemical test or tests under
that division and the test results indicate a prohibited concentration of
alcohol, a controlled substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine at the time of
the alleged offense, or if a law enforcement officer asks a person under arrest
as described in division (G)(6) above to submit to a chemical test or tests
under Ohio R.C. 4511.191 or this section, if the officer advises the person in
accordance with this section of the consequences of the person’s refusal or
submission and if either the person refuses to submit to the test or tests or,
unless the arrest was for a violation of division (O) below, Ohio R.C. 4511.194
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the person submits to the
test or tests and the test results indicate a prohibited concentration of
alcohol, a controlled substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine at the time of
the alleged offense, the arresting officer shall do all of the following:
            1.   On behalf of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, notify the
person that, independent of any penalties or sanctions imposed upon the person,
the person’s Ohio driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or non-
resident operating privilege is suspended immediately, that the suspension will
last at least until the person’s initial appearance on the charge, which will
be held within five days after the date of the person’s arrest or the issuance
of a citation to the person, and that the person may appeal the suspension at
the initial appearance or during the period of time ending 30 days after that
initial appearance;
            2.   Seize the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit of
the person and immediately forward it to the Registrar. If the arrested person
is not in possession of the person’s license or permit or it is not in the
person’s vehicle, the officer shall order the person to surrender it to the law
enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24 hours after the person is
given notice of the suspension and, upon the surrender, the officer’s employing
agency immediately shall forward the license or permit to the Registrar;
            3.   Verify the person’s current residence and, if it differs from
that on the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit, notify
the Registrar of the change;
            4.   Send to the Registrar, within 48 hours after the arrest of the
person, a sworn report that includes all of the following statements:
               a.   That the officer had reasonable grounds to believe that, at
the time of the arrest, the arrested person was operating a vehicle in
violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) or (B) or a municipal O.V.I. ordinance or for
being in physical control of a stationary vehicle in violation of Ohio R.C.
4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
               b.   That the person was arrested and charged with a violation
of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) or (B), Ohio R.C. 4511.194 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a municipal O.V.I. ordinance;
               c.   Unless division (G)(9)(a)4.e. below applies, that the
officer asked the person to take the designated chemical test or tests, advised
the person in accordance with this section of the consequences of submitting
to, or refusing to take, the test or tests, and gave the person the form
described in division (G)(7) above;
               d.   Unless division (G)(9)(a)4.e. below applies, that either
the person refused to submit to the chemical test or tests or, unless the
arrest was for a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the person submitted to the chemical test or tests and the
test results indicate a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine at the time of the alleged
offense;
               e.   If the person was under arrest as described in division (G)
(5) above and the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance with that
division, that the person was under arrest as described in that division, that
the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance with that division, and
that test results indicated a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine at the time of the alleged
offense.
         (b)   Division (G)(9)(a) above does not apply to a person who is
arrested for a violation of division (O) below, Ohio R.C. 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, who is asked by a law enforcement
officer to submit to a chemical test or tests under this section, and who
submits to the test or tests, regardless of the amount of alcohol, a controlled
substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance that the test results
indicate is present in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath
or urine.
      (10)   Sworn report of arresting officer.
         (a)   The arresting officer shall give the officer’s sworn report that
is completed under this section to the arrested person at the time of the
arrest, or the Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall send the report to the person
by regular first class mail as soon as possible after receipt of the report,
but not later than 14 days after receipt of it. An arresting officer may give
an unsworn report to the arrested person at the time of the arrest provided the
report is complete when given to the arrested person and subsequently is sworn
to by the arresting officer. As soon as possible, but not later than 48 hours
after the arrest of the person, the arresting officer shall send a copy of the
sworn report to the court in which the arrested person is to appear on the
charge for which the person was arrested.
         (b)   The sworn report of an arresting officer completed under this
section is prima facie proof of the information and statements that it
contains. It shall be admitted and considered as prima facie proof of the
information and statements that it contains in any appeal under Ohio R.C.
4511.197 relative to any suspension of a person’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or non-resident operating privilege that results
from the arrest covered by the report.
(ORC 4511.192)
      (11)   Suspension effective immediately. A suspension of a person’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or non-resident operating
privilege under this section for the time described in Ohio R.C. 4511.191(B) or
(C) is effective immediately from the time at which the arresting officer
serves the notice of suspension upon the arrested person. Any subsequent
finding that the person is not guilty of the charge that resulted in the
person’s being requested to take the chemical test or tests under division (G)
(1) through (G)(5) above does not affect the suspension.
      (12)   Initial appearance. If a person arrested for operating a vehicle
in violation of divisions (A) or (B) above, Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) or (B), or any
other municipal O.V.I. ordinance, or for being in physical control of a vehicle
in violation of division (O) below or Ohio R.C. 4511.194 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, regardless of whether the person’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or non-resident operating privilege is or
is not suspended under Ohio R.C. 4511.191(B) or (C) or Ohio R.C. Ch. 4510, the
person’s initial appearance on the charge resulting from the arrest shall be
held within five days of the persons’ arrest or the issuance of the citation to
him or her, subject to any continuance granted by the court pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 4511.197 regarding the issues specified in that section.
(ORC 4511.191(D))
   (H)   Penalty for driving under the influence.
      (1)   Whoever violates any provisions of divisions (A)(1)(a) through (A)
(1)(i) or (A)(2) above is guilty of operating a vehicle under the influence of
alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them. Whoever violates division
(A)(1)(j) above is guilty of operating a vehicle while under the influence of a
listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance.
The court shall sentence the offender under Ohio R.C. Ch. 2929, except as
otherwise authorized or required by divisions (H)(1)(a) through (H)(1)(e)
below.
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (H)(1)(b), (H)(1)(c),
(H)(1)(d) or (H)(1)(e) below, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree and the court shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties
and sanctions provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.19(G)(1)(a)(i) to (iv).
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in division (H)(1)(e) of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of division (A) of this
section, or one other equivalent offense is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and
sanctions provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) to (G)(1)(b)(v).
         (c)   Except as otherwise provided in division (H)(1)(e) of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division (A) of this
section or other equivalent offenses is guilty of a misdemeanor. The court
shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and sanctions provided in
Ohio R.C. 4511.19(G)(1)(c)(i) to (G)(1)(c)(vi).
         (d)   Except as otherwise provided in division (H)(1)(e) of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of division (A) of
this section or other equivalent offenses or an offender who, within 20 years
of the offense, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to five or
more violations of that nature, or an offender who previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a specification of the type described in Ohio
R.C. 2941.1413, is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
         (e)   An offender who previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) that was a felony, regardless of
when the violation and the conviction or guilty plea occurred, is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   An offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (A) above and who subsequently seeks reinstatement of the driver’s or
occupational driver’s license or permit or non-resident operating privilege
suspended under this section or Ohio R.C. 4511.19 as a result of the conviction
or guilty plea shall pay a reinstatement fee as provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.191
(F)(2).
      (3)   (a)   If an offender is sentenced to a jail term under Ohio R.C.
4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) or (ii) or (G)(1)(c)(i) or (ii) and if, within 60 days of
sentencing of the offender, the court issues a written finding on the record
that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail where the offender is
required to serve the term, the offender will not be able to begin serving that
term within the 60-day period following the date of sentencing, the court may
impose an alternative sentence as specified in Ohio R.C. 4511.19(G)(3) that
includes a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring, with continuous
alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol
monitoring.
         (b)   As an alternative to the mandatory jail terms as required by
Ohio R.C. 4511.19(G)(1), the court may sentence the offender as provided in
Ohio R.C. 4511.19(G)(3).
      (4)   If an offender’s driver’s or occupational driver’s license or
permit or non-resident operating privilege is suspended under this division (H)
or Ohio R.C. 4511.19(G) and if Ohio R.C. 4510.13 permits the court to grant
limited driving privileges, the court may grant the limited driving privileges
in accordance with that section. If division (A)(7) of that section requires
the court impose as a condition of the privileges that the offender must
display on the vehicle that is driven subject to the privileges restricted
license plates that are issued under Ohio R.C. 4503.231, except as provided in
division (B) of that section, the court shall impose that condition as one of
the conditions of the limited driving privileges granted to the offender,
except as provided in Ohio R.C. 4503.231(B).
      (5)   Fines imposed under this section for a violation of division (A)
above shall be distributed as provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.19(G)(5).
      (6)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order of criminal
forfeiture under divisions (H)(1)(c), (H)(1)(d) or (H)(1)(e) above is assigned
or transferred and Ohio R.C. 4503.234(B)(2) or (3) applies, in addition to or
independent of any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the
offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the National
Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds of any fine so imposed shall be
distributed in accordance with division (C)(2) of that section.
      (7)   In all cases in which an offender is sentenced under this division
(H), the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01. If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, the court, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, may order restitution pursuant to §
698.02(F) of this code of ordinances or Ohio R.C. 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an
amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident or
collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s operation
of the vehicle before, during or after committing the offense for which the
offender is sentenced under this division (H).
      (8)   A court may order an offender to reimburse a law enforcement agency
for any costs incurred by the agency with respect to a chemical test or tests
administered to the offender if all of the following apply:
         (a)   The offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (A) above;
         (b)   The test or tests were of the offender’s whole blood, blood
serum or plasma or urine; and
         (c)   The test or tests indicated that the offender had a prohibited
concentration of a controlled substance or a metabolite of a controlled
substance in the offender’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma or urine at the
time of the offense.
      (9)   As used in this division (H), ELECTRONIC MONITORING has the same
meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2929.01.
   (I)   Penalty for operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption.
Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
after underage alcohol consumption and shall be punished as follows.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (I)(2) below, the offender
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. In addition to any other
sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class six suspension
of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license or non-resident operating privilege
from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(6). The court may grant
limited driving privileges relative to the suspension under Ohio R.C. 4510.021
and 4510.13. The court may grant unlimited driving privileges with an ignition
interlock device relative to the suspension and may reduce the period of
suspension as authorized under Ohio R.C. 4510.022. If the court grants
unlimited driving privileges under R.C. 4510.022, the court shall suspend any
jail term imposed under this division (I)(1) as required under that section.
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of division (A)
of this section or other equivalent offense or offenses, the offender is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the third degree. In addition to any other sanction imposed
for the offense, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the
offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(4). The court may grant limited driving
privileges relative to the suspension under Ohio R.C. 4510.021 and 4510.13.
      (3)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01. If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
698.02(F) or Ohio R.C. 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any
economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender's operation of the vehicle before, during, or
after committing the violation of division (B) of this section.
   (J)   Sentencing.
      (1)   No court shall sentence an offender to an alcohol treatment program
under this section unless the treatment program complies with the minimum
standards for alcohol treatment programs adopted under Ohio R.C. Ch. 5119 by
the Director of Mental Health and Addiction Services.
      (2)   An offender who stays in a drivers’ intervention program or in an
alcohol treatment program under an order issued under this section shall pay
the cost of the stay in the program. However, if the court determines that an
offender who stays in an alcohol treatment program under an order issued under
this section is unable to pay the cost of the stay in the program, the court
may order that the cost be paid from the court’s indigent drivers’ alcohol
treatment fund.
   (K)   License suspension. If a person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit or non- resident operating privilege is suspended under this
section or Ohio R.C. 4511.19 files an appeal regarding any aspect of the
person’s trial or sentence, the appeal itself does not stay the operation of
the suspension.
   (L)   Application. Division (A)(1)(j) above does not apply to a person who
operates a vehicle while the person has a concentration of a listed controlled
substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s
whole blood, blood serum or plasma or urine that equals or exceeds the amount
specified in that division, if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs; and
      (2)   The person injected, ingested or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
   (M)   Prohibited concentrations. The prohibited concentrations of a
controlled substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance listed in
division (A)(1)(j) above also apply in a prosecution of a violation of Ohio
R.C. 2923.16(D) in the same manner as if the offender is being prosecuted for a
prohibited concentration of alcohol.
   (N)   Defined terms. All terms defined in Ohio R.C. 4510.01 apply to this
section. If the meaning of a term defined in Ohio R.C. 4510.01 conflicts with
the meaning of the same term as defined in Ohio R.C. 4501.01 or 4511.01, the
term as defined in Ohio R.C. 4510.01 applies to this section.
(ORC 4511.19(G) - (M))
   (O)   Physical control of vehicle while under the influence.
      (1)   Definition. As used in this division (O), PHYSICAL CONTROL means
being in the driver’s position of the front seat of a vehicle and having
possession of the vehicle’s ignition key or other ignition device.
      (2)   Generally. No person shall be in physical control of a vehicle if,
at the time of the physical control, any of the following apply:
         (a)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse or
a combination of them;
         (b)   The person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine
contains at least the concentration of alcohol specified in divisions (A)(1)
(b), (A)(1)(c), (A)(1)(d) or (A)(1)(e) above; and/or
         (c)   Except as provided in division (O)(5) below, the person has a
concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma or
urine that equals or exceeds the concentration specified in division (A)(1)(j)
above.
      (3)   Field sobriety tests.
         (a)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of this section, if a law enforcement officer has administered a
field sobriety test to the person in physical control of the vehicle involved
in the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the
officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing
standards for any reliable, credible, and generally acceptable field sobriety
tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including,
but not limited to, any testing standards then in effect what were set by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply.
            1.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
            2.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field
sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding.
            3.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
divisions (O)(3)(a)1. or (O)(3)(a)2. above and, if the testimony or evidence is
admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the testimony or
evidence, and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the trier of fact
considers to be appropriate.
         (b)   Division (O)(3)(a) above does not limit or preclude a court, in
its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by probable
cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal prosecution or
juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division, from
considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by division
(O)(3)(a) of this section.
      (4)   Penalty. Whoever violates this division (O) is guilty of having
physical control of a vehicle while under the influence, a misdemeanor of the
first degree. In addition to other sanctions imposed, the court may impose on
the offender a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license
or non-resident operating privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C.
4510.02(A)(7).
      (5)   Exception. Division (O)(2)(c) above does not apply to a person who
is in physical control of a vehicle while the person has a concentration of a
listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in
the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or
exceeds the amount specified in division (A)(1)(j) above if both of the
following apply:
         (a)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs; and
         (b)   The person injected, ingested or inhaled the controlled
substance in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
(ORC 4511.194)
   (P)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL SANCTION, CONTINUOUS ALCOHOL MONITORING, JAIL,
MANDATORY PRISON TERM, MANDATORY TERM OF LOCAL INCARCERATION, PRISON TERM and
SANCTION. Have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2929.01.
      DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4506.01.
      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE. Any of the following:
         (a)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A);
         (b)   A violation of a municipal O.V.I. ordinance;
         (c)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.04 in a case in which the offender
was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that section;
         (d)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.06(A)(1) or Ohio R.C. 2903.08 or a
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to either of those
divisions;
         (e)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.06(A)(2), (A)(3) or (A)(4), Ohio
R.C. 2903.08(A)(2), or former Ohio R.C. 2903.07, or a municipal ordinance that
is substantially equivalent to any of those divisions or that former section,
in a case in which a judge or jury as the trier of fact found that the offender
was under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;
         (f)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 1547.11(A);
         (g)   A violation of a municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from
operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or from
manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or similar device on the waters of the
state while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them or prohibiting a person from operating or being in physical control of
any vessel underway or from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or similar
device on the waters of the state with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a
controlled substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine;
         (h)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) or 1547.11(A);
         (i)   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) or 1547.11(A).
      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE THAT IS VEHICLE-RELATED. An equivalent offense that is
any of the following:
         (a)   A violation described in divisions (a), (b), (c), (d) or (e) of
the definition for “equivalent offense” provided in this division (P);
         B.   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A);
         C.   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A).
      MANDATORY JAIL TERM. The mandatory term in jail of three, six, ten, 20,
30 or 60 days that must be imposed under Ohio R.C. 4511.19(G)(1)(a), (G)(1)(b)
or (G)(1)(c) upon an offender convicted of a violation of division (A) of that
section and in relation to which all of the following apply:
         (a)   Except as specifically authorized under Ohio R.C. 4511.19, the
term must be served in a jail; and
         (b)   Except as specifically authorized under Ohio R.C. 4511.19, the
term cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2929.21 through 2929.28 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
      MUNICIPAL O.V.I. ORDINANCE and MUNICIPAL O.V.I. OFFENSE. Any municipal
ordinance prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle while under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse or a combination of them or prohibiting a
person from operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a
controlled substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine.
(ORC 4511.181)
(Ord. 93-2003, passed 7-14-2003)
Statutory reference:
   Disposition of fines, immobilization of vehicle and impoundment of license
plates, criminal forfeiture for municipal ordinance conviction, see Ohio R.C.
4511.193
   Effect of refusal to submit to test, seizure of license, suspension periods,
appeal procedures, occupati driving privileges, and indigent drivers alcohol
treatment funds, see Ohio R.C. 4511.191
   Judicial pretrial suspension, initial appearance, see Ohio R.C. 4511.196
   Mayor’s Court to suspend driver’s license, see Ohio R.C. 1905.201
   Seizure of vehicles upon arrest, see Ohio R.C. 4511.195
   Trial judge to suspend driver’s license, see Ohio R.C. 4510.05
§ 333.011 IMMOBILIZING OR DISABLING DEVICE VIOLATION.
   (A)   (1)   No offender who has been granted limited or unlimited driving
privileges, during any period that the offender is required to operate only a
motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device, shall request
or permit any other person to breathe into the device if it is an ignition
interlock device or another type of device that monitors the concentration of
alcohol in a person’s breath or to otherwise start the motor vehicle equipped
with the device, for the purpose of providing the offender with an operable
motor vehicle.
      (2)   No person shall breathe into an immobilizing or disabling device
that is an ignition interlock device or another type of device that monitors
the concentration of alcohol in a person’s breath or otherwise start a motor
vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device, for the purpose of
providing an operable motor vehicle to another person who has been granted
limited or unlimited driving privileges under the condition that the person
operate only a motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device.
      (3)   No unauthorized person shall tamper with or circumvent the
operation of an immobilizing or disabling device.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an immobilizing or
disabling device violation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 4510.44)
§ 333.02 RECKLESS OPERATION ON STREETS, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any street or highway in willful
or wanton disregard of the safety of persons or property.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any public or private
property other than streets or highways in willful or wanton disregard of the
safety of persons or property.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) above does not apply to the competitive operation
of vehicles on public or private property when the owner of such property
knowingly permits such operation thereon.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever violates
any provision of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates any
provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates any
provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.20, 4511.201) (Ord. 19-1983, passed 1-24-1983)
§ 333.03 MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS; ASSURED CLEAR DISTANCE AHEAD.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater or less
than is reasonable or proper, having due regard for the traffic, surface and
width of the street or highway and any other conditions, and no person shall
drive any motor vehicle in and upon any street or highway at a greater speed
than will permit him or her to bring it to a stop within the assured clear
distance ahead.
   (B)   It is prima facie lawful, in the absence of a lower limit declared or
established pursuant to this section by the Director of Transportation or local
authorities, for the operator of a motor vehicle to operate the same at a speed
not exceeding the following:
      (1)   (a)   Twenty miles per hour in school zones during school recess
and while children are going to or leaving school during the opening or closing
hours, and when 20 miles per hour school speed limit signs are erected; except
that, on controlled-access highways and expressways, if the right-of-way line
fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed
by division (B)(4) below, and on freeways, if the right-of-way line fence has
been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed by
divisions (B)(10) and (B)(11) below. The end of every school zone may be marked
by a sign indicating the end of the zone. Nothing in this section or in the
Manual and Specifications for a Uniform System of Traffic-Control Devices shall
be construed to require school zones to be indicated by signs equipped with
flashing or other lights or giving other special notice of the hours in which
the school zone speed limit is in effect.
         (b)   As used in this section, “school” means all of the following:
            1.   Any school chartered under R.C. § 3301.16;
            2.   Any nonchartered school that during the preceding year filed
with the Ohio Department of Education and Workforce in compliance with O.A.C.
3301-35-08, a copy of the school's report for the parents of the school's
pupils certifying that the school meets state minimum standards for
nonchartered, nontax-supported schools and presents evidence of this filing to
the jurisdiction from which it is requesting the establishment of a school
zone;
            3.   Any special elementary school that in writing requests the
County Engineer to create a school zone at the location of the school. Upon
receipt of the written request, the County Engineer shall create a school zone
at that location by erecting appropriate signs;
            4.   Any preschool education program operated by an educational
service center that is located on a street or highway with a speed limit of 45
miles per hour or more, when the educational service center in writing requests
that the County Engineer create a school zone at the location of that program.
Upon receipt of such a written request, the County Engineer shall create a
school zone at that location by erecting the appropriate signs.
         (c)   As used in this section, SCHOOL ZONE means that portion of a
street or highway passing a school fronting upon the street or highway that is
encompassed by projecting the school property lines to the fronting street or
highway, and also includes that portion of a state highway. Upon request from
local authorities for streets and highways under their jurisdiction and that
portion of a state highway under the jurisdiction of the Director of
Transportation or a request from a County Engineer in the case of a school zone
for a special elementary school, the Director may extend the traditional school
zone boundaries. The distances in divisions (b)(1)(c)1. through (b)(1)(c)3.
below shall not exceed 300 feet per approach per direction, and are bounded by
whichever of the following distances or combination thereof the Director
approves as most appropriate:
            1.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school building
lines normal to the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction;
            2.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school property
lines intersecting the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction; or
            3.   The distance encompassed by the special marking of the
pavement for a principal school pupil crosswalk plus a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction of the highway.
         (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the
Director’s initial action on 8-9-1976, establishing all school zones at the
traditional school zone boundaries defined by projecting school property lines,
except when those boundaries are extended as provided in divisions (B)(1)(a)
and (B)(1)(c) above.
         (e)   As used in this division (B), CROSSWALK has the meaning given
that term in Ohio R.C. 4511.01(LL)(2).
         (f)   The Director may, upon request by resolution of the legislative
authority and upon submission by the municipality of such engineering, traffic
and other information as the Director considers necessary, designate a school
zone on any portion of a state route lying within the municipality that
includes a crosswalk customarily used by children going to or leaving a school
during recess and opening and closing hours, whenever the distance, as measured
in a straight line, from the school property line nearest the crosswalk to the
nearest point of a crosswalk is no more than 1,320 feet. Such a school zone
shall include the distance encompassed by the crosswalk and extending 300 feet
in each appropriate direction of the state route.
         (g)   As used in this section, SPECIAL ELEMENTARY SCHOOL means a
school that meets all of the following:
            1.   It is not chartered and does not receive tax revenue from any
source;
            2.   It does not educate children beyond the eighth grade;
            3.   It is located outside the limits of a municipal corporation;
            4.   A majority of the total number of students enrolled at the
school are not related by blood; and
            5.   The principal or other person in charge of the special
elementary school annually sends a report to the superintendent of the school
district in which the special elementary school is located indicating the total
number of students enrolled at the school, but otherwise the principal or other
person in charge does not report any other information or data to the
superintendent.
      (2)   Twenty-five miles per hour in all other portions of the
municipality, except on state routes outside business districts, through
highways outside business districts and alleys;
      (3)   Thirty-five miles per hour on all state routes or through highways
within the municipality outside business districts, except as provided in
divisions (B)(4) and (B)(6) below;
      (4)   Fifty miles per hour on controlled-access highways and expressways
within the municipality;
      (5)   Fifty-five miles per hour on highways outside the municipality,
other than highways within island jurisdictions as provided in division (B)(8)
below, highways as provided in divisions (B)(9) and (B)(10) below, and
highways, expressways and freeways as provided in divisions (B)(13), (B)(14),
(B)(15) and (B)(17) below;
      (6)   Fifty miles per hour on state routes within the municipality
outside urban districts unless a lower prima facie speed is established as
further provided in this section;
      (7)   Fifteen miles per hour on all alleys within the municipality;
      (8)   Thirty-five miles per hour on highways outside the municipality
that are within an island jurisdiction;
      (9)   Thirty-five miles per hour on through highways, except state
routes, that are outside municipal corporations and that are within a national
park with boundaries extending through two or more counties;
      (10)   Sixty miles per hour on two-lane state routes outside municipal
corporations as established by the Director under Ohio R.C. 4511.21(H)(2);
      (11)   Fifty-five miles per hour at all times on freeways with paved
shoulders inside the municipality, other than freeways as provided in divisions
(B)(15) and (B)(17) below;
      (12)   Fifty-five miles per hour at all times on freeways outside the
municipality, other than freeways as provided in divisions (B)(15) and (B)(17)
below;
      (13)   Sixty miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at all
times on all portions of rural divided highways;
      (14)   Sixty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at
all times on all rural expressways without traffic-control signals;
      (15)   Seventy miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at all
times on all rural freeways;
      (16)   Fifty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at
all times on all portions of freeways in congested areas as determined by the
Director and that are part of the interstate system and are located within a
municipal corporation or within an interstate freeway outerbelt;
      (17)   Sixty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at
all times on all portions of freeways in urban areas as determined by the
Director and that are part of the interstate system and are part of an
interstate freeway outerbelt;
   (C)   It is prima facie unlawful for any person to exceed any of the speed
limitations in divisions (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7), (B)
(8) and (B)(9) above or any declared pursuant to this section by the Director
or local authorities and it is unlawful for any person to exceed any of the
speed limitations in division (D) below. No person shall be convicted of more
than one violation of this section for the same conduct, although violations of
more than one provision of this section may be charged in the alternative in a
single affidavit.
   (D)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon a street or highway as
follows:
      (1)   At a speed exceeding 55 miles per hour, except upon a two-lane
state route as provided in division (B)(10) above and upon a highway,
expressway or freeway as provided in divisions (B)(13), (B)(14), (B)(15) and
(B)(17) above;
      (2)   At a speed exceeding 60 miles per hour upon a two-lane state route
as provided in division (B)(10) above and upon a highway as provided in
division (B)(13) above;
      (3)   At a speed exceeding 65 miles per hour upon an expressway as
provided in division (B)(14) above or upon a freeway as provided in division
(b)(15) above, except upon a freeway as provided in division (B)(15) above;
      (4)   At a speed exceeding 70 miles per hour upon a freeway as provided
in division (B)(15) above; and
      (5)   At a speed exceeding the posted speed limit upon a highway,
expressway or freeway for which the Director has determined and declared a
speed limit pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4511.21(I)(2) or (L)(2).
   (E)   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4511.21(E), in every charge of violating this
section, the affidavit and warrant shall specify the time, place and speed at
which the defendant is alleged to have driven, and in charges made in reliance
upon division (C) above also the speed which divisions (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)
(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) above of, or a limit declared or
established pursuant to, this section or Ohio R.C. 4511.21 declares is prima
facie lawful at the time and place of such alleged violation; except that, in
affidavits where a person is alleged to have driven at a greater speed than
will permit the person to bring the vehicle to stop within the assured clear
distance ahead, the affidavit and warrant need not specify the speed at which
the defendant is alleged to have driven.
   (F)   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4511.21(F), when a speed in excess of both a
prima facie limitation and a limitation in division (D) above is alleged, the
defendant shall be charged in a single affidavit, alleging a single act, with a
violation indicated of both divisions (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)
(6), (B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) above, or of a limit declared or established
pursuant to this section or Ohio R.C. 4511.21 by the Director or local
authorities, and of the limitation in division (D) above. If the court finds a
violation of divisions (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7), (B)
(8) or (B)(9) above, or a limit declared or established pursuant to this
section or Ohio R.C. 4511.21 has occurred, it shall enter judgment of
conviction under such division and dismiss the charge under division (D) above.
If it finds no violation of divisions (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)
(6), (B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) above, or a limit declared or established
pursuant to, this section or Ohio R.C. 4511.21, it shall then consider whether
the evidence supports a conviction under division (D) above.
(ORC 4511.21(A) - (F))
   (G)   Notwithstanding the penalties provided in §
303.99 of this traffic code, whoever violates division (A) above under
circumstances detailed in division (B)(1)(a) above is guilty of an unclassified
misdemeanor. If the person involved in such an offense was operating a motor
vehicle at less than 35 miles per hour, that person shall be fined not less
than $90 and not more than $180 for the violation. If the person involved in
such an offense was operating a motor vehicle at more than 35 miles per hour,
that person shall be fined not less than $140 and not more than $280 for the
violation.
   (H)   (1)   All fines collected pursuant to division (G) above shall benefit
child safety programs, including the purchase and distribution of child safety
helmets, educational programs, police payroll and warning signage.
      (2)   Child safety program funds shall be administered by the Director of
Public Safety, with the spending of funds subject to Council approval.
   (I)   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4511.21(G), points shall be assessed for a
violation of a limitation under division (D) above in accordance with Ohio R.C.
4510.036.
(ORC 4511.21(G))
   (J)   Whenever, in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4511.21(H) through (N), the
maximum prima facie speed limitations as established herein have been altered,
either higher or lower, and the appropriate signs giving notice have been
erected as required, operators of motor vehicles shall be governed by the speed
limitations set forth on such signs. It is prima facie unlawful for any person
to exceed the speed limits posted upon such signs.
   (K)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      COMMERCIAL BUS. A motor vehicle designed for carrying more than nine
passengers and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
      INTERSTATE SYSTEM. Has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C. § 101.
      NON-COMMERCIAL BUS. Includes, but is not limited to, a school bus, or a
motor vehicle operated solely for the transportation of persons associated with
a charitable or non-profit organization.
      OUTERBELT. A portion of a freeway that is part of the interstate system
and is located in the outer vicinity of a major municipal corporation or group
of municipal corporations, as designated by the Director.
      RURAL. Outside urbanized areas, as designated in accordance with 23
U.S.C. § 101, and outside of a business or urban district.
(ORC 4511.21(O))
   (L)   (1)   A violation of any provision of this section is one of the
following:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (L)(1)(b), (L)(1)(c)
and (L)(2) and (L)(3) below, a minor misdemeanor;
         (b)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of any provision of this
section, Ohio R.C. 4511.21, or any provision of any other municipal ordinance
that is substantially equivalent to any provision of that section, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
         (c)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of any
provision of this section, Ohio R.C. 4511.21, or any provision of any other
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any provision of that
section, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   If the offender operated a motor vehicle faster than 35 miles an
hour in a business district of the municipality, faster than 50 miles an hour
in other portions of the municipality, or faster than 35 miles an hour in a
school zone during recess or while children are going to or leaving school
during the school's opening or closing hours, a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. This division does not apply if penalties may be imposed under division
(L)(1)(b) or (L)(1)(c) of this section.
      (3)   Notwithstanding division (L)(1) above, if the offender operated a
motor vehicle in a construction zone where a sign was then posted in accordance
with Ohio R.C. 4511.98, the court, in addition to all other penalties provided
by law, shall impose upon the offender a fine of two times the usual amount
imposed for the violation. No court shall impose a fine of two times the usual
amount imposed for the violation upon an offender if the offender alleges, in
an affidavit filed with the court prior to the offender’s sentencing, that the
offender is indigent and is unable to pay the fine imposed pursuant to this
division (L)(3) and if the court determines that the offender is an indigent
person and unable to pay the fine.
      (4)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.21(P)) (Ord. 271-1999, passed 12-13-1999)
§ 333.035 SPEED LIMITS ON PRIVATE ROADS AND DRIVEWAYS.
   (A)   The owner of a private road or driveway located in a private
residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units may establish a speed
limit on the road or driveway by complying with all of the following
requirements.
      (1)   The speed limit is not less than 25 miles per hour and is indicated
by a sign that is in a proper position, is sufficiently legible to be seen by
an ordinarily observant person, and meets the specifications for the basic
speed limit sign included in the manual adopted by the Department of
Transportation pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4511.09;
      (2)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road or
driveway that is in plain view and clearly informs persons entering the road or
driveway that they are entering private property, a speed limit has been
established for the road or driveway and the speed limit is enforceable by law
enforcement officers under state law.
   (B)   No person shall operate a vehicle upon a private road or driveway as
provided in division (A) above at a speed exceeding any speed limit established
and posted pursuant to division (A) above.
   (C)   When a speed limit is established and posted in accordance with
division (A) above, a law enforcement officer may apprehend a person violating
the speed limit of the residential area by utilizing any of the means described
in Ohio R.C. 4511.091 or by any other accepted method of determining the speed
of a motor vehicle and may stop and charge the person with exceeding the speed
limit.
   (D)   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4511.211(D), points shall be assessed for
violation of a speed limit established and posted in accordance with division
(A) above in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4510.036.
   (E)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      OWNER. Includes but is not limited to a person who holds title to the
real property in fee simple, a condominium owners’ association, a property
owners’ association, a board of directors or trustees of a private community
and a non-profit corporation governing a private community.
      PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL AREA CONTAINING 20 OR MORE DWELLING UNITS. Does not
include a Chautauqua assembly as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.90.
(ORC 4511.211(A) - (E))
   (F)   (1)   A violation of division (B) above is one of the following:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (F)(1)(b) and (F)(1)
(c) below, a minor misdemeanor;
         (b)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this section, Ohio
R.C. 4511.211(B), or any other municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to that division, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; and/or
         (c)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this
section, Ohio R.C. 4511.211(B), or any other municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to that division, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.211(F))
§ 333.04 SLOW SPEED; POSTED MINIMUM SPEEDS.
   (A)   No person shall stop or operate a vehicle at such an unreasonably slow
speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic,
except when stopping or reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or to
comply with law.
   (B)   Whenever the Director of Transportation or local authorities determine
on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that slow speeds on
any part of a controlled-access highway, expressway or freeway consistently
impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the Director or such
local authority may declare a minimum speed limit below which no person shall
operate a motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe operation or in
compliance with the law. No minimum speed limit established hereunder shall be
less than 30 miles per hour, greater than 50 miles per hour, nor effective
until the provisions of Ohio R.C. 4511.21 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, relating to appropriate signs, have been fulfilled and
local authorities have obtained the approval of the Director.
   (C)   In a case involving a violation of this section, the trier of fact, in
determining whether the vehicle was being operated at an unreasonably slow
speed, shall consider the capabilities of the vehicle and its operator.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.22)
§ 333.05 SPEED LIMITATIONS OVER BRIDGES.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle over any bridge or other
elevated structure constituting a part of a highway at a speed which is greater
than the maximum speed that can be maintained with safety to such bridge or
structure, when such structure is posted with signs as provided in this
section.
      (2)   The Department of Transportation upon request from any local
authority shall, or upon its own initiative may, conduct an investigation of
any bridge or other elevated structure constituting a part of a highway, and if
it finds that such structure cannot with safety withstand traffic traveling at
the speed otherwise permissible under this traffic code, the Department shall
determine and declare the maximum speed of traffic which such structure can
withstand, and shall cause or permit suitable signs stating such maximum speed
to be erected and maintained at a distance of a least 100 feet before each end
of the structure.
      (3)   Upon the trial of any person charged with a violation of this
section, proof of such determination of the maximum speed by the Department and
the existence of such signs shall constitute prima facie evidence of the
maximum speed which can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.23)
§ 333.06 SPEED EXCEPTIONS FOR EMERGENCY OR SAFETY VEHICLES.
   The prima facie speed limitations set forth in Ohio R.C. 4511.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance do not apply to emergency vehicles
or public safety vehicles when they are responding to emergency calls and are
equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating
light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet
to the front of the vehicle, and when the drivers thereof sound audible signals
by bell, siren or exhaust whistle. This section does not relieve the driver of
an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons using the street or highway.
(ORC 4511.24)
§ 333.07 STREET RACING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   As used in this section, STREET RACING means the operation of two or
more vehicles from a point side by side at accelerating speeds in a competitive
attempt to outdistance each other, or the operation of one or more vehicles
over a common selected course, from the same point to the same point, wherein
timing is made of the participating vehicles involving competitive
accelerations or speeds. Persons rendering assistance in any manner to such
competitive use of vehicles shall be equally charged as the participants. The
operation of two or more vehicles side by side either at speeds in excess of
prima facie lawful speeds established by Ohio R.C. 4511.21(B)(1)(a) through (B)
(9) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or rapidly accelerating
from a common starting point to a speed in excess of such prima facie lawful
speeds shall be prima facie evidence of street racing.
   (B)   No person shall participate in street racing upon any public road,
street or highway in the municipality.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of street racing, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to any other sanctions, the court
shall suspend the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license or non-resident operating
privileges for not less than 30 days or more than three years. No judge shall
suspend the first 30 days of any suspension of an offender’s license, permit or
privilege imposed under this division (C).
(ORC 4511.251)
§ 333.08 VEHICULAR HOMICIDE; VEHICULAR MANSLAUGHTER.
   (A)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a
motor vehicle, motorcycle, snowmobile, locomotive, watercraft or aircraft,
shall cause the death of another or the unlawful termination of another’s
pregnancy in any of the following ways:
      (1)   (a)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of Ohio
R.C. 4511.19(A) or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
         (b)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of Ohio R.C.
1547.11(A) or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance; and/or
         (c)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of Ohio R.C.
4561.15(A)(3) or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   In one of the following ways:
         (a)   Recklessly;
         (b)   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle in a
construction zone, a reckless operation offense; provided that, this division
applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is
unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of the offender’s
commission of the reckless operation offense in the construction zone and does
not apply as described in division (D) below.
      (3)   In one of the following ways:
         (a)   Negligently;
         (b)   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle in a
construction zone, a speeding offense; provided that, this division (A)(3)
applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is
unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of the offender’s
commission of the speeding offense in the construction zone and does not apply
as described in division (D) below.
      (4)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of any provision
of any section contained in Ohio R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor or
of a municipal ordinance that, regardless of the penalty set by ordinance for
the violation, is substantially equivalent to any provision of any section
contained in Ohio R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates divisions (A)(1) or (A)(2) above is guilty of
aggravated vehicular homicide, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(3) above is guilty of vehicular
homicide. Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), vehicular homicide
is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular homicide committed in violation
of division (A)(3) above is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving under a suspension
or cancellation imposed under R.C. Ch. 4510 or any other provision of the Ohio
Revised Code or was operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have a
valid driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license or non-resident operating privilege, and was not
eligible for renewal of the offender’s driver’s license or commercial driver’s
license without examination under Ohio R.C. 4507.10 or if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this
section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter or assault offense. The
court shall impose a mandatory jail term on the offender when required by
division (C) below
         (b)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
division (B), the court shall impose upon the offender a class four suspension
of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license or non-resident operating privilege
from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(4) or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this
section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter or assault offense, a
class three suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or non-resident
operating privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(3), or, if
the offender previously had been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a traffic-
related murder, felonious assault, or attempted murder offense, a class two
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license or non-resident operating
privilege as specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(2).
      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) above is guilty of vehicular
manslaughter. Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), vehicular
manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the second degree. Vehicular manslaughter is a
misdemeanor of the first degree if, at the time of the offense, the offender
was driving under a suspension or cancellation imposed under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4510
or any other provision of the Revised Code or was operating a motor vehicle or
motorcycle, did not have a valid driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license or non-resident operating
privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the offender’s driver’s license
or commercial driver’s license without examination under Ohio R.C. 4507.10 or
if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of this section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter or
assault offense.
         (b)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
division (B), the court shall impose upon the offender a class six suspension
of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license or non-resident operating privilege
from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(6) or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this
section, any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter or assault offense, or a
traffic-related murder, felonious assault or attempted murder offense, a class
four suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or non-resident
operating privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(4).
   (C)   The court shall impose a mandatory prison term on an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a felony violation of this section, as
provided in Ohio R.C. 2903.06(E). The court shall impose a mandatory jail term
of at least 15 days on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
misdemeanor violation of division (A)(3)(b) above and may impose upon the
offender a longer jail term as authorized pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.24.
   (D)   Divisions (A)(2)(b) and (A)(3)(b) above do not apply in a particular
construction zone unless signs of the type described in Ohio R.C. 2903.081 are
erected in that construction zone in accordance with the guidelines and design
specifications established by the Director of Transportation under Ohio R.C.
5501.27. The failure to erect signs of the type described in Ohio R.C. 2903.081
in a particular construction zone in accordance with those guidelines and
design specifications does not limit or affect the application of divisions (A)
(1), (A)(2)(a), (A)(3)(a) or (A)(4) above in that construction zone or the
prosecution of any person who violates any of those divisions in that
construction zone.
   (E)   (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         CONSTRUCTION ZONE. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 5501.27.
         MANDATORY PRISON TERM and MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Have the same meanings
as in Ohio R.C. 2929.01.
         MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
         RECKLESS OPERATION OFFENSE. A violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.20 or a
municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to Ohio R.C. 4511.20.
         SPEEDING OFFENSE. A violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.21 or a municipal
ordinance pertaining to speed.
         TRAFFIC-RELATED HOMICIDE, MANSLAUGHTER OR ASSAULT OFFENSE. A violation
of Ohio R.C. 2903.04 in circumstances in which division (D) of that section
applies, a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.06 or 2903.08, or a violation of Ohio
R.C. 2903.06, 2903.07 or 2903.08 as they existed prior to 3-23-2000.
         TRAFFIC-RELATED MURDER, FELONIOUS ASSAULT, OR ATTEMPTED MURDER
OFFENSE. A violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.01 or Ohio R.C. 2903.02 in circumstances
in which the offender used a motor vehicle as the means to commit the
violation, a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.11(A)(2) in circumstances in which the
deadly weapon used in the commission of the violation is a motor vehicle, or an
attempt to commit aggravated murder or murder in violation of Ohio R.C. 2923.02
in circumstances in which the offender used a motor vehicle as the means to
attempt to commit the aggravated murder or murder.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, when a penalty or suspension is
enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a prior
or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the specified
law or the specified offense includes any violation of any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of the state or current or former
law of this or another state or the United States.
(ORC 2903.06)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated vehicular assault, felony, see Ohio R.C. 2903.08
   Trial court to suspend driver’s license, see Ohio R.C. 4510.05, 4510.10
§ 333.09 OPERATION RESTRICTED FOR MINI-TRUCKS AND LOW-SPEED, UNDER-SPEED, OR
UTILITY VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a low-speed vehicle upon any street or
highway having an established speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour.
      (2)   No person shall operate an under-speed or utility vehicle or a
mini-truck upon any street or highway except as follows:
         (a)   Upon a street or highway having an established speed limit not
greater than 35 miles per hour and only upon such streets or highways where the
municipality has granted permission for such operation in accordance with
division (E) below; and
         (b)   A state park or political subdivision employee or volunteer
operating a utility vehicle exclusively within the boundaries of state parks or
political subdivision parks for the operation or maintenance of state or
political subdivision park facilities.
      (3)   No person shall operate a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter upon
any street or highway having an established speed limit greater than 45 miles
per hour.
   (B)   This section does not prohibit either of the following:
      (1)   A person operating a low-speed, under-speed, or utility vehicle or
a mini-truck from proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway
having a speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour; and/or
      (2)   A person operating a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter from
proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway having a speed limit
greater than 45 miles per hour.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the municipality from adopting
more stringent local ordinances, resolutions, or regulations governing the
operation of a low-speed vehicle or a mini-truck or a motor-driven cycle or
motor scooter.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A) above is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.214)
   (E)   By ordinance or resolution, the municipality may authorize the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on a public street
or highway under its jurisdiction. The municipality shall do all of the
following:
      (1)   Limit the operation of those vehicles to streets and highways
having an established speed limit not greater than 35 miles per hour;
      (2)   Require the vehicle owner who wishes to operate an under-speed or
utility vehicle or a mini-truck on the public streets or highways to submit the
vehicle to an inspection conducted by a local law enforcement agency that
complies with inspection requirements established by the Department of Public
Safety under Ohio R.C. 4513.02;
      (3)   Permit the operation on public streets or highways of only those
vehicles that successfully pass the required vehicle inspection, are registered
in accordance with Ohio R.C. Ch. 4503, and are titled in accordance with Ohio
R.C. Ch. 4505; and
      (4)   Notify the Director of Public Safety, in a manner the Director
determines, of the authorization for the operation of under-speed or utility
vehicles or mini-trucks.
   (F)   The municipality may establish additional requirements for the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on its streets and
highways.
(ORC 4511.215)
   (G)   Notwithstanding divisions (A) through (F) of this section, a person
may operate a utility vehicle on any public roads or right-of-way, other than a
freeway, when traveling from one farm field to another for agricultural
purposes if the vehicle is displaying a triangular slow-moving vehicle emblem
as described in R.C. § 4513.112.
(R.C. § 4511.216)
   (H)   (1)   Except as provided in this division (H) and divisions (E) and
(F) above, no person shall operate a mini-truck within the municipality.
      (2)   A person may operate a mini-truck on a farm for agricultural
purposes only when the owner of the farm qualifies for the current agricultural
use valuation tax credit. A mini-truck may be operated by or on behalf of such
a farm owner on public roads and rights-of-way only when traveling from one
farm field to another.
      (3)   A person may operate a mini-truck on property owned or leased by a
dealer who sells mini-trucks at retail.
      (4)   Whoever violates this division (H) shall be penalized as provided
in division (D) above.
(ORC 4519.401)
§ 333.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
303.99 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 335: LICENSING; ACCIDENTS
Section
335.01   Driver’s or commercial driver’s license required.
335.02   Possession of more than one license prohibited.
335.03   Driving with temporary instruction permit.
335.035   Driving with probationary license.
335.04   Certain acts prohibited.
335.05   Owner or operator allowing another to drive.
335.06   Display of license.
335.07   Driving under suspension or revocation or without proof of financial
responsibility or in violation of license restrictions. (Repealed)
335.071   Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction.
335.072   Operating motor vehicle or motorcycle without valid license.
335.073   Driving under O.V.I. suspension.
335.074   Driving under financial responsibility law suspension or
cancellation; driving under a non-payment of judgment suspension.
335.075   Failure to reinstate license.
335.08   Operation or sale without certificate of title.
335.09   Display of license plates; registration; obstructions.
335.10   License plates to be unobstructed. (Recodified)
335.11   Use of illegal license plates.
335.12   Failure to stop after accident.
335.13   Stopping after accident on other than public roads or highways.
335.14   Vehicle accident resulting in damage to realty.
335.15   Removal of vehicles after accidents.
335.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Deposit of driver’s license as security for traffic offenses, see TRAF.
303.11
   Driver’s license law, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4507
   Employment of a minor to operate a taxicab prohibited, see Ohio R.C.
4507.321
   Glass removal from street after accident, see TRAF.
311.01
   Licensing requirements of snowmobile, off-highway and all-purpose vehicle
operator, see
    TRAF.
375.05
   Motor vehicle licensing law, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4503
   Power of trial court of record to suspend license for certain violations,
see Ohio R.C. 4510.05, 4510.15
   See section histories for similar state law
   Snowmobile, off-highway and all-purpose vehicle accident reports - see TRAF.
375.06
   State accident reports, see Ohio R.C. 4509.01, 4509.06, 4509.74, 5502.11
   State point system suspension, see Ohio R.C. 4510.036
   Suspension of driver’s license, see TRAF.
303.99; GEN. OFF.
698.07
§ 335.01 DRIVER’S OR COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall permit the operation of a motor vehicle upon any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking, knowing the operator does not have a valid driver’s license issued
to the operator by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a deputy registrar under
R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid commercial driver’s license issued under R.C.
Chapter 4506. Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this division is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an
unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03, R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case. If, within three years of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
two or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.02(A)(1))
   (B)   (1)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license for the purpose of temporarily driving, operating, drawing,
moving or propelling a road roller or road machinery upon a street or highway.
      (2)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license for the purpose of temporarily driving, operating, drawing,
moving or propelling any agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a
street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
      (3)   No person shall drive, operate, draw, move or propel any
agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a street or highway at a
speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the person has a current, valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license.
      (4)   No person having a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license
shall be required to have a motorcycle operator’s endorsement to operate a
motorcycle having three wheels with a motor of not more than 50 cubic
centimeters piston displacement.
      (5)   No person having a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license
shall be required to have a motorcycle operator’s endorsement to operate an
autocycle or a cab-enclosed motorcycle.
      (6)   Every person on active duty in the military or naval forces of the
United States, when furnished with a driver’s permit and when operating an
official motor vehicle in connection with such duty, is exempt from the license
requirements of Ohio R.C. Ch. 4506 and 4507. Every person on active duty in the
military or naval forces of the United States or in service with the peace
corps, volunteers in service to America or the foreign service of the United
States, is exempt from the license requirements of such sections for the period
of the person’s active duty or service and for six months thereafter; provided,
such person was a licensee under such sections at the time the person commenced
the person’s active duty or service. This section does not prevent such a
person or the person’s spouse or dependent from making an application, as
provided in Ohio R.C. 4507.10(C), for the renewal of a driver’s license or
motorcycle operator’s endorsement or as provided in Ohio R.C. 4506.14 for the
renewal of a commercial driver’s license during the period of the person’s
active duty or service.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (B)(3) above is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
(ORC 4507.03)
   (C)   Non-residents, permitted to drive upon the highways of their own
state, may operate any motor vehicle upon any highway in the state without
examination or license under Ohio R.C. 4507.01 to 4507.39, inclusive, upon
condition that such non-resident may be required at any time or place to prove
lawful possession or their right to operate such motor vehicle, and to
establish proper identity.
(ORC 4507.04)
   (D)   Surrender of driver’s license from another state.
      (1)   Any person who becomes a resident of this state, within 30 days of
becoming a resident, shall surrender any driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card issued by another state to the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a deputy registrar. If such a person intends to
operate a motor vehicle upon the public roads or highways, the person shall
apply for a temporary instruction permit or driver’s license in this state. If
the person fails to apply for a driver’s license or temporary instruction
permit or within 30 days of becoming a resident, the person shall not operate
any motor vehicle in this state under a license or permit issued by another
state.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (d)(1) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   The offense established under division (d)(2)A. of this section
is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable mental state
for purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of this offense as a strict
liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
      (3)   For purposes of division (d)(1) of this section, “resident” means
any person to whom any of the following applies:
         (a)   The person maintains their principal residence in this state and
does not reside in this state as a result of the person’s active service in the
United States armed forces.
         (b)   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to
be a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the Registrar under R.C.
§ 4507.01.
(R.C. § 4507.213)
§ 335.02 POSSESSION OF MORE THAN ONE LICENSE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall receive a driver’s license, or a motorcycle
operator’s endorsement of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card unless and until the person
surrenders to the Registrar or a deputy registrar all valid licenses, temporary
instruction permits, and identification cards issued to the person by another
jurisdiction recognized by this state.
      (2)   The Registrar shall report the cancellation of a license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card to the issuing authority, together
with information that the license, temporary instruction permit, or
identification card is now issued in this state. The Registrar or a deputy
registrar shall destroy any such license, temporary instruction permit, or
identification card that is not returned to the issuing authority.
      (3)   No person shall possess more than one valid license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card at any time.
(R.C. § 4507.02(A)(2))
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4507.99)
§ 335.03 DRIVING WITH TEMPORARY INSTRUCTION PERMIT.
   (A)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under Ohio R.C.
4507.05(A) shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking
in violation of the conditions established under Ohio R.C. 4507.05(A).
   (B)   Except as provided in division (C) below, no holder of a temporary
instruction permit that is issued under Ohio R.C. 4507.05(A) and that is issued
on or after 7-1-1998, and who has not attained the age of 18 years, shall
operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used
by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the hours of
midnight and 6:00 a.m.
   (C)   The holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under Ohio R.C.
4507.05(A) on or after 7-1-1998, who has not attained the age of 18 years, may
operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used
by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the hours of
midnight and 6:00 a.m. if, at the time of such operation, the holder is
accompanied by the holder’s parent, guardian or custodian, and the parent,
guardian or custodian holds a current valid driver’s or commercial driver’s
license issued by the state, is actually occupying a seat beside the permit
holder, and does not have a prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine as provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.19
(A).
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4507.05(F), (I))
§ 335.035 DRIVING WITH PROBATIONARY LICENSE.
   (A)   (1)   (a)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held
the license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a
highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. unless
the holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
         (b)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held the
license for 12 months or longer shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless the
holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
      (2)   (a)   Subject to division (C)(1) below, division (A)(1)(a) above
does not apply to the holder of a probationary driver’s license who is doing
either of the following:
            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours of midnight and 6:
00 a.m.; provided that, the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession
written documentation from the holder’s employer;
            2.   Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the
school the holder attends between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m.; provided
that, the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession written documentation
from an appropriate official of the school; or
            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious event between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m.; provided that, the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official
affiliated with the event.
         (b)   Division (A)(1)(b) above does not apply to the holder of a
probationary driver’s license who is doing either of the following:
            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m.; provided that, the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession
written documentation from the holder’s employer;
            2.   Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the
school the holder attends between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.;
provided that, the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession written
documentation from an appropriate official of the school; or
            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious event between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.; provided that, the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official
affiliated with the event.
      (3)   An employer, school official or official affiliated with a
religious event is not liable in damages in a civil action for any injury,
death or loss to person or property that allegedly arises from, or is related
to, the fact that the employer, school official or official affiliated with a
religious event provided the holder of a probationary driver’s license with the
written documentation described in division (A)(2) above. The Registrar of
Motor Vehicles shall make available at no cost a form to serve as the written
documentation described in division (A)(2) above, and employers, school
officials, officials affiliated with religious events and holders of
probationary driver’s licenses may utilize that form or may choose to utilize
any other written documentation to meet the requirements of that division.
      (4)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held the
license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking with more than one person who is not a family member
occupying the vehicle unless the probationary license holder is accompanied by
the probationary license holder’s parent, guardian or custodian.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of divisions (A)(1)(a) or
(A)(1)(b) below if, at the time of the violation, an emergency existed that
required the holder of the probationary driver’s license to operate a motor
vehicle in violation of divisions (A)(1)(a) or (A)(1)(b) above or the holder
was an emancipated minor.
   (C)   (1)   If a person is issued a probationary driver’s license prior to
attaining the age of 17 years and the person pleads guilty to, is convicted of,
or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a moving violation
during the six-month period commencing on the date on which the person is
issued the probationary driver’s license, the court with jurisdiction over the
violation may order that the holder must be accompanied by the holder’s parent
or guardian whenever the holder is operating a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking for a period not to exceed six months or the date the holder
attains the age of 17 years, whichever occurs first.
      (2)   Any person who is subject to the operating restrictions established
under division (C)(1) above as a result of a first moving violation may
petition the court for driving privileges without being accompanied by the
holder’s parent or guardian during the period of time determined by the court
under that division. In granting the driving privileges, the court shall
specify the purposes of the privileges and shall issue the person appropriate
forms setting forth the privileges granted. If a person is convicted of, pleads
guilty to, or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a second or
subsequent moving violation, the court with jurisdiction over the violation may
terminate any driving privileges previously granted under this division (C)(2).
      (3)   No person shall violate any operating restriction imposed under
divisions (C)(1) or (C)(2) above.
   (D)   No holder of a probationary license shall operate a motor vehicle upon
a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking unless the total number of occupants of the vehicle
does not exceed the total number of occupant restraining devices originally
installed in the motor vehicle by its manufacturer, and each occupant of the
vehicle is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted
occupant restraining device.
   (E)   A restricted license may be issued to a person who is 14 or 15 years
of age under proof of hardship satisfactory to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.
   (F)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether each occupant of the motor vehicle is wearing all of the
available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device as
required by division (D) above, or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket,
citation or summons if that requirement has been or is being violated, or for
causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation
of that requirement.
   (G)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of divisions (A)(1)(a) or (A)(1)(b) above has
been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket,
citation or summons for such a violation or for causing the arrest or
commencing a prosecution of a person for such a violation.
   (H)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      FAMILY MEMBER OF A PROBATIONARY LICENSE HOLDER. Includes any of the
following:
         (a)   A spouse;
         (b)   A child or stepchild;
         (c)   A parent, stepparent, grandparent or parent-in-law;
         (d)   An aunt or uncle;
         (e)   A sibling, whether of the whole or half blood or by adoption, a
brother-in-law or a sister-in- law;
         (f)   A son or daughter of the probationary license holder’s
stepparent if the stepparent has not adopted the probationary license holder;
and
         (g)   An eligible adult, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4507.05.
      MOVING VIOLATION. Any violation of any statute or ordinance that
regulates the operation of vehicles on the highways or streets. MOVING
VIOLATION does not include a violation of Ohio R.C. 4513.263 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of any statute or ordinance
regulating pedestrians or the parking of vehicles, vehicle size or load
limitations, vehicle fitness requirements or vehicle registration.
      OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
4513.263.
   (I)   Whoever violates divisions (A)(1), (A)(4), (C)(3) or (D) above is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4507.071(B) - (J))
§ 335.04 CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Display or cause or permit to be displayed, or possess any
identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit
knowing the same to be fictitious, or to have been canceled, suspended or
altered;
      (2)   Lend to a person not entitled thereto, or knowingly permit a person
not entitled thereto to use any identification card, driver’s or commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver’s license
temporary instruction permit issued to the person so lending or permitting the
use thereof;
      (3)   Display, or represent as one’s own, any identification card,
driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit or
commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit not issued to the
person so displaying the same;
      (4)   Fail to surrender to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, upon the
Registrar’s demand, any identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit that has been suspended or canceled; and
      (5)   In any application for an identification card, driver's or
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit or commercial
driver's license temporary instruction permit or any renewal, reprint, or
duplicate thereof, knowingly conceal a material fact or present any physician's
statement required under R.C. § 4507.08 or 4507.081 when knowing the same to be
false or fictitious.
   (B)   Whoever violates any division of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.30)
§ 335.05 OWNER OR OPERATOR ALLOWING ANOTHER TO DRIVE.
   (A)   No person shall permit a motor vehicle owned by the person or under
the person’s control to be driven by another if any of the following apply:
      (1)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person does not have a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit or valid non-resident driving privileges;
      (2)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or non-
resident operating privileges have been suspended or canceled under Ohio R.C.
Ch. 4510 or any other provision of the Revised Code;
      (3)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s act of driving the motor vehicle would violate any prohibition
contained in Ohio R.C. Ch. 4509;
      (4)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s act of driving would violate Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance; and
      (5)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
vehicle is the subject of an immobilization waiver order issued under R.C.
4503.235 and the other person is prohibited from operating the vehicle under
that order.
   (B)   Without limiting or precluding the consideration of any other evidence
in determining whether a violation of divisions (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4)
or (A)(5) above has occurred, it shall be prima facie evidence that the
offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the operator of the
motor vehicle owned by the offender or under the offender’s control is in a
category described in divisions (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4) or (A)(5) above
if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
divisions (A)(1), (A)(3) or (A)(5) above, the offender and the operator of the
motor vehicle reside in the same household and are related by consanguinity or
affinity;
      (2)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (A)(2) above, the offender and the operator of the motor vehicle
reside in the same household, and the offender knows or has reasonable cause to
believe that the operator has been charged with or convicted of any violation
of law or ordinance, or has committed any other act or omission, that would or
could result in the suspension or cancellation of the operator’s license,
permit or privilege; and
      (3)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (A)(4) above, the offender and the operator of the motor vehicle
occupied the motor vehicle together at the time of the offense.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of wrongful entrustment of a
motor vehicle, and shall be punished as provided in divisions (C) to (H) of
this section.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) below, whoever violates
divisions (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) above is guilty of an unclassified
misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender
shall be sentenced pursuant to §§
698.02 and
698.03 of this code of ordinances or Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28; except that,
the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be
sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(D) of this code of ordinances or Ohio R.C. 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(F)(1)(b)1. of this code of ordinances and Ohio R.C. 2929.28(A)(2)(a),
the offender may be fined up to $1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(E)(1)(c) of this code of ordinances and Ohio R.C. 2929.27(A)(3), the
offender may be ordered pursuant to §
698.02(E)(3) of this code of ordinances or Ohio R.C. 2929.27(C) to serve a term
of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete
a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect
criminal contempt under Ohio R.C. 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the
underlying case.
      (2)   (a)   If, within three years of a violation of divisions (A)(1),
(A)(2) or (A)(3) above, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been
convicted of two or more violations of divisions (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3)
above, Ohio R.C. 4511.203(A)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
         (b)   Whoever violates divisions (A)(4) or (A)(5) above is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   For any violation of this section, in addition to the penalties
imposed under this code of ordinances or Ohio R.C. Ch. 2929, the court may
impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or non-
resident operating privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)
(7), and, if the vehicle involved in the offense is registered in the name of
the offender, the court may order one of the following:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (C)(3)(b) or (C)(3)(c)
below, the court may order, for 30 days, the immobilization of the vehicle
involved in the offense and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license plates.
If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under Ohio R.C. 4503.233;
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section, Ohio R.C. 4511.203, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order, for 60 days, the
immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of
that vehicle’s license plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and
enforced under Ohio R.C. 4503.233; and
         (c)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section, Ohio R.C. 4511.203, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order the criminal
forfeiture to the state of the vehicle involved in the offense. If issued, the
order shall be issued and enforced under Ohio R.C. 4503.234.
      (4)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order for
criminal forfeiture under divisions (C)(3)(c) above is assigned or transferred
and Ohio R.C. 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in addition to or independent
of any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the offender the
value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the National Automobile
Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine imposed under this division (C)
shall be distributed in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.234(C)(2).
   (D)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under divisions
(C)(3)(a) or (C)(3)(b) above, the court shall not release the vehicle from the
immobilization before the termination of the period of immobilization ordered
unless the court is presented with current proof of financial responsibility
with respect to that vehicle.
   (E)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under division
(C)(3)(c) above, upon receipt of the order from the court, neither the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor any deputy registrar shall accept any
application for the registration or transfer of registration of any motor
vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the order. The period of denial
shall be five years after the date the order is issued, unless, during that
five-year period, the court with jurisdiction of the offense that resulted in
the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar of the
termination. If the court terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar,
the Registrar shall take all necessary measures to permit the person to
register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to transfer the
registration of the vehicle.
   (F)   This section does not apply to motor vehicle rental dealers or motor
vehicle leasing dealers, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4549.65.
   (G)   Evidence of a conviction of, plea of guilty to, or adjudication as a
delinquent child for a violation of this section shall not be admissible as
evidence in any civil action that involves the offender or delinquent child who
is the subject of the conviction, plea or adjudication and that arises from the
wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle.
   (H)   For purposes of this section, a vehicle is owned by a person if, at
the time of a violation of this section, the vehicle is registered in the
person’s name.
(ORC 4511.203)
§ 335.06 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall display the operator’s driver’s
license, or furnish satisfactory proof that the operator has a driver’s
license, upon demand of any peace officer or of any person damaged or injured
in any collision in which the licensee may be involved. When a demand is
properly made, and the operator has the operator’s driver’s license on or about
the operator’s person, the operator shall not refuse to display the license. A
person’s failure to furnish satisfactory evidence that the person is licensed
under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4507 when the person does not have the person’s license on
or about the person’s person shall be prima facie evidence of the person’s not
having obtained a driver’s license.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) below, whoever violates
this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an
unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §§
698.02 and
698.03 of this code of ordinances or Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28; except that,
the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be
sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(D) of this code of ordinances or Ohio R.C. 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(F)(1)(b)1. of this code of ordinances and Ohio R.C. 2929.28(A)(2)(a),
the offender may be fined up to $1,000; and notwithstanding §
698.02(E)(1)(c) of this code of ordinances and Ohio R.C. 2929.27(A)(3), the
offender may be ordered pursuant to §
698.02(E)(3) of this code of ordinances or Ohio R.C. 2929.27(C) to serve a term
of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete
a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect
criminal contempt under Ohio R.C. 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the
underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section,
Ohio R.C. 4507.35, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the
offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 4507.35)
§ 335.07 DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OR WITHOUT PROOF OF FINANCIAL
RESPONSIBILITY OR IN VIOLATION OF LICENSE RESTRICTIONS. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 335.07 was repealed as part of the 2003-B updating and revision of
this code of ordinances because substantially equivalent state law (Ohio R.C.
4507.02(B) - (H)) was repealed by the Ohio General Assembly. See §§
335.071 through
335.075 for current provisions.)
§ 335.071 DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR IN VIOLATION OF LICENSE RESTRICTION.
   (A)   Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2) below, division (B) below, §
335.074 of this code of ordinances and in Ohio R.C. 4510.111 and 4510.16, no
person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or non-resident
operating privilege has been suspended under any provision of the Revised Code,
other than Ohio R.C. Ch. 4509, or under any applicable law in any other
jurisdiction in which the person’s license or permit was issued shall operate
any motor vehicle upon the public roads and highways or upon any public or
private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking
within the municipality during the period of suspension unless the person is
granted limited driving privileges and is operating the vehicle in accordance
with the terms of the limited driving privileges.
      (2)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in the municipality in violation of any restriction of the person’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit imposed under Ohio R.C.
4506.10(D) or 4507.14.
      (3)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-
certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a non-
certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth and Social Security number of a person charged with a
violation of divisions (A)(1) or (A)(2) above may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under suspension at the
time of the alleged violation of division (A)(1) above or the person operated a
motor vehicle in violation of a restriction at the time of the alleged
violation of division (A)(2) above. The person charged with a violation of
divisions (A)(1) or (A)(2) above may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie
evidence.
      (4)   (a)   Whoever violates divisions (A)(1) or (A)(2) above is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court may impose upon the offender a
class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or non-resident
operating privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(7).
         (b)   1.   Except as provided in divisions (A)(4)(b)2. or (A)(4)(b)3.
below, the court, in addition to any other penalty that it imposes on the
offender and if the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if, within
three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, Ohio R.C. 4510.11, 4510.111 or
4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to or independent of any other sentence that it imposes upon the
offender, may order the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense
for 30 days and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license plates for 30 days in
accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.233.
            2.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this section, or any combination of
two violations of this section, Ohio R.C. 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a
substantially similar municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to any other
sentence that it imposes on the offender, may order the immobilization of the
vehicle involved in the offense for 60 days and the impoundment of that
vehicle’s license plates for 60 days in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.233.
            3.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section, or any
combination of three or more violations of this section or Ohio R.C. 4510.11,
4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a substantially similar municipal ordinance, the
court, in addition to any other sentence that it imposes on the offender, may
order the criminal forfeiture of the vehicle involved in the offense to the
state.
      (5)   Any order for immobilization and impoundment under this section
shall be issued and enforced under Ohio R.C. 4503.233 and 4507.02, as
applicable. The court shall not release a vehicle from immobilization ordered
under this section unless the court is presented with current proof of
financial responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
      (6)   Any order of criminal forfeiture under this section shall be issued
and enforced under Ohio R.C. 4503.234. Upon receipt of the copy of the order
from the court, neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor a deputy registrar
shall accept any application for the registration or transfer of registration
of any motor vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the declaration of
forfeiture. The period of registration denial shall be five years after the
date of the order, unless, during that period, the court having jurisdiction of
the offense that led to the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the
registrar of the termination. The registrar then shall take necessary measures
to permit the person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to
transfer registration of the vehicle.
      (7)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01. If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
698.02(F) of this code of ordinances or Ohio R.C. 2929.28 in an amount not
exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision
that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s operation of the
vehicle before, during or after committing the offense for which the offender
is sentenced under this section.
(ORC 4510.11)
   (b)   Driving under suspension in violation of other provisions.
      (1)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in the municipality whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license
has been suspended pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2151.354, 2151.87, 2935.27, 3123.58,
4301.99, 4510.032, 4510.22 or 4510.33, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
      (2)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-
certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a non-
certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth and Social Security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (B)(1) above may be admitted into evidence as prima facie
evidence that the license of the person was under suspension at the time of the
alleged violation of division (B)(1) above. The person charged with a violation
of division (B)(1) above may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) above is guilty of driving under
suspension and shall be punished as provided in divisions (B)(3)(a) or division
(B)(3)(b) below.
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3)(b) below, the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. The offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §§
698.02 and
698.03 of this code of ordinances or Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28; except that,
the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be
sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to Section 698.02(d) or
Ohio R.C. 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(F)(1)(b)1. of this code of ordinances and Ohio R.C. 2929.28(A)(2)(a),
the offender may be fined up to $1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(E)(1)(c) of this chapter and Ohio R.C. 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may
be ordered pursuant to §
698.02(E)(3) of this chapter or Ohio R.C. 2929.27(C) to serve a term of
community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a
term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect
criminal contempt under Ohio R.C. 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the
underlying case.
         (b)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously
was convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (B)(1)
above, or any combination of two or more violations of division (B)(1) above,
Ohio R.C. 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, and the offender
shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in
Ohio R.C. 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial
responsibility, then in addition to any other penalties provided by law, the
court may order restitution pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.28 in an amount not
exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision
that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s operation of the
vehicle before, during or after committing the offense for which the offender
is sentenced under this section.
(ORC 4510.111)
   (C)   Repeat traffic offender; point system suspension. Any person whose
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or non-resident operating
privileges are suspended as a repeat traffic offender under Ohio R.C. 4510.037
and who, during the suspension, operates any motor vehicle upon any public
roads and highways is guilty of driving under a 12-point suspension, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to a
minimum term of three days in jail. No court shall suspend the first three days
of jail time imposed pursuant to this division (C).
(ORC 4510.037(J))
   (D)   Affirmative defense. It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution
brought under this section that the alleged offender drove under suspension,
without a valid permit or driver's or commercial driver's license, or in
violation of a restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no
other person was reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(ORC 4510.04)
§ 335.072 OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE OR MOTORCYCLE WITHOUT VALID LICENSE.
   (A)   (1)   No person, except those expressly exempted under Ohio R.C.
4507.03, 4507.04 and 4507.05, shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public
road or highway or any public or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking in the municipality unless the person
has a valid driver’s license issued under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4507 or a commercial
driver’s license issued under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4506.
      (2)   No person, except a person expressly exempted under Ohio R.C.
4507.03, 4507.04 and 4507.05, shall operate any motorcycle upon a public road
or highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking in the municipality unless the person has a valid
license as a motorcycle operator that was issued upon application by the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4507. The license shall be in
the form of an endorsement, as determined by the Registrar, upon a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, if the person has a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle, or in the form of a restricted
license as provided in Ohio R.C. 4507.14, if the person does not have a valid
license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle.
   (B)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-
certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a non-
certified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth and Social Security number of a person charged with a
violation of divisions (A)(1) or (A)(2) above may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the person did not have either a valid driver’s or
commercial driver’s license at the time of the alleged violation of division
(A)(1) above or a valid license as a motorcycle operator either in the form of
an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or a restricted
license at the time of the alleged violation of division (A)(2) above. The
person charged with a violation of divisions (A)(1) or (A)(2) above may offer
evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
or motorcycle without a valid license and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   If the trier of fact finds that the offender never has held a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license issued by the state or any other
jurisdiction, or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the
offender, if the offender has never held a valid license as a motorcycle
operator, either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or in the form of a restricted license, except as otherwise
provided in this division (C)(1), the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor.
When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be
sentenced pursuant to §§
698.02 and
698.03 of this code of ordinances or Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28; except that,
the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be
sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(D) of this code of ordinances or Ohio R.C. 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(F)(1)(b)1. of this code of ordinances and Ohio R.C. 2929.28(A)(2)(a),
the offender may be fined up to $1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(E)(1)(c) of this code of ordinances and Ohio R.C. 2929.27(A)(3), the
offender may be ordered pursuant to §
698.02(E)(3) of this code of ordinances or Ohio R.C. 2929.27(B) to serve a term
of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete
a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect
criminal contempt under Ohio R.C. 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the
underlying case. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to any violation of this section or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the offender, the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license bearing the motorcycle
endorsement or the offender’s restricted license was expired at the time of the
offense, except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(2), the offense is a
minor misdemeanor. If within three years of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of
this section or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is
a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (D)   The court shall not impose a license suspension for a first violation
of this section or if more than three years have passed since the offender’s
last violation of Ohio R.C. 4510.12, this section or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (E)   If the offender is sentenced under division (C)(2) above, if within
three years of the offense the offender previously was convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one or more violations of Ohio R.C. 4510.12, this section, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance within the past three years, and
if the offender’s license was expired for more than six months at the time of
the offense, the court may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s
driver license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license or non-resident operating privilege from the range
specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(7).
(ORC 4510.12)
§ 335.073 DRIVING UNDER O.V.I. SUSPENSION.
   (A)   No person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
non-resident operating privilege has been suspended under Ohio R.C. 4511.19,
4511.191 or 4511.196 or under Ohio R.C. 4510.07 for a conviction of a violation
of a municipal O.V.I. ordinance shall operate any motor vehicle upon the public
roads or highways within the municipality during the period of the suspension.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of driving under O.V.I.
suspension. The court shall sentence the offender under Ohio R.C. Ch. 2929,
subject to the differences authorized or required by this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (B)(2) or (B)(3) below,
driving under O.V.I. suspension is a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court
shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         (a)   A mandatory jail term of three consecutive days. The three-day
term shall be imposed, unless, subject to division (C) below, the court instead
imposes a sentence of not less than 30 consecutive days of house arrest with
electronic monitoring. A period of house arrest with electronic monitoring
imposed under this division shall not exceed six months. If the court imposes a
mandatory three-day jail term under this division (B)(1), the court may impose
a jail term in addition to that term; provided that, in no case shall the
cumulative jail term imposed for the offense exceed six months;
         (b)   A fine of not less than $250 and not more than $1,000;
         (c)   A license suspension under division (E) below;
         (d)   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, immobilization for 30 days of the
offender’s vehicle and impoundment for 30 days of the identification license
plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment shall be
issued and enforced in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.233.
      (2)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section or one
equivalent offense, driving under O.V.I. suspension is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         (a)   A mandatory jail term of ten consecutive days. Notwithstanding
the jail terms provided in Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, the court may sentence
the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The ten-day
mandatory jail term shall be imposed unless, subject to division (C) below, the
court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 90 consecutive days of house
arrest with electronic monitoring. The period of house arrest with electronic
monitoring shall not exceed one year;
         (b)   Notwithstanding the fines provided for in Ohio R.C. Ch. 2929, a
fine of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500;
         (c)   A license suspension under division (E) below;
         (d)   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, immobilization of the offender’s
vehicle for 60 days and the impoundment for 60 days of the identification
license plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment
shall be issued and enforced in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.233.
      (3)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section
or two or more equivalent offenses, driving under O.V.I. suspension is a
misdemeanor. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         (a)   A mandatory jail term of 30 consecutive days. Notwithstanding
the jail terms provided in Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, the court may sentence
the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The court shall
not sentence the offender to a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring
in lieu of the mandatory portion of the jail term;
         (b)   Notwithstanding the fines set forth in Ohio R.C. Ch. 2929, a
fine of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500;
         (c)   A license suspension under division (E) below;
         (d)   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, criminal forfeiture to the state
of the offender’s vehicle. The order of criminal forfeiture shall be issued and
enforced in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.234. If title to a motor vehicle
that is subject to an order for criminal forfeiture under this division is
assigned or transferred and Ohio R.C. 4503.234(B)(2) or (3) applies, the court
may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of
the National Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine so
imposed shall be distributed in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.234(C)(2).
   (C)   (1)   No court shall impose an alternative sentence of house arrest
with electronic monitoring under divisions (B)(1) or (B)(2) above unless,
within 60 days of the date of sentencing, the court issues a written finding on
the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail where the
offender is required to serve the jail term imposed, the offender will not be
able to begin serving that term within the 60-day period following the date of
sentencing.
      (2)   An offender sentenced under this section to a period of house
arrest with electronic monitoring shall be permitted work release during that
period.
   (D)   Fifty percent of any fine imposed by a court under divisions (B)(1),
(B)(2) or (B)(3) above shall be deposited into the Municipal Indigent Drivers’
Alcohol Treatment Fund under the control of that court, as created by the
municipality pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4511.191(H).
   (E)   In addition to or independent of all other penalties provided by law
or ordinance, the trial judge of any court of record or the mayor of a mayor’s
court shall impose on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of this section a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or permit or non-resident operating privilege
from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02 (A)(7).
      (1)   When permitted as specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.021, if the court
grants limited driving privileges during a suspension imposed under this
section, the privileges shall be granted on the additional condition that the
offender must display restricted license plates, issued under Ohio R.C.
4503.231, on the vehicle driven subject to the privileges, except as provided
in Ohio R.C. 4503.231(B).
      (2)   A suspension of a commercial driver’s license under this section
shall be concurrent with any period of suspension or disqualification under
Ohio R.C. 3123.58 or 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from
holding a commercial driver’s license under Ohio R.C. 4506.16 shall be issued a
driver’s license under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4507 during the period for which the
commercial driver’s license was suspended under this section, and no person
whose commercial driver’s license is suspended under this section shall be
issued a driver’
   (F)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01. If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
698.02(F) of this code of ordinances or Ohio R.C. 2929.28 in an amount not
exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision
that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s operation of the
vehicle before, during or after committing the offense that is a misdemeanor of
the first degree under this section for which the offender is sentenced.
   (G)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ELECTRONIC MONITORING. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2929.01.
      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE. Any of the following:
         (a)   A violation of a municipal ordinance, law of another state, or
law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to division (A)
above;
         (b)   A violation of a former law of the state that was substantially
equivalent to division (A) above.
      JAIL. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2929.01.
      MANDATORY JAIL TERM. The mandatory term in jail of three, ten or 30
consecutive days that must be imposed under divisions (B)(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3)
above upon an offender convicted of a violation of division (A) above and in
relation to which all of the following apply:
         (a)   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
must be served in a jail; and
         (b)   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
cannot be suspended, reduced or otherwise modified pursuant to any provision of
the Ohio Revised Code.
(ORC 4510.14)
   (H)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(ORC 4510.04)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see Ohio R.C. 4510.161
§ 335.074 DRIVING UNDER FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LAW SUSPENSION OR
CANCELLATION; DRIVING UNDER A NON-PAYMENT OF JUDGMENT SUSPENSION.
   (A)   No person, whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or temporary
instruction permit or non- resident’s operating privilege has been suspended or
canceled pursuant to Ohio R.C. Ch. 4509, shall operate any motor vehicle within
the municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the person to
be operated by another person in the municipality, during the period of the
suspension or cancellation, except as specifically authorized by Ohio R.C. Ch.
4509. No person shall operate a motor vehicle within the municipality, or
knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the person to be operated by
another person in the municipality, during the period in which the person is
required by Ohio R.C. 4509.45 to file and maintain proof of financial
responsibility for a violation of Ohio R.C. 4509.101, unless proof of financial
responsibility is maintained with respect to that vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any public
or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking in the municipality if the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or temporary instruction permit or non-resident operating privilege has
been suspended pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4509.37 or 4509.40 for non-payment of a
judgment.
   (C)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-
certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a non-
certified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth and Social Security number of a person charged with a
violation of divisions (A) or (B) above may be admitted into evidence as prima
facie evidence that the license of the person was under either a financial
responsibility law suspension at the time of the alleged violation of division
(A) above or a non- payment of judgment suspension at the time of the alleged
violation of division (B) above. The person charged with a violation of
divisions (A) or (B) above may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie
evidence.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of driving under
financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation and shall be punished
as provided in this division (D). Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty
of driving under a non-payment of judgment suspension and shall be punished as
provided in this division (D).
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(2) below, the offense
is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified
misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §§
698.02 or
698.03 of this code of ordinances or Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that
the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be
sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(D) of this chapter or Ohio R.C. 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(F)(1)(b)1. of this code of ordinances and Ohio R.C. 2929.28(A)(2)(a),
the offender may be fined up to $1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(E)(1)(c) of this chapter and Ohio R.C. 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may
be ordered pursuant to §
698.02(E)(3) of this code of ordinances or Ohio R.C. 2929.27(C) to serve a term
of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete
a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect
criminal contempt under Ohio R.C. 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the
underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously was
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section, or
any combination of two violations of this section, Ohio R.C. 4510.11, 4510.111
or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising
from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the
offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during or after committing the
offense for which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(ORC 4510.16)
   (E)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under
this section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the order of suspension resulted from the failure of the alleged
offender to respond to a financial responsibility random verification request
under Ohio R.C. 4509.101(A)(3)(c) and that, at the time of the initial
financial responsibility random verification request, the alleged offender was
in compliance with Ohio R.C. 4509.101(A)(1) as shown by proof of financial
responsibility that was in effect at the time of that request.
(ORC 4510.04)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see Ohio R.C. 4510.161
§ 335.075 FAILURE TO REINSTATE LICENSE.
   (A)   No person whose driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit or non- resident’s operating privilege has been
suspended shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public road or highway or any
public or private property after the suspension has expired unless the person
has complied with all license reinstatement requirements imposed by the court,
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles or another provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (B)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-
certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a non-
certified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth and Social Security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (A) above may be admitted into evidence as prima facie
evidence that the license of the person had not been reinstated by the person
at the time of the alleged violation of division (A) above. The person charged
with a violation of division (A) above may offer evidence to rebut this prima
facie evidence.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to reinstate a
license, and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) below, whoever violates this
section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an
unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §§
698.02 or
698.03 of this code of ordinances or Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28; except that,
the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be
sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(D) of this code of ordinances or Ohio R.C. 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(F)(1)(b)1. of this code of ordinances and Ohio R.C. 2929.28(A)(2)(a),
the offender may be fined up to $1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(E)(1)(c) of this code of ordinances and Ohio R.C. 2929.27(A)(3), the
offender may be ordered pursuant to §
698.02(E)(3) of this code of ordinances or Ohio R.C. 2929.27(C) to serve a term
of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete
a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect
criminal contempt under Ohio R.C. 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the
underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of a violation of division (A) above, the
offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two or more
violations of this section, Ohio R.C. 4510.21 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (3)   In all cases, the court may impose upon the offender a class seven
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license or non-resident
operating privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(7).
(ORC 4510.21)
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(ORC 4510.04)
§ 335.08 OPERATION OR SALE WITHOUT CERTIFICATE OF TITLE.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in the municipality a motor vehicle for which a certificate
of title is required without having that certificate in accordance with Ohio
R.C. Ch. 4505 or, if a physical certificate of title has not been issued for a
motor vehicle, operate the motor vehicle in the state knowing that the
ownership information relating to the vehicle has not been entered into the
automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common Pleas;
      (2)   Display or display for sale or sell as a dealer or acting on behalf
of a dealer, a motor vehicle without having obtained a manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate, a certificate of title or an assignment of a
certificate of title for it as provided in Ohio R.C. Ch. 4505;
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title or any certificate of
registration or license plates upon cancellation of the same by the Registrar
of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed in Ohio R.C. Ch.
4505;
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in Ohio R.C. Ch. 4505 in case of the destruction or
dismantling or change of a motor vehicle in such respect that it is not the
motor vehicle described in the certificate of title;
      (5)   Violate any rules adopted pursuant to Ohio R.C. Ch. 4505;
      (6)   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. Ch. 4505 and 4517, sell
at wholesale a motor vehicle ownership of which is not evidenced by an Ohio
certificate of title, or the current certificate of title issued for the motor
vehicle, or the manufacturer’s certificate of origin, and all title assignments
that evidence the seller’s ownership of the motor vehicle, and an odometer
disclosure statement that complies with Ohio R.C. 4505.06 and Subchapter IV of
the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act, 86 Stat. 961 (1972), 15
U.S.C. § 1981; and
      (7)   Operate in the state a motor vehicle knowing that the certificate
of title to the vehicle or ownership of the vehicle as otherwise reflected in
the automated title processing system has been canceled.
   (B)   This section does not apply to persons engaged in the business of
warehousing or transporting motor vehicles for the purpose of salvage
disposition.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $200,
imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
(ORC 4505.18)
§ 335.09 DISPLAY OF LICENSE PLATES; REGISTRATION; OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   No person who is the owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall
fail to display in plain view on the rear of the motor vehicle a license plate
that displays the distinctive number and registration mark assigned to the
motor vehicle by the Ohio Director of Public Safety, including any county
identification sticker and any validation sticker when required by and issued
under R.C. §§ 4503.19 and 4503.191. However, a commercial tractor shall display
the license plate on the front of the commercial tractor.
      (2)   The license plate shall be securely fastened so as not to swing,
and shall not be covered by any material that obstructs its visibility.
      (3)   No person to whom a temporary motor vehicle license registration
has been issued for the use of a motor vehicle under R.C. § 4503.182, and no
operator of that motor vehicle, shall fail to display the temporary motor
vehicle license registration in plain view from the rear of the vehicle either
in the rear window or on an external rear surface of the motor vehicle.
      (4)   No person shall cover a temporary motor vehicle license
registration by any material that obstructs its visibility.
(R.C. § 4503.21(A))
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided by Ohio R.C. 4503.103, 4503.107,
4503.173, 4503.41, 4503.43 and 4503.46, no person who is the owner or chauffeur
of a motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways shall
fail to file annually the application for registration or to pay the tax
therefor.
(R.C. § 4503.11(A))
   (C)   (1)   Within 30 days of becoming a resident of the state, any person
who owns a motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways
shall register the vehicle in the state. If such a person fails to register a
vehicle owned by the person, the person shall not operate any motor vehicle in
the state under a license issued by another state.
      (2)   For purposes of division (C)(1) above, RESIDENT means any person to
whom any of the following applies:
         (a)   The person maintains their principal residence in the state and
does not reside in the state as a result of the person’s active service in the
United States Armed Forces; and
         (b)   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to
be a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the Registrar under Ohio
R.C. 4507.01.
(R.C. § 4503.111(A), (C))
   (D)   Upon the transfer of ownership of a motor vehicle, the registration of
the motor vehicle expires, and the original owner immediately shall remove the
license plates from the motor vehicle, except as otherwise provided in R.C. §
4503.12.
(R.C. § 4503.12(A))
   (E)   No person shall operate or drive upon the highways of the municipality
a motor vehicle acquired from a former owner who has registered the motor
vehicle, while the motor vehicle displays the distinctive number or
identification mark assigned to it upon its original registration.
(R.C. § 4549.11(A))
   (F)   No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle and a resident of the
state shall operate or drive the motor vehicle upon the highways of the
municipality while it displays a distinctive number or identification mark
issued by or under the authority of another state, without complying with the
laws of the state relating to the registration and identification of motor
vehicles.
(R.C. § 4549.12(A))
   (G)   (1)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   The offenses established under division (A) of this section are
strict liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of
these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply
that any other offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability,
is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4503.21(B), (C))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4503.11(D))
      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   The offense established under division (G)(3)(a) of this section
is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable mental state
for purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of this offense as a strict
liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
(R.C. § 4503.111(B))
      (4)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4503.12(D))
      (5)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty of
operation of a motor vehicle bearing license plates or an identification mark
issued to another, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.11(B))
      (6)   Whoever violates division (F) of this section is guilty of illegal
operation by a resident of this state of a motor vehicle bearing the
distinctive number or identification mark issued by a foreign jurisdiction, a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4549.12(B))
§ 335.10 LICENSE PLATES TO BE UNOBSTRUCTED. (RECODIFIED)
Editor’s note:
   Sections 335.09 and 335.10 were combined as part of the 2003 updating and
revision of this code of ordinances. Please see §
335.09(G), regarding obstruction of license plates.
§ 335.11 USE OF ILLEGAL LICENSE PLATES.
   (A)   No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle upon the public roads
and highways in the municipality if it displays a license plate or a
distinctive number or identification mark that meets any of the following
criteria:
      (1)   It is fictitious;
      (2)   It is a counterfeit or an unlawfully made copy of any distinctive
number or identification mark;
      (3)   It belongs to another motor vehicle; provided that, this section
does not apply to a motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads and
highways in the municipality when the motor vehicle displays license plates
that originally were issued for a motor vehicle that previously was owned by
the same person who owns the motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads
and highways in the municipality during the 30-day period described in Ohio
R.C. 4503.12(A)(4).
   (B)   A person who fails to comply with the transfer of registration
provisions of Ohio R.C. 4503.12 and is charged with a violation of that section
shall not be charged with a violation of this section.
   (C)   Whoever violates divisions (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) above is guilty of
operating a motor vehicle bearing an invalid license plate or identification
mark, this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first
offense and a misdemeanor of the third degree on each subsequent offense.
(ORC 4549.08)
§ 335.12 FAILURE TO STOP AFTER ACCIDENT.
   (A)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision with
persons or property on a public road or highway, the operator of the motor
vehicle, having knowledge of the accident or collision, immediately shall stop
the operator’s motor vehicle at the scene of the accident or collision. The
operator shall remain at the scene of the accident or collision until the
operator has given the operator’s name and address and, if the operator is not
the owner, the name and address of the owner of that motor vehicle, together
with the registered number of that motor vehicle, to all of the following:
         (a)   Any person injured in the accident or collision;
         (b)   The operator, occupant, owner or attendant of any motor vehicle
damaged in the accident or collision; and
         (c)   The police officer at the scene of the accident or collision.
      (2)   In the event an injured person is unable to comprehend and record
the information required to be given under division (A)(1) above, the other
operator involved in the accident or collision shall notify the nearest police
authority concerning the location of the accident or collision, and the
operator’s name, address, and the registered number of the motor vehicle the
operator was operating. The operator shall remain at the scene of the accident
or collision until a police officer arrives, unless removed from the scene by
an emergency vehicle operated by a political subdivision or an ambulance.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required to be given in this section, in writing, to a
conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of failure to stop
after an accident. Except as otherwise provided in divisions (B)(2) or (B)(3)
above, failure to stop after an accident is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a
person, failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a person,
failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license or non-resident operating privilege from the range
specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six
months of suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege required by
this division (B)(4).
      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01. If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during or after
committing the offense charged under this section.
(ORC 4549.02)
§ 335.13 STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT ON OTHER THAN PUBLIC ROADS OR HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision resulting
in injury or damage to persons or property on any public or private property
other than a public road or highway, the operator of the motor vehicle, having
knowledge of the accident or collision, shall stop at the scene of the accident
or collision. Upon request of any person who is injured or damaged, or any
other person, the operator shall give that person the operator’s name and
address and, if the operator is not the owner, the name and address of the
owner of that motor vehicle, together with the registered number of that motor
vehicle, and, if available, exhibit the operator’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license.
      (2)   If the operator of the motor vehicle involved in the accident or
collision does not provide the information specified in division (A)(1) above,
the operator shall give that information, within 24 hours after the accident or
collision, to the police department of the city or village in which the
accident or collision occurred, or if it occurred outside the corporate limits
of a city or village, to the sheriff of the county in which the accident or
collision occurred.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required under division (A)(1) above, in writing, to a
conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of failure to stop
after a non-public road accident. Except as otherwise provided in divisions (B)
(2) or (B)(3) below, failure to stop after a non-public road accident is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a
person, failure to stop after a non- public road accident is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a person,
failure to stop after a non-public road accident is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license or non-resident operating privilege from the range
specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six
months of suspension of an offender’s license, permit or privilege required by
this division (B)(4).
      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01. If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense charged under this section.
(ORC 4549.021)
§ 335.14 VEHICLE ACCIDENT RESULTING IN DAMAGE TO REALTY.
   (A)   (1)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in
damage to real property, or personal property attached to real property,
legally upon or adjacent to a public road or highway immediately shall stop and
take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of the
property of that fact, of the driver’s name and address and of the registration
number of vehicle the driver is driving and, upon request and if available,
shall exhibit the driver’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license.
      (2)   If the owner or person in charge of the property cannot be located
after reasonable search, the driver of the vehicle involved in the accident
resulting in damage to the property within 24 hours after the accident, shall
forward to the Police Department of the municipality the same information
required to be given to the owner or person in control of the property and give
the location of the accident and a description of the damage insofar as it is
known.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of failure to stop
after an accident involving the property of others, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01. If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
698.02(F) of this code of ordinances or Ohio R.C. 2929.28 in an amount not
exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision
that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s operation of the
motor vehicle before, during or after committing the offense charged under this
section.
(ORC 4549.03)
§ 335.15 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES AFTER ACCIDENTS.
   (A)   If a motor vehicle accident occurs on any highway, public street or
other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel and if any
motor vehicle, cargo or personal property that has been damaged or spilled as a
result of the motor vehicle accident is blocking the highway, street or other
property or is otherwise endangering public safety, a public safety official
may do either of the following without the consent of the owner, but with the
approval of the law enforcement agency conducting any investigation of the
accident:
      (1)   Remove, or order the removal of, the motor vehicle if the motor
vehicle is unoccupied, cargo or personal property from the portion of the
highway, public street or property ordinarily used for vehicular travel on the
highway, public street or other property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel;
      (2)   If the motor vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle, allow the owner
or operator of the vehicle the opportunity to arrange for the removal of the
motor vehicle within a period of time specified by the public safety official.
If the public safety official determines that the motor vehicle cannot be
removed within the specified period of time, the public safety official shall
remove or order the removal of the motor vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) above, the Department of
Transportation, any employee of the Department of Transportation or a public
safety official who authorizes or participates in the removal of any unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo or personal property as authorized by division (A) above,
regardless of whether the removal is executed by a private towing service, is
not liable for civil damages for any injury, death or loss to person or
property that results from the removal of that unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo
or personal property. Further, except as provided in division (B)(2) below, if
a public safety official authorizes, employs or arranges to have a private
towing service remove any unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo or personal property
as authorized by division (A) above, that private towing service is not liable
for civil damages for any injury, death or loss to person or property that
results from the removal of that unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo or personal
property.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) above does not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   Any person or entity involved in the removal of an unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo or personal property pursuant to division (A) above if
that removal causes or contributes to the release of a hazardous material or to
structural damage to the roadway;
         (b)   A private towing service that was not authorized, employed or
arranged by a public safety official to remove an unoccupied motor vehicle,
cargo or personal property under this section;
         (c)   Except as provided in division (B)(2)(d) below, a private towing
service that was authorized, employed or arranged by a public safety official
to perform the removal of the unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo or personal
property but the private towing service performed the removal in a negligent
manner; or
         (d)   A private towing service that was authorized, employed or
arranged by a public safety official to perform the removal of the unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo or personal property that was endangering public safety,
but the private towing service performed the removal in a reckless manner.
   (C)   For the purpose of divisions (A) and (B) above, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2305.232.
      PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICIAL. Any of the following:
         (a)   The sheriff of the county, or the chief of a law enforcement
agency in the municipal corporation, township, port authority, conservancy
district, or township or joint police district, in which the accident occurred;
         (b)   A state highway patrol trooper;
         (c)   The chief of the fire department having jurisdiction where the
accident occurred; and
         (d)   A duly authorized subordinate acting on behalf of an official
specified in divisions (a) to (c) of this definition.
(ORC 4513.66)
   (D)   If a towing service is removing a motor vehicle, and the removal was
not authorized under Ohio R.C. 4513.60, 4513.601, 4513.61, or 4513.66, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, prior to removing the motor
vehicle, the towing service shall provide a written estimate of the price for
the removal to the operator of the motor vehicle, if requested.
   (E)   The towing service shall ensure that any estimate provided under
division (D) above includes the fees, services to be rendered and destination
of the vehicle.
   (F)   If a towing service fails to provide a written estimate as required by
this section, the towing service shall not charge fees for the towing and
storage of the motor vehicle that exceed 25% of any applicable fees established
by the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted under Ohio R.C. 4921.25(B)
(4) or, if the vehicle was towed within a municipal corporation that has
established vehicle removal and storage fees, 25% of the fees established by
the municipal corporation.
   (G)   Any storage facility that accepts towed vehicles shall conspicuously
post a notice at the entrance to the storage facility that states the
limitation on fees established under division (F) above.
(ORC 4513.68)
§ 335.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
303.99 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 337: SAFETY AND EQUIPMENT
Section
337.01   Driving unsafe vehicles; application.
337.015   Bumpers.
337.02   Lighted lights; measurement of distances and heights.
337.03   Headlights on motor vehicles and motorcycles.
337.04   Tail light; illumination of rear license plate.
337.05   Rear red reflectors.
337.06   Safety lighting on commercial vehicles.
337.07   Obscured lights on vehicles in combination.
337.08   Red light or red flag on extended loads.
337.09   Lights on parked or stopped vehicles.
337.10   Lights, emblems, and reflectors on slow-moving vehicles, farm
machinery, agricultural tractors, and animal-drawn vehicles.
337.11   Spotlight and auxiliary lights.
337.12   Cowl, fender and back-up lights.
337.13   Display of lighted lights.
337.14   Use of headlight beams.
337.15   Lights of less intensity on slow-moving vehicles.
337.16   Number of lights; limitations on flashing, oscillating or rotating
lights.
337.165   Lights and sound-producing devices on coroners’ vehicles.
337.17   Focus and aim of headlights.
337.18   Motor vehicle and motorcycle brakes.
337.19   Horn, siren and theft alarm signal.
337.20   Muffler; muffler cutout; excessive smoke, gas or noise.
337.21   Rear-view mirror; clear view to front, both sides and rear.
337.22   Windshield required; sign or poster upon windshield; windshield wiper.
337.225   Tinted glass; materials on glass.
337.23   Limited load extension on left side of passenger vehicle.
337.24   Motor vehicle stop lights.
337.25   Air cleaner required.
337.26   Snow removal equipment and lights.
337.27   Vehicles transporting preschool children.
337.28   Use of child restraints.
337.29   Ignition interlock devices. (Repealed)
337.30   Air bags.
337.31   Jake brakes prohibited.
337.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Bicycle equipment, see TRAF.
373.05 et seq.
   Collector’s vehicles, see Ohio R.C. 4513.38, 4513.41
   Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle, see GEN. OFF.
672.04
   Occupying travel trailers while in motion, see TRAF.
331.35
   See section histories for similar state law
   Snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle and all-purpose vehicle equipment, see
TRAF.
375.02 et seq
   Towing requirements; exception to size and weight restrictions, see TRAF.
339.07
   Use of stop and turn signals, see TRAF.
331.14
   Vehicles transporting explosives, see TRAF.
339.06
   Warning devices for commercial vehicles disabled upon freeways, see Ohio
R.C. 4513.28
   Wheel protectors for commercial vehicles, see TRAF.
339.05
§ 337.01 DRIVING UNSAFE VEHICLES; APPLICATION.
   (A)   No person shall drive or move, or cause or knowingly permit to be
driven or moved, on any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is
in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.02(A), (H))
§ 337.015 BUMPERS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING. The manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight
rating established for that vehicle.
      MANUFACTURER. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
      MULTIPURPOSE PASSENGER VEHICLE. A motor vehicle with motive power, except
a motorcycle, designed to carry ten persons or less, that is constructed either
on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional off-road operation.
      PASSENGER CAR. Any motor vehicle with motive power, designed for carrying
ten persons or less, except a multipurpose passenger vehicle or motorcycle.
      TRUCK. Every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers, designed
and used to carry property and having a gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000
pounds or less.
   (B)   Rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety, in accordance with
Ohio R.C. Ch. 119, shall govern the maximum bumper height or, in the absence of
bumpers and in cases where bumper height have been lowered or modified, the
maximum height to the bottom of the frame rail of any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck.
   (C)   No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in the state that does not
conform to the requirements of this section or any applicable rule adopted
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4513.021.
   (D)   No person shall modify any motor vehicle registered in the state in
such a manner as to cause the vehicle body or chassis to come in contact with
the ground, expose the fuel tank to damage from collision, or cause the wheels
to come in contact with the body under normal operation, and no person shall
disconnect any part of the original suspension system of the vehicle to defeat
the safe operation of that system.
   (E)   Nothing contained in this section or in the rules adopted pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 4513.021 shall be construed to prohibit either of the following:
      (1)   The installation upon a passenger car, multipurpose passenger
vehicle or truck registered in the state of heavy duty equipment, including
shock absorbers and overload springs; and/or
      (2)   The operation on a street or highway of a passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle, or truck registered in the state with normal
wear to the suspension system if the normal wear does not adversely affect the
control of the vehicle.
   (F)   This section and the rules adopted pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4513.021 do
not apply to any specially designed or modified passenger car, multipurpose
passenger vehicle or truck when operated off a street or highway in races and
similar events.
   (G)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.021)
Statutory reference:
   Maximum height on bumpers, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-43
§ 337.02 LIGHTED LIGHTS; MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCES AND HEIGHTS.
   (A)   Every vehicle, other than a motorized bicycle, operated upon a street
or highway within this state shall display lighted lights and illuminating
devices as required by Ohio R.C. 4513.04 through 4513.37 during all of the
following times:
      (1)   The time from sunset to sunrise;
      (2)   At any other time when, due to insufficient natural light or
unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons, vehicles and substantial objects
on the highway are not discernible at a distance of 1,000 feet ahead; and
      (3)   At any time when the windshield wipers of the vehicle are in use
because of precipitation on the windshield.
   (B)   Every motorized bicycle shall display at such times lighted lights
meeting the rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under Ohio R.C.
4511.521. No motor vehicle, during any time specified in this section, shall be
operated upon a street or highway within this state using only parking lights
as illumination.
   (C)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the distance
from which certain lamps and devices shall render objects visible, or within
which such lamps or devices shall be visible, such distance shall be measured
upon a straight level unlighted highway under normal atmospheric conditions
unless a different condition is expressly stated.
   (D)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the mounted
height of lights or devices, it shall mean from the center of such light or
device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a vehicle being operated upon a
street or highway within the state to stop the vehicle solely because the
officer observes that a violation of division (A)(3) above has been or is being
committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or summons for
a violation of that division, or causing the arrest of or commencing a
prosecution of a person for a violation of that division.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.03)
§ 337.03 HEADLIGHTS ON MOTOR VEHICLES AND MOTORCYCLES.
   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, shall be equipped
with at least two headlights with at least one near each side of the front of
the motor vehicle.
      (2)   Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one and not more
than two headlights.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.04)
§ 337.04 TAIL LIGHT; ILLUMINATION OF REAR LICENSE PLATE.
   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or
vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles shall be
equipped with at least one tail light mounted on the rear which, when lighted,
shall emit a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear,
provided that in the case of a train of vehicles only the tail light on the
rearmost vehicle need be visible from the distance specified.
      (2)   Either a tail light or a separate light shall be so constructed and
placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate, when
such registration plate is required, and render it legible from a distance of
50 feet to the rear. Any tail light, together with any separate light for
illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted
whenever the headlights or auxiliary driving lights are lighted, except where
separate lighting systems are provided for trailers for the purpose of
illuminating such registration plate.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.05)
§ 337.05 REAR RED REFLECTORS.
   (A)   (1)   Every new motor vehicle sold after 9-6-1941, and operated on a
highway, other than a commercial tractor to which a trailer or semitrailer is
attached, shall carry at the rear, either as a part of the tail lamps or
separately, two red reflectors meeting the requirements of this section; except
that, vehicles of the type mentioned in Ohio R.C. 4513.07 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance shall be equipped with reflectors as required by
the regulations provided for in that section.
      (2)   Every such reflector shall be of such size and characteristics and
so maintained as to be visible at night from all distances within 300 feet to
50 feet from such vehicle.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.06)
§ 337.06 SAFETY LIGHTING ON COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   When the Director of Public Safety prescribes and promulgates
regulations relating to clearance lights, marker lights, reflectors and stop
lights on buses, trucks, commercial tractors, trailers, semitrailers and pole
trailers, when operated upon any highway, these vehicles shall be equipped as
required by such regulations, and such equipment shall be lighted at all times
mentioned in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance; except that, clearance lights and side marker lights need not be
lighted on any such vehicle when it is operated within the municipality where
there is sufficient light to reveal any person or substantial object on the
highway at a distance of 500 feet.
      (2)   Such equipment shall be in addition to all other lights
specifically required by Ohio R.C. 4513.03 through 4513.16, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances.
      (3)   Vehicles operated under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities
Commission are not subject to this section.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.07)
§ 337.07 OBSCURED LIGHTS ON VEHICLES IN COMBINATION.
   Whenever motor and other vehicles are operated in combination during the
time that lights are required, any light, except tail lights, which by reason
of its location on a vehicle of the combination would be obscured by another
vehicle of the combination, need not be lighted, but this section does not
affect the requirement that lighted clearance lights be displayed on the front
of the foremost vehicle required to have clearance lights or that all lights
required on the rear of the rearmost vehicle of any combination shall be
lighted.
(ORC 4513.08)
§ 337.08 RED LIGHT OR RED FLAG ON EXTENDED LOADS.
   (A)   Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or
more beyond the bed or body of this vehicle, there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of the load, at the times specified in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a red light or lantern plainly
visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the sides and rear. The red
light or lantern required by this section is in addition to the red rear light
required upon every vehicle. At any other time there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of such load a red flag or cloth not less than 16 inches
square.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.09)
§ 337.09 LIGHTS ON PARKED OR STOPPED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Except in case of an emergency, whenever a vehicle is parked or
stopped upon a roadway open to traffic or a shoulder adjacent thereto, whether
attended or unattended, during the times mentioned in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, such vehicle shall be equipped
with one or more lights which shall exhibit a white or amber light on the
roadway side visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle,
and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. No lights need
be displayed upon any such vehicle when it is stopped or parked within the
Municipality where there is sufficient light to reveal any person or
substantial object within a distance of 500 feet upon such highway. Any lighted
headlights upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.
(ORC 4513.10)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
§ 337.10 LIGHTS, EMBLEMS, AND REFLECTORS ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES, FARM
MACHINERY, AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS, AND ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      BOAT TRAILER. Means any vehicle designed and used exclusively to
transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a
marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of no more
than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
      SLOW-MOVING VEHICLE and SMV. Mean a boat trailer, unit of farm machinery,
road construction machinery, or other machinery designed by the manufacturer to
operate at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less. The term does not include a
bicycle, motorized bicycle, electric bicycle, or animal-drawn vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.11)
   (B)   Generally.
      (1)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall operate
either of the following vehicles unless it is equipped with and displays the
lamps described in division (B)(2) of this section:
         (a)   A vehicle not specifically required to be equipped with lamps or
other lighting devices by R.C. §§ 4513.03 to 4513.10;
         (b)   A vehicle referred to in R.C. § 4513.02(G).
      (2)   Vehicles described in division (B)(1) of this section shall be
equipped with both of the following:
         (a)   At least one lamp displaying a white light visible from a
distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the vehicle;
         (b)   Two lamps displaying red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the vehicle, or as an alternative, one lamp
displaying a red light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to
the rear and two red reflectors visible from all distances of 600 feet to 100
feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams of headlamps.
      (3)   (a)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall
operate a multi- wheel agricultural tractor model year 2001 or earlier on a
street or highway unless it is equipped with and displays reflectors and
illuminated amber lamps so that the extreme left and right projections of the
tractor are indicated by all of the following:
            1.   Flashing lamps displaying amber light, visible to the front
and the rear. The lamps need not flash simultaneously and need not flash in
conjunction with any directional signals of the tractor.
            2.   Amber reflectors, all visible to the front;
            3.   Red reflectors, all visible to the rear.
         (b)   Rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under R.C. §
4513.111 governing the lamps and reflectors described in division (B)(3)(a) of
this section and their placement correlate with and, as far as possible,
conform with paragraphs 4.1.4.1, 4.1.7.1, and 4.1.7.2 respectively of the
American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S279.10 OCT 98,
Lighting and Marking of Agricultural Equipment on Highways.
      (4)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall operate a
unit of farm machinery model year 2002 or later on a street or highway unless
it is equipped with and displays markings and illuminated lamps that meet or
exceed the lighting, illumination, and marking standards and specifications
that are applicable to that type of farm machinery for the unit's model year
specified in the American society of agricultural engineers standard ANSI/ASAE
S279.10 OCT 98, lighting and marking of agricultural equipment on highways.
      (5)   Any unit of farm machinery designed by its manufacturer to operate
at a speed of 25 miles per hour or greater or any SMV may be equipped with and
display a red flashing light that is visible from a distance of not less than
1,000 feet to the rear at all times specified in R.C. § 4513.03. When a double-
faced light is used, it shall display amber light to the front and red light to
the rear.
      (6)   Lights and reflectors required under divisions (B)(3) and (B)(4) of
this section and authorized under division (B)(5) of this section are in
addition to other lights required or permitted by this division (B) or R.C. §
4513.17.
      (7)   The Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt rules in accordance
R.C. Chapter 119 Code that establish standards and specifications for lamps and
reflectors required or authorized by this section. Lamps and reflectors
required or authorized by this section shall meet those standards and
specifications.
      (8)   This division (B) does not apply to a bicycle, motorized bicycle,
electric bicycle, or animal-drawn vehicle.
      (9)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.111)
   (C)   Slow-moving vehicles.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall
operate an SMV on a street or highway as follows:
         (a)   At a speed exceeding 25 miles per hour;
         (b)   Without displaying the triangular SMV emblem mounted in
accordance with division (C)(2) of this section.
      (2)   The SMV emblem shall be mounted so as to be visible from a distance
of not less than 500 feet to the rear. In accordance with R.C. Chapter 119, the
Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt standards and specifications for the
design and position of mounting the SMV emblem. The standards and
specifications for the SMV emblem correlate with and, so far as possible,
conform with those approved by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers.
      (3)   A person may operate an SMV on a street or highway without
displaying the triangular SMV emblem when any of the following apply:
         (a)   The SMV is being used in actual construction and maintenance
work in an area guarded by a flagperson, or where flares are used.
         (b)   The SMV is operating or traveling within the limits of a
construction area designated by the Ohio Director of Transportation, a city
engineer, or the county engineer of the several counties, when such
construction area is marked in accordance with requirements of the Ohio
Director of Transportation and the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices,
as set forth in R.C. § 4511.09.
      (4)   No person shall display an SMV emblem on any of the following:
         (a)   Any vehicle not required to use the SMV emblem by this division
(C) or R.C. § 4513.113 or 4513.114;
         (b)   An SMV being transported upon any other vehicle;
         (c)   Any stationary object on the highway.
      (5)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate an SMV, except a unit
designed to be completely mounted on a primary power unit that is manufactured
or assembled on or after April 1, 1966, unless it is equipped with an SMV
emblem mounting device.
      (6)   Whoever violates this division (C) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.112)
   (D)   Farm machinery and agricultural tractors.
      (1)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate on a street or
highway any unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the unit displays both
of the following:
         (a)   The SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. § 4513.112(B);
         (b)   A speed identification symbol that does both of the following:
            1.   Meets the specifications contained in the American Society of
Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, Agricultural Equipment:
Speed Identification Symbol (SIS);
            2.   Indicates the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the
unit of farm machinery is designed by its manufacturer to operate.
      (2)   No person operating a tractor on a street or highway that is
designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per
hour and that is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit of farm machinery
while operating at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour shall fail to display
both of the following on the unit of farm machinery:
         (a)   The SMV emblem;
         (b)   The speed identification symbol that matches the speed
identification symbol required to be displayed on the agricultural tractor.
      (3)   No person shall operate an agricultural tractor that is designed by
its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless
the person possesses documentation published or provided by the manufacturer
indicating the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the manufacturer
designed the agricultural tractor to operate.
      (4)   Whoever violates this division (D) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.113)
   (E)   Animal-drawn vehicles.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (E)(4) of this section, no
person shall operate an animal-drawn vehicle on a street or highway unless it
is equipped with and displays, at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, both
of the following:
         (a)   At least one lamp displaying a white light visible from a
distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the animal- drawn vehicle;
         (b)   Two lamps displaying red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the animal-drawn vehicle, or as an
alternative, one lamp displaying a red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear and two red reflectors visible from all
distances of 600 feet to one hundred feet to the rear when illuminated by the
lawful lower beams of headlamps.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (E)(4) of this section, no
person shall operate an animal-drawn vehicle on a street or highway unless it
is equipped with and displays, at all times, all of the following:
         (a)   One yellow flashing lamp displaying yellow light that is visible
from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet and that is mounted in either of
the following positions:
            1.   On the top most portion of the rear of the animal-drawn
vehicle;
            2.   On the top of the animal-drawn vehicle.
         (b)   At least one of the following:
            1.   An SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. § 4513.112(B);
            2.   Micro-prism reflective tape that is visible from a distance of
not less than 500 feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams
of headlamps;
            3.   Both an SMV emblem and micro-prism reflective tape, as
specified in this division.
         (c)   Lamps and micro- prism reflective tape required by this section
shall meet standards and specifications adopted by the Ohio Director of Public
Safety under R.C. § 4513.114.
      (3)   The Ohio Director of Public Safety, in accordance with R.C. Chapter
119, shall adopt rules establishing standards and specifications for the
position and mounting of the lamps and micro-prism reflective tape required by
R.C. § 4513.114. The rules permit the micro-prism reflective tape to be red,
amber, white, or silver in color.
      (4)   (a)   Divisions (E)(1) and (E)(2) of this section do not apply to
the operator of animal-drawn agricultural equipment who is not transporting any
livestock or a person other than the operator.
         (b)   No operator described in division (E)(4)(a) of this section
shall operate animal-drawn agricultural equipment unless it is equipped with
and displays, at all times, the SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. §
4513.112(B).
         (c)   As used in division (E)(4) of this section, “animal-drawn
agricultural equipment” means equipment drawn by the muscular power of an
animal that is used solely for agricultural purposes. “Animal-drawn
agricultural equipment” includes any of the following:
            1.   A plow;
            2.   A manure spreader;
            3.   A thresher.
      (5)   Whoever violates this division (E) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.114)
   (F)   Strict liability offenses. The offenses established under this section
are strict liability offenses, and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The
designation of these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be
construed to imply that any other offense, for which there is no specified
degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4513.115)
§ 337.11 SPOTLIGHT AND AUXILIARY LIGHTS.
   (A)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one
spotlight and every lighted spotlight shall be so aimed and used upon
approaching another vehicle that no part of the high-intensity portion of the
beam will be directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side
of the vehicle, nor more than 100 feet ahead of the vehicle.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than three
auxiliary driving lights mounted on the front of the vehicle. Any such lights
which do not conform to the specifications for auxiliary driving lights and the
regulations for their use prescribed by the Director of Public Safety shall not
be used.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.12)
§ 337.12 COWL, FENDER AND BACK-UP LIGHTS.
   (A)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with side cowl or fender
lights which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with lights on each side thereof
which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
      (3)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with back-up lights, either
separately or in combination with another light. No back-up lights shall be
continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.13)
§ 337.13 DISPLAY OF LIGHTED LIGHTS.
   (A)   At all times mentioned in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, at least two lighted lights shall be displayed,
one near each side of the front of every motor vehicle, except when such
vehicle is parked subject to the regulations governing lights on parked
vehicles.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.14)
§ 337.14 USE OF HEADLIGHT BEAMS.
   (A)   Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or shoulder
adjacent thereto during the times specified in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the driver shall use a
distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and of
sufficient intensity to reveal persons, vehicles and substantial objects at a
safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following requirements.
      (1)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle,
such driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed that
the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming driver.
      (2)   Every new motor vehicle registered in the state which has multiple-
beam road lighting equipment shall be equipped with a beam indicator, which
shall be lighted whenever the uppermost distribution of light from the
headlights is in use, and shall not otherwise be lighted. This indicator shall
be so designed and located that, when lighted, it will be readily visible
without glare to the driver of the vehicle.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.15)
§ 337.15 LIGHTS OF LESS INTENSITY ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES.
   (A)   Any motor vehicle may be operated under the conditions specified in
Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance when it is
equipped with two lighted lights upon the front thereof capable of revealing
persons and substantial objects 75 feet ahead, in lieu of lights required in
Ohio R.C. 4513.14 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, provided
that such vehicle shall not be operated at a speed in excess of 20 miles per
hour.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.16)
§ 337.16 NUMBER OF LIGHTS; LIMITATIONS ON FLASHING, OSCILLATING OR ROTATING
LIGHTS.
   (A)   Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlights is also equipped
with any auxiliary lights or spotlight or any other light on the front thereof
projecting a beam of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower, not more than a
total of five of any such lights on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at
any one time when the vehicle is upon a highway.
   (B)   Any lighted light or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle, other
than headlights, spotlights, signal lights or auxiliary driving lights, that
projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower shall be
so directed that no part of the beam will strike the level of the roadway on
which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than 75 feet from the vehicle.
   (C)   (1)   Flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles, except as a
means for indicating a right or a left turn, or in the presence of a vehicular
traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, or overtaking or passing.
      (2)   The prohibition in division (C)(1) of this section does not apply
to any of the following:
         (a)   Emergency vehicles, road service vehicles servicing or towing a
disabled vehicle, stationary waste collection vehicles actively collecting
garbage, refuse, trash, or recyclable materials on the roadside, rural mail
delivery vehicles, vehicles as provided in R.C. § 4513.182, highway maintenance
vehicles, and similar equipment operated by state or local authorities,
provided such vehicles are equipped with and display, when used on a street or
highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights, a flashing,
oscillating, or rotating amber light;
         (b)   Vehicles or machinery permitted by R.C. § 4513.111 to have a
flashing red light;
         (c)   Farm machinery and vehicles escorting farm machinery, provided
such machinery and vehicles are equipped with and display, when used on a
street or highway, a flashing, oscillating, or rotating amber light. Farm
machinery also may display the lights described in R.C. § 4513.111.
         (d)   A funeral hearse or funeral escort vehicle, provided that the
funeral hearse or funeral escort vehicle is equipped with and displays, when
used on a street or highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights,
a flashing, oscillating, or rotating purple or amber light.
         (e)   A vehicle being used for emergency preparedness, response, and
recovery activities, as those terms are defined in R.C. § 5502.21, that is
equipped with and displays, when used on a street or highway for the special
purpose necessitating such lights, a flashing, oscillating, or rotating amber
or red and white light, provided that the vehicle is being operated by a person
from one of the following and the vehicle is clearly marked with the applicable
agency's or authority's insignia:
            1.   The Ohio Emergency Management Agency;
            2.   A countywide emergency management agency established under
R.C. § 5502.26;
            3.   A regional authority for emergency management established
under R.C. § 5502.27;
            4.   A program for emergency management established under R.C. §
5502.271.
      (3)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to animal-drawn
vehicles subject to R.C. § 4513.114.
   (D)   (1)   Except a person operating a public safety vehicle, as defined in
R.C. § 4511.01(E), an emergency management agency vehicle, as described in
division (C)(2)(e) of this section, or a school bus, no person shall operate,
move, or park upon, or permit to stand within the right-of-way of any public
street or highway any vehicle or equipment that is equipped with and displaying
a flashing red or a flashing combination red and white light, or an oscillating
or rotating red light, or a combination red and white oscillating or rotating
light.
      (2)   Except a public law enforcement officer, or other person sworn to
enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state, operating a public safety
vehicle when on duty, no person shall operate, move, or park upon, or permit to
stand within the right-of-way of any street or highway any vehicle or equipment
that is equipped with, or upon which is mounted, and displaying a flashing blue
or a flashing combination blue and white light, or an oscillating or rotating
blue light, or a combination blue and white oscillating or rotating light.
   (E)   This section does not prohibit the use of warning lights required by
law or the simultaneous flashing of turn signals on disabled vehicles or on
vehicles being operated in unfavorable atmospheric conditions in order to
enhance their visibility. This section also does not prohibit the simultaneous
flashing of turn signals or warning lights whether on farm machinery or
vehicles escorting farm machinery when used on a street or highway.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.17)
§ 337.165 LIGHTS AND SOUND-PRODUCING DEVICES ON CORONERS’ VEHICLES.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a motor vehicle operated
by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator may be equipped with a
flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and siren, whistle or bell
capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of
not less than 500 feet. Such a vehicle may display the flashing, oscillating or
rotating red or blue light and may give the audible signal of the siren,
whistle or bell only when responding to a fatality or a fatal motor vehicle
accident on a street or highway and only at those locations where the stoppage
of traffic impedes the ability of the coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s
investigator to arrive at the site of the fatality.
   (B)   This section does not relieve the coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s
investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard
for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.171)
§ 337.17 FOCUS AND AIM OF HEADLIGHTS.
   (A)   No person shall use any lights mentioned in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 through
4513.18, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, upon any motor
vehicle, trailer or semitrailer unless these lights are equipped, mounted and
adjusted as to focus and aim in accordance with regulations which are
prescribed by the Director of Public Safety.
   (B)   The headlights on any motor vehicle shall comply with the headlamp
color requirements contained in Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number
108, 49 C.F.R. § 571.108. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in violation
of this division (B).
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.19)
§ 337.18 MOTOR VEHICLE AND MOTORCYCLE BRAKES.
   (A)   The following requirements govern as to brake equipment on vehicles.
      (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, when operated upon a
highway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and
to stop and hold the motor vehicle, including two separate means of applying
the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at
least two wheels. If these two separate means of applying the brakes are
connected in any way, then on such motor vehicles, manufactured or assembled
after 1-1-1942, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one part of
the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without brakes on at
least two wheels.
      (2)   Every motorcycle, when operated upon a highway shall be equipped
with at least one adequate brake, which may be operated by hand or by foot.
      (3)   Every motorized bicycle shall be equipped with brakes meeting the
rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety under Ohio R.C. 4511.521.
      (4)   When operated upon the highways, the following vehicles shall be
equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to
hold the vehicle, designed to be applied by the driver of the towing motor
vehicle from its cab, and also designed and connected so that, in case of a
breakaway of the towed vehicle, the brakes shall be automatically applied:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every trailer or
semitrailer, except a pole trailer, with an empty weight of 2,000 pounds or
more, manufactured or assembled on or after 1-1-1942;
         (b)   Every manufactured home or travel trailer with an empty weight
of 2,000 pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after 1-1-2001.
      (5)   Every watercraft trailer with a gross weight or manufacturer’s
gross vehicle weight rating of 3,000 pounds or more that is manufactured or
assembled on or after 1-1-2008, shall have separate brakes equipped with
hydraulic surge or electrically operated brakes on two wheels.
      (6)   In any combination of motor-drawn trailers or semitrailers equipped
with brakes, means shall be provided for applying the rearmost brakes in
approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing vehicle, and developing
the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at the fastest rate; or
means shall be provided for applying braking effort first on the rearmost
brakes; or both of the above means, capable of being used alternatively, may be
employed.
      (7)   Every vehicle and combination of vehicles, except motorcycles and
motorized bicycles, and except trailers and semitrailers of a gross weight of
less than 2,000 pounds, and pole trailers, shall be equipped with parking
brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is operated, under
all conditions of loading, on a surface free from snow, ice or loose material.
The parking brakes shall be capable of being applied in conformance with the
foregoing requirements by the driver’s muscular effort or by spring action or
by equivalent means. Their operation may be assisted by the service brakes or
other source of power provided that failure of the service brake actuation
system or other power assisting mechanism will not prevent the parking brakes
from being applied in conformance with the foregoing requirements. The parking
brakes shall be so designed that when once applied they shall remain applied
with the required effectiveness despite exhaustion of any source of energy or
leakage of any kind.
      (8)   The same brake drums, brake shoes and lining assemblies, brake shoe
anchors and mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism normally associated with
the wheel brake assemblies may be used for both the service brakes and the
parking brakes. If the means of applying the parking brakes and the service
brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of
any one part shall not leave the vehicle without operative brakes.
      (9)   Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn vehicles shall,
at all times and under all conditions of loading, be capable of being stopped
on a dry, smooth, level road free from loose material, upon application of the
service or foot brake, within the following specified distances, or shall be
capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate corresponding to these
distances.
         (a)   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles having brakes on all wheels
shall come to a stop in 30 feet or less from a speed of 20 miles per hour.
         (b)   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles not having brakes on all
wheels shall come to a stop in 40 feet or less from a speed of 20 miles per
hour.
      (10)   All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be
so adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect to the wheels
on opposite sides of the vehicle.
(ORC 4513.20)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
§ 337.19 HORN, SIREN AND THEFT ALARM SIGNAL.
   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle when operated upon a highway shall be
equipped with a horn which is in good working order and capable of emitting
sound audible, under normal conditions, from a distance of not less than 200
feet.
      (2)   No motor vehicle shall be equipped with, nor shall any person use
upon a vehicle, any siren, whistle or bell. Any vehicle may be equipped with a
theft alarm signal device which shall be so arranged that it cannot be used as
an ordinary warning signal. Every emergency vehicle shall be equipped with a
siren, whistle or bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal
conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet and of a type approved by
the Director of Public Safety. Such equipment shall not be used except when
such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or is in the
immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in which case
the driver of the emergency vehicle shall sound such equipment when it is
necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.21)
§ 337.20 MUFFLER; MUFFLER CUTOUT; EXCESSIVE SMOKE, GAS OR NOISE.
   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle with an internal combustion
engine shall at all times be equipped with a muffler which is in good working
order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise, and no
person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon a motor
vehicle on a highway. Every motorcycle muffler shall be equipped with baffle
plates.
      (2)   No person shall own, operate or have in the person’s possession any
motor vehicle or motorcycle equipped with a device for producing excessive
smoke or gas, or so equipped as to permit oil or any other chemical to flow
into or upon the exhaust pipe or muffler of such vehicle, or equipped in any
way to produce or emit smoke or dangerous or annoying gases from any portion of
such vehicle, other than the ordinary gases emitted by the exhaust of an
internal combustion engine under normal operation.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.22) (Ord. 222-1976, passed 9-20-1976)
§ 337.21 REAR-VIEW MIRROR; CLEAR VIEW TO FRONT, BOTH SIDES AND REAR.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle shall be equipped with a mirror so
located as to reflect to the operator a view of the highway to the rear of such
vehicle or motorcycle. Operators of vehicles and motorcycles shall have a clear
and unobstructed view to the front and to both sides of their vehicles and
motorcycles and shall have a clear view to the rear of their vehicles and
motorcycles by mirror.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.23)
§ 337.22 WINDSHIELD REQUIRED; SIGN OR POSTER UPON WINDSHIELD; WINDSHIELD WIPER.
   (A)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle on a street or highway in the
municipality, other than a motorcycle or motorized bicycle, that is not
equipped with a windshield.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle, other than a bus, with
any sign, poster or other non- transparent material upon the front windshield,
sidewings, side or rear windows of such vehicle other than a certificate or
other paper required to be displayed by law; except that, there may be in the
lower left-hand or right-hand corner of the windshield a sign, poster or decal
not to exceed four inches in height by six inches in width. No sign, poster or
decal shall be displayed in the front windshield in such a manner as to conceal
the vehicle identification number for the motor vehicle when, in accordance
with federal law, that number is located inside the vehicle passenger
compartment and so placed as to be readable through the vehicle glazing without
moving any part of the vehicle.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a passenger car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if either of
the following apply to the device:
         A.   It is a "vehicle safety technology" as defined in 49 C.F.R. §
393.5 and complies with 49 C.F.R. § 393.60(e)(1)(ii).
         B.   It does not restrict the vehicle operator's sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals, and it does not conceal the vehicle
identification number.
      (3)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a commercial car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if either of
the following apply to the device:
         A.   It is a "vehicle safety technology" as defined in 49 C.F.R. §
393.5 and complies with 49 C.F.R. § 393.60(e)(1)(ii).
         B.   It does not restrict the vehicle operator's sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals, and it is mounted not more than 8.5 inches
below the upper edge of the windshield.
   (C)   The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device
for cleaning rain, snow or other moisture from the windshield. The device shall
be maintained in good working order and so constructed as to be controlled or
operated by the operator of the vehicle.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.24)
§ 337.225 TINTED GLASS; MATERIALS ON GLASS.
   (A)   No person shall operate, on any highway or other public or private
property open to the public for vehicular travel or parking, lease or rent any
motor vehicle that is registered in the state unless the motor vehicle conforms
to the requirements concerning tinted glass and reflectorized material of Ohio
R.C. 4513.241 and of any applicable rule adopted under that section.
   (B)   No person shall install in or on any motor vehicle any glass or other
material that fails to conform to the requirements of Ohio R.C. 4513.241 or of
any rule adopted under that section.
   (C)   (1)   No used motor vehicle dealer or new motor vehicle dealer, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 4517.01, shall sell any motor vehicle that fails to
conform to the requirements of Ohio R.C. 4513.241 or of any rule adopted under
that section.
      (2)   No manufacturer, remanufacturer or distributor, as defined in Ohio
R.C. 4517.01, shall provide to a motor vehicle dealer licensed under Ohio R.C.
Ch. 4517 or to any other person, a motor vehicle that fails to conform to the
requirements of Ohio R.C. 4513.241 or of any rule adopted under that section.
   (D)   No reflectorized materials shall be permitted upon or in any front
windshield, side windows, sidewings or rear window.
   (E)   This section does not apply to the manufacturer’s tinting or glazing
of motor vehicle windows or windshields that is otherwise in compliance with or
permitted by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard #205.
   (F)   With regard to any side window behind a driver’s seat or any rear
window other than any window on an emergency door, this division (F) does not
apply to any school bus used to transport a child with disabilities pursuant to
Ohio R.C. Ch. 3323, whom it is impossible or impractical to transport by
regular school bus in the course of regular route transportation provided by a
school district. As used in this division (F), CHILD WITH DISABILITIES has the
same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3323.01.
   (G)   This section does not apply to any school bus that is to be sold and
operated outside the municipality.
   (H)   (1)   This section does not apply to a motor vehicle used by a law
enforcement agency under either of the following circumstances:
         (a)   The vehicle does not have distinctive markings of a law
enforcement vehicle but is operated by or on behalf of the law enforcement
agency in an authorized investigation or other activity requiring that the
presence and identity of the vehicle occupants be undisclosed; or
         (b)   The vehicle primarily is used by the law enforcement canine unit
for transporting a police dog.
      (2)   As used in this division (H), LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY means a police
department, the office of a sheriff, the State Highway Patrol, a county
prosecuting attorney or a federal, state or local governmental body that
enforces criminal laws and that has employees who have a statutory power of
arrest.
(ORC 4513.241(C) - (J))
   (I)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
(2)   Whoever violates divisions (B), (C)(2) or (D) above is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (C)(1) above is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor if the dealer or the dealer’s agent knew of the non-conformity at
the time of sale.
      (4)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree; except that, an organization may not be
convicted unless the act of installation was authorized by the board of
directors, trustees, partners or by a high managerial officer acting on behalf
of the organization, and installation was performed by an employee of the
organization acting within the scope of the person’s employment.
         (b)   In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section,
whoever violates division (B) above is liable in a civil action to the owner of
a motor vehicle on which was installed the non-conforming glass or material for
any damages incurred by that person as a result of the installation of the non-
conforming glass or material, costs of maintaining the civil action and
attorney fees.
         (c)   In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section, if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation
of division (B) above and the offender is a motor vehicle repair operator
registered under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4775 or a motor vehicle dealer licensed under
Ohio R.C. Ch. 4517, whoever violates division (B) above is subject to a
registration or license suspension, as applicable, for a period of not more
than 180 days.
(ORC 4513.241(K))
Statutory reference:
   Administrative regulations, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-41
§ 337.23 LIMITED LOAD EXTENSION ON LEFT SIDE OF PASSENGER VEHICLE.
   (A)   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on a highway with any load
carried on the vehicle which extends more than six inches beyond the line of
the fenders on the vehicle’s left side.
(ORC 4513.30)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
§ 337.24 MOTOR VEHICLE STOP LIGHTS.
   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer and pole trailer when
operated upon a highway shall be equipped with two or more stop lights; except
that, passenger cars manufactured or assembled prior to 1-1-1967, motorcycles
and motor-driven cycles shall be equipped with at least one stop light. Stop
lights shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle, actuated upon application
of the service brake, and may be incorporated with other rear lights. Such stop
lights when actuated shall emit a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet
to the rear; provided that, in the case of a train of vehicles only the stop
lights on the rearmost vehicle need be visible from the distance specified.
      (2)   Such stop lights when actuated shall give a steady warning light to
the rear of a vehicle or train of vehicles to indicate the intention of the
operator to diminish the speed of or stop a vehicle or train of vehicles.
      (3)   When stop lights are used as required by this section, they shall
be constructed or installed so as to provide adequate and reliable illumination
and shall conform to the appropriate rules and regulations established under
Ohio R.C. 4513.19.
      (4)   Historical motor vehicles as defined in Ohio R.C. 4503.181, not
originally manufactured with stop lights, are not subject to this section.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.071)
§ 337.25 AIR CLEANER REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate upon any street, alley or other public place any
motor vehicle which is not equipped with a functioning air cleaner, except for
motor vehicles equipped with electronic fuel-injection engines.
§ 337.26 SNOW REMOVAL EQUIPMENT AND LIGHTS.
   (A)   It is unlawful to operate snow removal equipment on a highway unless
the lights thereon comply with and are lighted when and as required by the
standards and specifications adopted by the Director of Transportation pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 4513.18.
(ORC 4513.18)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent
offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4513.99)
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 337.27 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING PRESCHOOL CHILDREN.
   (A)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle owned, leased or hired by a
nursery school, kindergarten or child care center, while transporting preschool
children to or from such an institution, unless the motor vehicle is equipped
with and displaying two amber flashing lights mounted on a bar attached to the
top of the vehicle, and a sign bearing the designation "caution — children,"
which shall be attached to the bar carrying the amber flashing lights in such a
manner as to be legible to persons both in front of and behind the vehicle. The
lights and sign shall meet standards and specifications adopted by the Ohio
Director of Public Safety.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle displaying the lights and sign
required by this section for any purpose other than the transportation of
preschool children as provided in this section.
(ORC 4513.182)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
§ 337.28 USE OF CHILD RESTRAINTS.
   (A)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child
restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age; and
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (B)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, that is owned,
leased or otherwise under the control of a nursery school or child care center,
the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions in a child restraint system
that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age; and
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (C)   When any child who is less than eight years of age and less than four
feet nine inches in height, who is not required by divisions (A) or (B) above
to be secured in a child restraint system, is being transported in a motor
vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle as defined in Ohio R.C.
4511.01 or a vehicle that is regulated under Ohio R.C. 5104.015, that is
required by the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with
seat belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor
vehicle shall have the child properly secured in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions on a booster seat that meets federal motor vehicle
safety standards.
   (D)   When any child who is at least eight years of age, but not older than
15 years of age, and who is not otherwise required by divisions (A), (B) or (C)
above to be secured in a child restraint system or booster seat, is being
transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle
as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly restrained either in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions
in a child restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards
or in an occupant restraining device as defined in Ohio R.C. 4513.263.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of divisions (C) or (D) above has been or is
being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation or
summons for a violation of divisions (C) or (D) above or causing the arrest of
or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of divisions (C) or (D)
above, and absent another violation of law, a law enforcement officer’s view of
the interior or visual inspection of a motor vehicle being operated on any
street or highway may not be used for the purpose of determining whether a
violation of divisions (C) or (D) above has been or is being committed.
   (F)   The Director of Public Safety shall adopt such rules as are necessary
to carry out this section.
   (G)   The failure of an operator of a motor vehicle to secure a child in a
child restraint system, a booster seat or in an occupant restraining device, as
required in this section is not negligence imputable to the child, is not
admissible as evidence in any civil action involving the rights of the child
against any other person allegedly liable for injuries to the child, is not to
be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the operator of the motor
vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section, and is not
admissible as evidence in any criminal action involving the operator of the
motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
   (H)   This section does not apply when an emergency exists that threatens
the life of any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle that is being
used to transport a child who otherwise would be required to be restrained
under this section. This section does not apply to a person operating a motor
vehicle who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this
state under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in this
state under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4734 that states that the child who otherwise would
be required to be restrained under this section has a physical impairment that
makes use of a child restraint system, booster seat or an occupant restraining
device impossible or impractical; provided that, the person operating the
vehicle has safely and appropriately restrained the child in accordance with
any recommendations of the physician or chiropractor as noted on the affidavit.
   (I)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any person to
carry with the person the birth certificate of a child to prove the age of the
child, but the production of a valid birth certificate for a child showing that
the child was not of an age to which this section applies is a defense against
any ticket, citation or summons issued for violating this section.
   (J)   (1)   Whoever violates divisions (A), (B), (C) or (D) above shall be
punished as follows; provided that, the failure of an operator of a motor
vehicle to secure more than one child in a child restraint system, booster seat
or occupant restraining device as required by this section that occurred at the
same time, on the same day and at the same location is deemed to be a single
violation of this section:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (J)(1)(b) above, the
offender is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $25,
nor more than $75.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of divisions (A), (B), (C) or (D) above or of a state law
or municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent any of those divisions,
the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   All fines imposed pursuant to division (J)(1) above shall be
forwarded to the State Treasurer for deposit in the Child Highway Safety Fund
created by Ohio R.C. 4511.81(I).
(ORC 4511.81(A) - (H), (K), (L))
§ 337.29 IGNITION INTERLOCK DEVICES. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 337.29 was repealed as part of the 2003 updating and revision of
this code of ordinances because substantially equivalent state law (Ohio R.C.
4511.83(A), (B), (E) was repealed by the Ohio General Assembly.)
§ 337.30 AIR BAGS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AIR BAG. Has the same meaning as in 49 C.F.R. § 579.4, as amended.
      COUNTERFEIT AIR BAG. An air bag displaying a mark identical or similar to
the genuine mark of a motor vehicle manufacturer, without the authorization of
the motor vehicle manufacturer.
      NON-FUNCTIONAL AIR BAG. Any of the following:
         (a)   A replacement air bag that has been previously deployed or
damaged;
         (b)   A replacement air bag that has an electrical fault that is
detected by the air bag diagnostic system of a vehicle after the air bag is
installed; and
         (c)   A counterfeit air bag, air bag cover or some other object that
is installed in a vehicle to deceive an owner or operator of the vehicle into
believing that a functional air bag has been installed.
   (B)   No person shall install or reinstall in any motor vehicle a
counterfeit or non-functional air bag or any object intended to fulfill the
function of an air bag other than an air bag that was designed in conformance
with or that is regulated by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208
for the make, model and model year of the vehicle, knowing that the object is
not in accordance with that standard.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly manufacture, import, sell or offer for sale
any of the following:
      (1)   A counterfeit air bag;
      (2)   A non-functional air bag; and
      (3)   Any other object that is intended to be installed in a motor
vehicle to fulfill the function of an air bag and that is not in conformance
with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208 for the make, model, and
model year of the vehicle in which the object is intended to be installed.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly sell, install or reinstall a device in a
motor vehicle that causes the diagnostic system of a vehicle to inaccurately
indicate that the vehicle is equipped with a functional air bag.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates divisions (B) or (D) above is guilty of
improper replacement of a motor vehicle air bag, a misdemeanor of the first
degree on a first offense. On each subsequent offense, or if the violation
results in serious physical harm to an individual, the person is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (C) above is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Each manufacture, importation, installation, reinstallation, sale
or offer for sale in violation of this section shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation.
(ORC 4549.20)
§ 337.31 JAKE BRAKES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, COMPRESSION RELEASE TYPE BRAKING
SYSTEM shall mean any device equipped on certain commercial vehicles including,
but not limited to, tractors, semi-trucks, motor carriers, and buses that
utilize engine compression release or engine retarders as a means of slowing or
braking the speed of the vehicle in lieu of applying the clutch or brakes. A
compression release type braking system is also referred to as "jake brakes".
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle with
a compression release type braking system to cause their vehicle to brake or
slow by any method which increases the noise emission levels of the engine such
as, but not limited to, engine compression release brakes or engine retarded in
lieu of applying the clutch or brakes upon any public street, road, or highway
within the limits of the City of Barberton. This section shall not apply to
fire protection equipment or other emergency vehicles or if used by an operator
of a vehicle in an emergency situation to avert imminent danger.
   (C)   Violation of this section shall be a minor misdemeanor punishable by a
fine of not more than $100 for each offense.
(Ord. 44-2025, passed 4-28-2025)
§ 337.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
303.99 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 339: COMMERCIAL AND HEAVY VEHICLES
Section
339.01   Oversize or overweight vehicle operation on state routes; state
permit.
339.02   Use of local streets; local permit and conditions.
339.03   Maximum width, height and length.
339.04   Route and load information.
339.05   Wheel protectors.
339.06   Vehicles transporting explosives.
339.07   Towing requirements; exception to size and weight restrictions.
339.08   Loads dropping or leaking; removal required; tracking mud.
339.09   Shifting load; loose loads.
339.10   Vehicles with spikes, lugs and chains.
339.11   Use of studded tires and chains.
339.12   Weighing vehicle; scales to be used; removal of excess load.
339.13   Chauffeured limousines.
339.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Arrest notice of drivers, see Ohio R.C. 5577.14
   Bus stops and taxicab stands, see TRAF.
351.10
   Commercial vehicles in residential districts, see TRAF.
351.05
   Display of certificates of registration, see Ohio R.C. 4549.18
   Fatigued or ill drivers, see TRAF.
341.09
   Occupying travel trailer or manufacturer home while in motion, see TRAF.
331.35
   Riding in cargo storage areas, see TRAF.
371.06
   See section histories for similar state law
   Slow-moving equipment at grade crossings, see TRAF.
331.41
   Slower moving vehicles to be driven in right-hand lane, see TRAF.
331.01
   Stopping at grade crossings, see TRAF.
331.40
   Tow trucks, see B.R. & T. Ch.
874
   Truck loading zones, see TRAF.
351.09
§ 339.01 OVERSIZE OR OVERWEIGHT VEHICLE OPERATION ON STATE ROUTES; STATE
PERMIT.
   (A)   State regulations.
      (1)   (a)   The municipality, with respect to highways under their
jurisdiction, upon application in writing, shall issue a special regional heavy
hauling permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or
combination of vehicles as follows:
            1.   At a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum
specified in Ohio R.C. 5577.01 to 5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with
Ohio R.C. 4513.01 to 4513.37;
            2.   Upon any highway under the jurisdiction of municipality except
those highways with a condition insufficient to bear the weight of the vehicle
or combination of vehicles as stated in the application;
            3.   For regional trips at distances of 150 miles or less from a
facility stated on the application as the applicant’s point of origin; and
            4.   Issuance of a special regional heavy hauling permit is subject
to the payment of a fee established by the municipality in accordance with this
section.
         (b)   In circumstances where a person is not eligible to receive a
permit under division (A)(1)(a) above, the municipality, with respect to
highways under its jurisdiction, upon application in writing and for good cause
shown, may issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to
operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight of
vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in Ohio R.C. 5577.01 through
5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with Ohio R.C. 4513.01 through 4513.37,
upon any highway under its jurisdiction.
      (2)   (a)   Notwithstanding Ohio R.C. 715.22 and 723.01, the holder of a
permit issued by the Director of Transportation under Ohio R.C. 4513.34 may
move the vehicle or combination of vehicles described in the permit on any
highway that is a part of the state highway system when the movement is partly
within and partly without the corporate limits of the municipality. No local
authority shall require any other permit or license or charge any license fee
or other charge against the holder of a permit for the movement of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles on any highway which is a part of the state highway
system. The Ohio Director of Transportation shall not require the holder of a
permit issued by the municipality to obtain a special permit for the movement
of vehicles or combination of vehicles on highways within the jurisdiction of
the municipality.
         (b)   Except as provided in Ohio R.C. 4513.34(B)(3), permits may be
issued for any period of time not to exceed one year, as the local authority in
its discretion determines advisable or for the duration of any public
construction project.
      (3)   (a)   The application for a permit issued under this section shall
be in the form that the municipality prescribes. The municipality may prescribe
a permit fee to be imposed and collected when any permit described in this
section is issued. The permit fee may be in an amount sufficient to reimburse
the municipality for the administrative costs incurred in issuing the permit,
and also to cover the cost of normal and expected damage caused to the roadway
or a street or highway structure as the result of the operation of the non-
conforming vehicle or combination of vehicles.
         (b)   For the purposes of this section and of rules adopted by the
Director under Ohio R.C. 4513.34, milk transported in bulk by vehicle is deemed
a non-divisible load.
         (c)   For purposes of this section and of rules adopted by the
Director under Ohio R.C. 4513.34, three or fewer aluminum coils, transported by
a vehicle, are deemed a non-divisible load. The Director shall adopt rules
establishing requirements for an aluminum coil permit that are substantially
similar to the requirements for a steel coil permit under O.A.C. Ch. 5501:2-1.
      (4)   The municipality shall issue a special regional heavy hauling
permit under division (A)(1)(a) above upon application and payment of the
applicable fee. However, the municipality may issue or withhold a special
permit specified in division (A)(1)(b) above. If a permit is to be issued, the
municipality may limit or prescribe conditions of operation for the vehicle and
may require the posting of a bond or other security conditioned upon the
sufficiency of the permit fee to compensate for damage caused to the roadway or
a street or highway structure. In addition, the municipality, as a condition of
issuance of an overweight permit, may require the applicant to develop and
enter into a mutual agreement with the municipality to compensate for or to
repair excess damage caused to the roadway by travel under the permit.
      (5)   Every permit issued under this section shall be carried in the
vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to
inspection by any police officer or authorized agent of any authority granting
the permit. No person shall violate any of the terms of a permit.
      (6)   The Director of Transportation may debar an applicant from applying
for a special permit under this section upon a finding based on a reasonable
belief that the applicant has done any of the actions specified in Ohio R.C.
4513.34(F).
      (7)   Notice and procedures for debarment shall be as provided in Ohio
R.C. 4513.34(G).
      (8)   (a)   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under
this section that relate to gross load limits.
         (b)   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to axle load by more than 2,000 pounds per axle or group of
axles.
         (c)   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to an approved route except upon order of a law enforcement
officer or authorized agent of the issuing authority.
      (9)   A permit issued by the municipality under this section for the
operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles is valid for the purposes of
the vehicle operation in accordance with the conditions and limitations
specified on the permit. Such a permit is voidable by law enforcement only for
operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles in violation of the weight,
dimension or route provisions of the permit. However, a permit is not voidable
for operation in violation of a route provision of a permit if the operation is
upon the order of a law enforcement officer.
(ORC 4513.34)
   (b)   Penalty. Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
§ 339.02 USE OF LOCAL STREETS; LOCAL PERMIT AND CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Local streets. No person shall drive or operate any vehicle designed
to be used for the conveyance, transfer or delivery of freight, merchandise or
other substances and materials usually hauled in such vehicles, exceeding a
gross weight of 10,000 pounds, including the weight of the vehicle, whether
loaded or unloaded, upon any street or other public place in the municipality,
except on designated and marked state and federal routes, whether temporary or
permanent and except that when the loaded contents of such vehicle exceeding
such weights are for delivery to, or such vehicle is called to remove
merchandise or other material from, any business house or other place not
located on such state or federal routes, then such vehicles may be driven and
operated on the streets and other public places not designated or marked as
state or federal routes, but only between the place of delivery or removal of
freight and merchandise and the nearest intersecting state or federal route.
   (B)   Permits.
      (1)   The Director of Public Safety, upon application in writing by the
owner or person having charge thereof, may grant permission for the moving of
vehicles, objects and structures in excess of the limit set forth in division
(A) above.
      (2)   Such permission shall be in writing and the Director may grant the
same subject to such conditions and restrictions as, in his or her judgment,
are necessary for the preservation and protection of the streets, bridges and
culverts.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 339.03 MAXIMUM WIDTH, HEIGHT AND LENGTH.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be operated upon the public highways, streets,
bridges and culverts within the municipality whose dimensions exceed those
specified in this section.
   (B)   No such vehicle shall have a width in excess of:
      (1)   104 inches for passenger bus type vehicles operated exclusively
within the municipality;
      (2)   102 inches, excluding such safety devices as are required by law,
for passenger bus type vehicles operated over freeways, and other state roads
with minimum pavement widths of 22 feet, except those roads or portions of
roads over which operation of 102-inch buses is prohibited by order of the
Director of Transportation;
      (3)   132 inches for traction engines;
      (4)   102 inches for recreational vehicles, excluding safety devices and
retracted awnings and other appurtenances of six inches or less in width and
except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch recreational
vehicles on designated State highways or portions of highways; and
      (5)   102 inches, including load, for all other vehicles; except that,
the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch vehicles on the state
highways or portions of state highways as the Director designates.
   (C)   No such vehicle shall have a length in excess of:
      (1)   66 feet for passenger bus type vehicles and articulated passenger
bus type vehicles operated by a regional transit authority pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 306.30 to 306.54;
      (2)   45 feet for all other passenger bus type vehicles;
      (3)   53 feet for any semitrailer when operated in a commercial tractor-
semitrailer combination, with or without load, except that the Director may
prohibit the operation of any such commercial tractor-semitrailer combination
on such state highways or portions of state highways as the Director
designates;
      (4)   28.5 feet for any semitrailer or trailer when operated in a
commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-semitrailer-
semitrailer combination, except that the Director may prohibit the operation of
any such commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-
semitrailer-semitrailer combination on such state highways or portions of state
highways as the Director designates; and
      (5)   (a)   97 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle transporter
combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle transporter
combinations when operated on any interstate, United States route, or State
route, including reasonable access travel on all other roadways for a distance
not to exceed one road mile from any interstate, United States route, or state
route, not to exceed three saddlemounted vehicles, but which may include one
fullmount;
         (b)   75 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle transporter
combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle transporter
combinations when operated on any roadway not designated as an interstate,
United States route or state route, not to exceed three saddlemounted vehicles,
but which may include one fullmount.
      (6)   65 feet for any other combination of vehicles coupled together,
with or without load, except as provided in divisions (C)(3) and (C)(4) above,
and in division (E) below.
      (7)   45 feet for recreational vehicles.
      (8)   50 feet for all other vehicles, except trailers and semitrailers,
with or without load.
   (D)   No such vehicle shall have a height in excess of 13.5 feet, with or
without load.
   (E)   An automobile transporter or boat transporter shall be allowed a
length of 65 feet, and a stinger- steered automobile transporter or stinger-
steered boat transporter shall be allowed a length of 75 feet; except that, the
load thereon may extend no more than four feet beyond the rear of such vehicles
and may extend no more than three feet beyond the front of such vehicles; and,
except further that, the Director may prohibit the operation of a stinger-
steered automobile transporter, stinger-steered boat transporter or a B-train
assembly on any state highway or portion of any state highway that the Director
designates.
   (F)   (1)   The widths prescribed in division (B) above shall not include
side mirrors, turn signal lamps, marker lamps, handholds for cab entry and
egress, flexible fender extensions, mud flaps, splash and spray suppressant
devices and load-induced tire bulge.
      (2)   The widths prescribed in division (B)(5) above shall not include
automatic covering devices, tarp and tarp hardware, and tiedown assemblies;
provided, these safety devices do not extend more than three inches from either
side of the vehicle.
      (3)   The lengths prescribed in divisions (C)(2) to (C)(7) above shall
not include safety devices, bumpers attached to the front or rear of such bus
or combination, non-property carrying devices or components that do not extend
more than 24 inches beyond the rear of the vehicle and are needed for loading
or unloading, B-train assembly used between the first and second semitrailer of
a commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination, energy conservation
devices as provided in any regulations adopted by the Secretary of the United
States Department of Transportation, or any non-cargo-carrying refrigerator
equipment attached to the front of trailers and semitrailers. In special cases,
vehicles that dimensions exceed those prescribed by this section may operate in
accordance with rules adopted by the Director.
   (G)   (1)   This section does not apply to fire engines, fire trucks or
other vehicles or apparatus belonging to the municipality or to the volunteer
fire department thereof or used by such department in the discharge of its
functions. This section does not apply to vehicles and pole trailers used in
the transportation of wooden and metal poles, nor to the transportation of
pipes or well-drilling equipment, nor to farm machinery and equipment.
      (2)   The owner or operator of any vehicle, machinery or equipment not
specifically enumerated in this section, but the dimensions of which exceed the
dimensions provided by this section, when operating the same on the highways
and streets of the municipality, shall comply with the rules of the Director
governing such movement. Any person adversely affected shall have the same
right of appeal as provided in Ohio R.C. Ch. 119.
      (3)   This section does not require the municipality or any railroad or
other private corporation to provide sufficient vertical clearance to permit
the operation of such vehicle, or to make any changes in or about existing
structures now crossing streets, roads and other public thoroughfares.
   (H)   As used in this section, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE has the same meaning as
in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
(ORC 5577.05)
   (I)   No person shall violate any rule or regulation promulgated by the
Director of Transportation in accordance with Ohio R.C. 5577.05.
(ORC 5577.06)
   (J)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second or subsequent offense, such person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 5577.99(C))
§ 339.04 ROUTE AND LOAD INFORMATION.
   Drivers of vehicles described in this chapter are required, upon request by
a police officer, to give full and true information as to the route they are
following and the name of the consignor and consignee and place of delivery or
removal and the location of any consignment being hauled or goods being
removed, and upon a designation by such police officer of a route to be
followed, shall immediately adopt and pursue such route.
§ 339.05 WHEEL PROTECTORS.
   (A)   No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated,
any commercial car, trailer or semitrailer, used for the transportation of
goods or property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds three tons,
upon the public highways, streets, bridges, and culverts within the
municipality, unless such vehicle is equipped with suitable metal protectors or
substantial flexible flaps on the rearmost wheels of such vehicle or
combination of vehicles to prevent, as far as practicable, the wheels from
throwing dirt, water, or other materials on the windshields of following
vehicles. Such protectors or flaps shall have a ground clearance of not more
than one-third of the distance from the center of the rearmost axle to the
center of the flaps under any conditions of loading of the vehicle, and they
shall be at least as wide as the tires they are protecting. If the vehicle is
so designed and constructed that such requirements are accomplished by means of
fenders, body construction or other means of enclosure, then no such protectors
or flaps are required. Rear wheels not covered at the top by fenders, bodies or
other parts of the vehicle shall be covered at the top by protective means
extending at least to the center line of the rearmost axle.
(ORC 5577.11)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $25.
(ORC 5577.99(E))
§ 339.06 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES.
   (A)   Any person operating any vehicle transporting explosives upon a
highway shall at all times comply with the following requirements.
      (1)   The vehicle shall be marked or placarded on each side and on the
rear with the word “EXPLOSIVES” in letters not less than eight inches high, or
there shall be displayed on the rear of such vehicle a red flag not less than
24 inches square marked with the word “DANGER” in white letters six inches
high, or shall be marked or placarded in accordance with § 177.823 of the
United States Department of Transportation regulations.
      (2)   The vehicle shall be equipped with not less than two fire
extinguishers, filled and ready for immediate use and placed at convenient
points on such vehicle.
(ORC 4513.29)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
§ 339.07 TOWING REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTION TO SIZE AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   When one vehicle is towing another vehicle, the drawbar or other
connection shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed
thereby, and the drawbar or other connection shall not exceed 15 feet from one
vehicle to the other, except the connection between any two vehicles
transporting poles, pipe, machinery or other objects of structural nature which
cannot readily be dismembered.
      (2)   When one vehicle is towing another and the connection consists only
of a chain, rope or cable, there shall be displayed upon such connection a
white flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square.   
      (3)   In addition to such drawbar or other connection, each trailer and
each semitrailer which is not connected to a commercial tractor by means of a
fifth wheel shall be coupled with stay chains or cables to the vehicle by which
it is being drawn. These chains or cables shall be of sufficient size and
strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle in
case the drawbar or other connection should break or become disengaged. In case
of a loaded pole trailer, the connecting pole to the drawing vehicle shall be
coupled to the drawing vehicle with stay chains or cables of sufficient size
and strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle.
      (4)   Every trailer or semitrailer, except pole and cable trailers and
pole and cable dollies operated by a public utility as defined in Ohio R.C.
5727.01, shall be equipped with a coupling device which shall be so designed
and constructed that the trailer will follow substantially in the path of the
vehicle drawing it, without whipping or swerving from side to side. Vehicles
used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials
between a local place of storage and supply and the farm, when drawn or towed
on a street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less, and vehicles
designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage
and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or
highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per
hour or less, shall have a drawbar or other connection, including the hitch
mounted on the towing vehicle, which shall be of sufficient strength to pull
all the weight towed thereby. Only one such vehicle used to transport
agricultural produce or agricultural production materials as provided in this
section may be towed or drawn at one time, except as follows.
         (a)   An agricultural tractor may tow or draw more than one such
vehicle;
         (b)   A pickup truck or straight truck designed by the manufacturer to
carry a load of not less than one-half ton and not more than two tons may tow
or draw not more than two such vehicles that are being used to transport
agricultural produce from the farm to a local place of storage. No vehicle
being so towed by such a pickup truck or straight truck shall be considered to
be a motor vehicle.
(ORC 4513.32)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
   (C)   (1)   The size and weight provisions of this chapter and Ohio R.C.
Chapter 5577 do not apply to a person who is engaged in the initial towing or
removal or a wrecked or disabled motor vehicle from the site of an emergency on
a public highway where the vehicle became wrecked or disabled to the nearest
site where the vehicle can be brought into conformance with the requirements of
this chapter and Ohio R.C. Chapter 5577 or to the nearest qualified repair
facility.
      (2)   Any subsequent towing of a wrecked or disabled vehicle shall comply
with the size and weight provisions of this chapter and Ohio R.C. Chapter 5577.
      (3)   No court shall impose any penalty prescribed in Ohio R.C. 5577.99,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or the civil liability
established in Ohio R.C. 5577.12 upon a person towing or removing a vehicle in
the manner described in division (C)(1) above.
(ORC 5577.15)
§ 339.08 LOADS DROPPING OR LEAKING; TRACKING MUD; REMOVAL REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the
vehicle is so constructed, loaded or covered as to prevent any of its load from
dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand or
other substances may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water
or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining
the roadway.   
      (2)   Except for a farm vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or
agricultural production materials or a rubbish vehicle in the process of
acquiring its load, no vehicle loaded with garbage, swill, cans, bottles, waste
paper, ashes, refuse, trash, rubbish, waste, wire, paper, cartons, boxes,
glass, solid waste or any other material of an unsanitary nature that is
susceptible to blowing or bouncing from a moving vehicle shall be driven or
moved on any highway unless the load is covered with a sufficient cover to
prevent the load or any part of the load from spilling onto the highway.
(ORC 4513.31)
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
   (C)   No person shall operate any vehicle so as to track mud on any public
way or place.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of the driver of a vehicle who unlawfully drops
or deposits mud or permits the load or any portion thereof to be dropped or
deposited upon any public way or place to immediately remove the same or cause
it to be removed.
§ 339.09 SHIFTING LOAD; LOOSE LOADS.
   (A)   In addition to any other lawful requirements of load distribution, no
person shall operate any vehicle upon a street or highway unless such vehicle
is so laden as to prevent its contents from shifting or otherwise unbalancing
the vehicle to such an extent as to interfere with the safe operation of the
same.
   (B)   No motor vehicle or trailer shall be driven unless the tailboard or
tailgate, tarpaulins, chains (except ground or contact chains), ropes, stakes,
poles and the like, or any part of the load, are securely fastened to prevent
dangling, flapping, swinging or falling from the side, end or top of the load
or body. All projecting cargo shall be properly guarded by a red flag or cloth
or a red light or lantern as required by Ohio R.C. 4513.09, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
§ 339.10 VEHICLES WITH SPIKES, LUGS AND CHAINS.
   (A)   No person shall drive over the improved highways of the municipality a
traction engine or tractor with tires or wheels equipped with ice picks, spuds,
spikes, chains or other projections of any kind extending beyond the cleats,
and no person shall tow or in any way pull another vehicle over the improved
highways of the municipality which towed or pulled vehicle has tires or wheels
equipped with ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other projections of any
kind. TRACTION ENGINE or TRACTOR, as used in this section, applies to all self-
propelling engines equipped with metal-tired wheels operated or propelled by
any form of engine, motor or mechanical power.
   (B)   The municipality shall not adopt, enforce or maintain any ordinance,
rule or regulation contrary to or inconsistent with division (A) above, nor
shall the municipality require any license tax upon or registration fee for any
traction engine, tractor or trailer, or any permit or license to operate.
Operators of traction engines or tractors shall have the same rights upon the
public streets and highways as the drivers of any other vehicles, unless some
other safe and convenient way is provided, and no public road open to traffic
shall be closed to traction engines or tractors.
(ORC 5589.08)
§ 339.11 USE OF STUDDED TIRES AND CHAINS.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, STUDDED TIRE means any tire designed
for use on a vehicle and equipped with metal studs or studs of wear-resisting
material that project beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) below, no person shall
operate any motor vehicle other than a public safety vehicle or school bus that
is equipped with studded tires on any street or highway in the municipality,
except during the period extending from November 1 of each year through April
15 of the succeeding year.
      (2)   A person may operate a motor vehicle that is equipped with
retractable studded tires with the studs retracted at any time of the year, but
shall operate the motor vehicle with the studs extended only as provided in
division (B)(1) above.
   (C)   Division (b) above does not apply to the use of tire chains when there
is snow or ice on the streets or highways where such chains are being used, or
the immediate vicinity thereof.
(ORC 5589.081)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 5589.99(B))
§ 339.12 WEIGHING VEHICLE; SCALES TO BE USED; REMOVAL OF EXCESS LOAD.
   (A)   Any police officer having reason to believe that the weight of a
vehicle and its load is unlawful may require the driver of such vehicle to stop
and submit to a weighing of it by means of a compact, self-contained, portable,
sealed scale specially adapted to determining the wheel loads of vehicles on
highways; a sealed scale permanently installed in a fixed location, having a
load-receiving element specially adapted to determining the wheel loads of
highway vehicles; a sealed scale, permanently installed in a fixed location,
having a load- receiving element specially adapted to determining the combined
load of all wheels on a single axle or on successive axles of a highway
vehicle, or a sealed scale adapted to weighing highway vehicles, loaded or
unloaded. The driver of such vehicle shall, if necessary, be directed to
proceed to the nearest available of such sealed scales to accomplish the
weighing; provided, such scales are within three miles of the point where such
vehicle is stopped. Any vehicle stopped in accordance with this section may be
held by the police officer for a reasonable time only to accomplish the
weighing as prescribed by this section.
   (B)   Whenever such officer upon weighing a vehicle and load determines that
the weight is unlawful, he may require the driver to stop the vehicle in a
suitable place and remain standing until such portion of the load is removed as
is necessary to reduce the weight of such vehicle to the limit permitted under
§§
339.01 and
339.02 of this chapter.
(ORC 4513.33)
§ 339.13 CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINES.
   (A)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine shall accept passengers only
on the basis of prearranged contracts, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4501.01, and
shall not cruise in search of patronage unless the limousine is in compliance
with any statute or ordinance governing the operation of taxicabs or other
similar vehicles for hire.
   (B)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine may provide transportation to
passengers who arrange for the transportation through an intermediary,
including a digital dispatching service. Notwithstanding any law to the
contrary, when providing transportation arranged through an intermediary, the
operator of a chauffeured limousine may establish the fare and method of fare
calculation, so long as the method of fare calculation is provided to the
passenger upon request.
   (C)   No person shall advertise or hold himself or herself out as doing
business as a limousine service or livery service or other similar designation
unless each vehicle used by the person to provide the service is registered in
accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.24 and is in compliance with Ohio R.C. 4509.80.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4511.85)
§ 339.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
303.99 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 341: DRIVERS OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
Section
341.01   Definitions.
341.02   Use of actual gross weight in lieu of rating.
341.03   Licensing requirements.
341.04   Physical qualification to operate commercial motor vehicles.
341.05   Criminal offenses.
341.06   Application of 49 C.F.R. 383.
341.07   Information required of prospective drivers by employers; unauthorized
driving.
341.08   Authority of peace officers regarding drunk driving.
341.09   Permitting or driving while fatigued or ill prohibited.
341.10   Driver’s consecutive service and off-duty hours. (Repealed)
341.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Arrest notice of drivers, see Ohio R.C. 5577.14
   Driving under the influence, generally, see TRAF.
333.01
   Hours of service of truck drivers, see Ohio R.C. 4921.30
   Load limits, see TRAF.
339.01
   Route and load information, see TRAF.
339.04
   See section histories for similar state law
   Stopping after accidents, generally, see TRAF.
335.12, 335.13
   Warning devices when disabled on freeways, see Ohio R.C. 4513.28
§ 341.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL CONCENTRATION. The concentration of alcohol in a person’s blood,
breath or urine. When expressed as a percentage, it means grams of alcohol per
the following:
      (1)   100 milliliters of whole blood, blood serum or blood plasma;
      (2)   210 liters of breath; and
      (3)   100 milliliters of urine.
   COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE. 
      (1)   A license issued in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506 that
authorizes an individual to drive a commercial motor vehicle. Except as
otherwise specifically provided, "commercial driver's license" includes an
"enhanced commercial driver's license."
      (2)   "Enhanced commercial driver's license" means a commercial driver's
license issued in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4507.021 and 4506.072 that denotes
citizenship and identity and is approved by the United States Secretary of
Homeland Security or other designated federal agency for purposes of entering
the United States.
   COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE INFORMATION SYSTEM. The information system
established pursuant to the requirements of the Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety
Act of 1986, 100 Stat. 3207-171, 49 U.S.C. App. 2701.
   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Except when used in Ohio R.C. 4506.25, any motor
vehicle designed or used to transport persons or property that meets any of the
following qualifications:
      (1)   Any combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight or combined
gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more, provided that the gross
vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating of the vehicle or vehicles being
towed is in excess of 10,000 pounds;
      (2)   Any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle
weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more;
      (3)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is not a Class A
or Class B vehicle, but is designed to transport 16 or more passengers
including the driver;
      (4)   Any school bus with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight
rating of less than 26,001 pounds that is designed to transport fewer than 16
passengers including the driver;
      (5)   Is transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is
required under 49 C.F.R. part 172, subpart F, as amended; or
      (6)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is designed to
be operated and to travel on a public street or highway and is considered by
the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration to be a commercial motor
vehicle, including, but not limited to, a motorized crane, a vehicle whose
function is to pump cement, a rig for drilling wells and a portable crane.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Includes all of the following:
      (1)   Any substance classified as a controlled substance under the
Controlled Substances Act, 80 Stat. 1242 (1970), 21 U.S.C. § 802(6), as
amended;
      (2)   Any substance included in Schedules I through V of 21 C.F.R. part
1308, as amended; and
      (3)   Any drug of abuse.
   CONVICTION. An unvacated adjudication of guilt or a determination that a
person has violated or failed to comply with the law in a court of original
jurisdiction or an authorized administrative tribunal, an unvacated forfeiture
of bail or collateral deposited to secure the person’s appearance in court, a
plea of guilty or nolo contendere accepted by the court, the payment of a fine
or court cost or violation of a condition of release without bail, regardless
of whether or not the penalty is rebated, suspended or probated.
   DISQUALIFICATION. Any of the following:
      (1)   The suspension, revocation or cancellation of a person’s privileges
to operate a commercial motor vehicle;
      (2)   Any withdrawal of a person’s privileges to operate a commercial
motor vehicle as the result of a violation of state or local law relating to
motor vehicle traffic control other than parking, vehicle weight or vehicle
defect violations; and
      (3)   A determination by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
that a person is not qualified to operate a commercial motor vehicle under 49
C.F.R. part 391.
   DOMICILED. Having a true, fixed, principal and permanent residence to which
an individual intends to return.
   DOWNGRADE. Any of the following, as applicable:
      (1)   A change in the commercial driver’s license, or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit, holder’s self-certified status as
described in Ohio R.C. 4506.10(A)(1);
      (2)   A change to a lesser class of vehicle; and
      (3)   Removal of commercial driver’s license privileges from the
individual’s driver’s license.
   DRIVE. To drive, operate or be in physical control of a motor vehicle.
   DRIVER. Any person who drives, operates or is in physical control of a
commercial motor vehicle or is required to have a commercial driver’s license.
   DRIVER’S LICENSE. A license issued by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles that
authorizes an individual to drive.
   DRUG OF ABUSE. Any controlled substance, dangerous drug as defined in Ohio
R.C. 4729.01, harmful intoxicant as defined in Ohio R.C. 2925.01, or over-the-
counter medication that, when taken in quantities exceeding the recommended
dosage, can result in impairment of judgment or reflexes.
   ELECTRONIC DEVICE. Includes a cellular telephone, a personal digital
assistant, a pager, a computer and any other device used to input, write, send,
receive or read text.
   ELIGIBLE UNIT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. A village, township or county that has a
population of not more than 3,000 persons according to the most recent federal
census.
   EMPLOYER. Any person, including the Federal government, any state and a
political subdivision of any state, that owns or leases a commercial motor
vehicle or assigns a person to drive such a motor vehicle.
   ENDORSEMENT. An authorization on a person’s commercial driver’s license that
is required to permit the person to operate a specified type of commercial
motor vehicle.
   FARM TRUCK. A truck controlled and operated by a farmer for use in the
transportation to or from a farm, for a distance of not more than 150 miles, of
products of the farm, including livestock and its products, poultry and its
products, floricultural and horticultural products, and in the transportation
to the farm, from a distance of not more than 150 miles, of supplies for the
farm, including tile, fence and every other thing or commodity used in
agricultural, floricultural, horticultural, livestock and poultry production,
and livestock, poultry and other animals and things used for breeding, feeding
or other purposes connected with the operation of the farm, when the truck is
operated in accordance with this definition and is not used in the operations
of a motor carrier, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4923.01.
   FATALITY. The death of a person as the result of a motor vehicle accident
occurring not more than 365 days prior to the date of death.   
   FELONY. Any offense under Federal or state law that is punishable by death
or imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and includes any offense
specifically classified as a felony under the law of the state, regardless of
the penalty that may be imposed.
   FOREIGN JURISDICTION. Any jurisdiction other than a state.
   GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING. The value specified by the manufacturer as the
maximum loaded weight of a single or a combination vehicle. The GROSS VEHICLE
WEIGHT RATING of a combination vehicle is the gross vehicle weight rating of
the power unit plus the gross vehicle weight rating of each towed unit.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material that has been designated as hazardous
under 49 U.S.C. § 5103 and is required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R. part
172, subpart F, or any quantity of a material listed as a select agent or toxin
in 42 C.F.R. part 73, as amended.
   IMMINENT HAZARD. The existence of a condition that presents a substantial
likelihood that death, serious illness, severe personal injury or a substantial
endangerment to health, property or the environment may occur before the
reasonably foreseeable completion date of a formal proceeding begun to lessen
the risk of death, illness, injury or endangerment.
   MEDICAL VARIANCE. One of the following received by a driver from the Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Administration that allows the driver to be issued a
medical certificate:
      (1)   An exemption letter permitting operation of a commercial motor
vehicle under 49 C.F.R. part 381, subpart C, or 49 C.F.R. § 391.64; and
      (2)   A skill performance evaluation certificate permitting operation of
a commercial motor vehicle pursuant to 49 C.F.R. § 391.49.
   MOBILE TELEPHONE. A mobile communication device that falls under or uses any
commercial mobile radio service, as defined in 47 C.F.R. part 20; except that,
mobile telephone does not include two-way or citizens band radio services.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer or semitrailer propelled
or drawn by mechanical power used on highways; except that, such term does not
include a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer or semitrailer operated
exclusively on a rail.
   OUT-OF-SERVICE ORDER. A declaration by an authorized enforcement officer of
a federal, state, local, Canadian or Mexican jurisdiction declaring that the
driver, commercial motor vehicle or commercial motor carrier operation is out
of service as defined in 49 C.F.R. § 390.5.
   PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2935.01.
   PORTABLE TANK. A liquid or gaseous packaging designed primarily to be loaded
on or temporarily attached to a vehicle and equipped with skids, mountings or
accessories to facilitate handling of the tank by mechanical means.
   PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01(E)(1)
and (E)(3).
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Includes every vehicle that is defined as a
recreational vehicle in Ohio R.C. 4501.01 and is used exclusively for purposes
other than engaging in business for profit.
   RESIDENCE. Any person’s residence determined in accordance with standards
prescribed in the rules adopted by the Registrar.
   SCHOOL BUS. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
   SERIOUS TRAFFIC VIOLATION. Any of the following:
      (1)   A conviction arising from a single charge of operating a commercial
motor vehicle in violation of any provision of Ohio R.C. 4506.03;
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (2)(b) below, a violation
while operating a commercial motor vehicle of a law of the state, or any
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or any other
substantially similar law of another state or political subdivision of another
state, prohibiting either of the following:
            1.   Texting while driving; or
            2.   Using a handheld mobile telephone.
         (b)   It is not a serious traffic violation if the person was texting
or using a handheld mobile telephone to contact law enforcement or other
emergency services.
      (3)   A conviction arising from the operation of any motor vehicle that
involves any of the following:
         (a)   A single charge of any speed in excess of the posted speed limit
by 15 miles per hour or more;
         (b)   Violations of Ohio R.C. 4511.20 or 4511.201 or any substantially
equivalent ordinance or resolution, or of any substantially equivalent law of
another state or political subdivision of another state;
         (c)   Violation of a law of the state or an ordinance or resolution
relating to traffic control, other than a parking violation, or of any
substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of
another state, that results in a fatal accident;
         (d)   Violation of Ohio R.C. 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state, that
involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid commercial
driver’s license with the proper class or endorsement for the specific vehicle
group being operated or for the passengers or type of cargo being transported;
         (e)   Violation of Ohio R.C. 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state, that
involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid commercial
driver’s license being in the person’s possession;
         (f)   Violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.33 or 4511.34, or any municipal
ordinance or county or township resolution substantially equivalent to either
of those sections, or any substantially equivalent law of another state or
political subdivision of another state;
         (g)   Violation of any other law of the state, any law of another
state, or any ordinance or resolution of a political subdivision of the state
or another state that meets both of the following requirements:
            1.   It relates to traffic control, other than a parking violation;
and
            2.   It is determined to be a serious traffic violation by the
United States Secretary of Transportation and is designated by the Director as
such by rule.
STATE. A state of the United States and includes the District of Columbia.
   TANK VEHICLE. Any commercial motor vehicle that is designed to transport any
liquid or gaseous materials within a tank or tanks that are either permanently
or temporarily attached to the vehicle or its chassis and have an individual
rated capacity of more than 119 gallons and an aggregate rated capacity of
1,000 gallons or more. The term does not include a commercial motor vehicle
transporting an empty storage container tank that is not designed for
transportation, has a rated capacity of 1,000 gallons or more and is
temporarily attached to a flatbed trailer.
   TESTER. A person or entity acting pursuant to a valid agreement entered into
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4506.09(B).
   TEXTING. Manually entering alphanumeric text into, or reading text from, an
electronic device. TEXTING includes short message service (SMS), e-mail,
instant messaging, a command or request to access a world wide web page,
pressing more than a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone, or engaging in any other form of
electronic text retrieval or entry, for present or future communication.
TEXTING does not include the following:
      (1)   Using voice commands to initiate, receive, or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone;
      (2)   Inputting, selecting or reading information on a global positioning
system or navigation system;
      (3)   Pressing a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone; or
      (4)   Using, for a purpose that is not otherwise prohibited by law, a
device capable of performing multiple functions, such as a fleet management
system, a dispatching device, a mobile telephone, a citizens band radio or a
music player.
   TEXTING WHILE DRIVING.
      (1)   Texting while operating a commercial motor vehicle, with the motor
running, including while temporarily stationary because of traffic, a traffic-
control device or other momentary delays.
      (2)   TEXTING WHILE DRIVING does not include operating a commercial motor
vehicle with or without the motor running when the driver has moved the vehicle
to the side of, or off, a highway and is stopped in a location where the
vehicle can safely remain stationary.
   UNITED STATES. The 50 states and the District of Columbia.
   UPGRADE. A change in the class of vehicles, endorsements or self-certified
status as described in Ohio R.C. 4506.10(A)(1) that expands the ability of a
current commercial driver’s license holder to operate commercial motor vehicles
under this chapter or Ohio R.C. Ch. 4506.
   USE OF A HANDHELD MOBILE TELEPHONE.
      (1)   Using at least one hand to hold a mobile telephone to conduct a
voice communication;
      (2)   Dialing or answering a mobile telephone by pressing more than a
single button; or
      (3)   Reaching for a mobile telephone in a manner that requires a driver
to maneuver so that the driver is no longer in a seated driving position, or
restrained by a seat belt that is installed in accordance with 49 C.F.R. §
393.93 and adjusted in accordance with the vehicle manufacturer’s instructions.
   VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
(ORC 4506.01)
§ 341.02 USE OF ACTUAL GROSS WEIGHT IN LIEU OF RATING.
   For purposes of this chapter, the actual gross weight of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles may be used in lieu of a gross vehicle weight rating to
determine whether a vehicle or combination of vehicles qualifies as a
commercial motor vehicle if the gross vehicle weight rating specified by the
manufacturer for the vehicle of combination of vehicles is not determinable, or
if the manufacturer of the vehicle has not specified a gross vehicle weight
rating.
(ORC 4506.011)
§ 341.03 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having in the person’s
possession or otherwise under the person’s control more than one valid driver’s
license issued by the state, any other state or by a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in the municipality
in violation of an out-of- service order while the person’s driving privilege
is suspended, revoked or cancelled, or while the person is subject to
disqualification;
      (3)   Drive a motor vehicle on a highway in the municipality under the
authority of a commercial driver’s license issued by another state or a foreign
jurisdiction, after having been a resident of the state for 30 days or longer;
      (4)   Knowingly give false information in any application or
certification required by Ohio R.C. 4506.07;
      (5)   Knowingly provide false statements or engage in any fraudulent act
related to testing for a commercial driver's license as required in Ohio R.C.
4506.09.
   (B)   The municipality shall give every conviction occurring out of the
state and notice of which was received by the State Department of Public Safety
after 12-31-1989, full faith and credit and treat it for sanctioning purposes
under this chapter as though the conviction had occurred in the state.
(ORC 4506.04(A), (B))
   (C)   No person shall drive any commercial motor vehicle for which an
endorsement is required under Ohio R.C. 4506.12 unless the proper endorsement
appears on the persons’s commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit. No person shall drive a commercial motor
vehicle in violation of a restriction established under Ohio R.C. 4506.12 that
appears on the person’s commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit.
(ORC 4506.12(I))
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates divisions (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) above is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) above is guilty of falsification,
a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition, the provisions of Ohio R.C.
4507.19 apply.
(ORC 4506.04(C))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(5) of this section is guilty of
falsification, a misdemeanor of the third degree. In addition, the provisions
of Ohio R.C. 4507.19 apply.
      (4)   (a)   Whoever violates division (C) above is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   The offenses established under division (C) above are strict
liability offenses and Ohio R.C. 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of
these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply
that any other offense for which there is no specified degree of culpability,
whether in this section or another section of this code or the Ohio Revised
Code, is not a strict liability offense.
(ORC 4506.12(J))
§ 341.04 PHYSICAL QUALIFICATION TO OPERATE COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person who holds a valid commercial driver’s license shall drive a
commercial motor vehicle unless the person is physically qualified to do so.
      (1)   Any person applying for a commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit, the renewal or upgrade of a
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit, or the transfer of a commercial driver’s license from out
of state shall self-certify to the Registrar for purposes of 49 C.F.R. § 383.71
one of the following in regard to the applicant’s operation of a commercial
motor vehicle, as applicable:
         (a)   1.   If the applicant operates or expects to operate a
commercial motor vehicle in interstate or foreign commerce and is subject to
and meets the requirements under 49 C.F.R. part 391, the applicant shall self-
certify that the applicant is non-excepted interstate and shall provide the
Registrar with the original or a copy of a medical examiner’s certificate and
each subsequently issued medical examiner’s certificate prepared by a qualified
medical examiner to maintain a medically certified status on the applicant’s
commercial driver licensing system driver record;
            2.   If the applicant operates or expects to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in interstate commerce, but engages in transportation or
operations excepted under 49 C.F.R. §§ 390.3(f), 391.2, 391.68 or 398.3 from
all or parts of the qualification requirements of 49 C.F.R. part 391, the
applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is excepted interstate and is
not required to obtain a medical examiner’s certificate;
         (b)   1.   If the applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and
is subject to state driver qualification requirements, the applicant shall
self-certify that the applicant is non-excepted intrastate;
            2.   If the applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and is
excepted from all or parts of the state driver qualification requirements, the
applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is excepted intrastate.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the expiration date on a person’s commercial
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit,
every commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit holder shall provide the Registrar with the certification
required by this section on or after 1-30-2012, but prior to 1-30-2014.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4506.10(A), (E))
§ 341.05 CRIMINAL OFFENSES.
   (A)   No person who holds a commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit or who operates a motor vehicle
for which a commercial driver’s license or permit is required shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having a measurable or
detectable amount of alcohol or of a controlled substance in the person’s
blood, breath or urine;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of 0.04% or more by whole blood or breath;
      (3)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of .048% or more by blood serum or blood plasma;
      (4)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of .056% or more by urine;
      (5)   Drive a motor vehicle while under the influence of a controlled
substance;
      (6)   Drive a motor vehicle in violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or a
municipal O.V.I. ordinance as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.181;
      (7)   Use a vehicle in the commission of a felony;
      (8)   Refuse to submit to a test under Ohio R.C. 4506.17 or Ohio R.C.
4511.191, or any substantially similar municipal ordinance;
      (9)   Operate a commercial motor vehicle while the person’s commercial
driver’s license or permit or other commercial driving privileges are revoked,
suspended, cancelled or disqualified;
      (10)   Cause a fatality through the negligent operation of a commercial
motor vehicle, including but not limited to the offenses of aggravated
vehicular homicide, vehicular homicide and vehicular manslaughter;
      (11)   Fail to stop after an accident in violation of Ohio R.C. 4549.02
to 4549.03, or any substantially similar municipal ordinance;
      (12)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle in violation of any provision of
Ohio R.C. 4511.61 to 4511.63 or any federal or local law or ordinance
pertaining to railroad-highway grade crossings;
      (13)   Use a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony involving the
manufacture, distribution or dispensing of a controlled substance as defined in
Ohio R.C. 3719.01 or the possession with intent to manufacture, distribute or
dispense a controlled substance;
      (14)   Use a commercial motor vehicle in the commission of a violation of
Ohio R.C. 2905.32 or any other substantially equivalent offense established
under federal law or the laws of another state.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
   (C)   The offenses established under this section are strict liability
offenses and Ohio R.C. 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of these
offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply that any
other offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a
strict liability offense.
(ORC 4506.15)
Statutory reference:
   Alcohol or controlled substance testing, disqualification of drivers, see
Ohio R.C. 4506.17
   Disqualification of drivers for violations, see Ohio R.C. 4506.16
§ 341.06 APPLICATION OF 49 C.F.R. PART 383.
   (A)   The provisions of 49 C.F.R. part 383, subpart C (notification
requirements and employer responsibilities), as amended, shall apply to all
commercial drivers or persons who apply for employment as commercial drivers.
No person shall fail to make a report to the person’s employer as required by
this section.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4506.19)
§ 341.07 INFORMATION REQUIRED OF PROSPECTIVE DRIVERS BY EMPLOYERS; UNAUTHORIZED
DRIVING.
   (A)   Each employer shall require every applicant for employment as a driver
of a commercial vehicle to provide the applicant’s employment history for the
ten years preceding the date the employment application is submitted to the
prospective employer. The following information shall be submitted:
      (1)   A list of the names and addresses of the applicant’s previous
employers for which the applicant was the operator of a commercial motor
vehicle;
      (2)   The dates the applicant was employed by these employers; and
      (3)   The reason for leaving each of these employers.
   (B)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize any driver employed by
the employer to drive a commercial motor vehicle during any period in which any
of the following apply:
      (1)   The driver’s commercial driver’s license is suspended, revoked or
cancelled by any state or a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   The driver has lost the privilege to drive, or currently is
disqualified from driving, a commercial motor vehicle in any state or foreign
jurisdiction;
      (3)   The driver, the commercial motor vehicle the driver is driving, or
the motor carrier operation is subject to an out-of-service order in any state
or a foreign jurisdiction; and
      (4)   The driver has more than one driver’s license.
   (C)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle in violation of Ohio R.C. 4506.15.
   (D)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle if the driver does not hold a valid, current
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit bearing the proper class or endorsements for the vehicle. No
employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in violation of the restrictions on the driver’s commercial
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates divisions (A), (B) or (D) above is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) above is guilty of a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 4506.20)
§ 341.08 AUTHORITY OF PEACE OFFICERS RE DRUNK DRIVING.
   (A)   Within the jurisdictional limits of the appointing authority, any
peace officer shall stop and detain any person found violating Ohio R.C.
4506.15, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, without obtaining
a warrant. When there is reasonable ground to believe that a violation of Ohio
R.C. 4506.15, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, has been
committed and a test or tests of the person’s whole blood, blood plasma or
blood serum, breath or urine is necessary, the peace officer shall take the
person to an appropriate place for testing. If a person refuses to submit to a
test after being warned as provided in Ohio R.C. 4506.17(C), or submits to a
test that discloses the presence of a controlled substance or an alcohol
concentration of 0.04% or more, by whole blood or breath, an alcohol
concentration of .048% or more by blood serum or blood plasma, or an alcohol
concentration of .056% or more by urine, the peace officer shall require that
the person immediately surrender the person’s commercial driver’s license to
the peace officer.
   (B)   As used in this section, JURISDICTIONAL LIMITS means the limits within
which a peace officer may arrest and detain a person without a warrant under
Ohio R.C. 2935.03; except that, the Superintendent and the troopers of the
State Highway Patrol may stop and detain, without warrant, any person who, in
the presence of the Superintendent or any trooper, is engaged in a violation of
any of the provisions of this subchapter or Ohio R.C. Ch. 4506.
(ORC 4506.23)
§ 341.09 PERMITTING OR DRIVING WHILE FATIGUED OR ILL PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle, as defined in Ohio
R.C. 4506.01, or a commercial car or commercial tractor, as defined in Ohio
R.C. 4501.01, while the person’s ability or alertness is so impaired by
fatigue, illness or other causes that it is unsafe for the person to drive such
vehicle. No driver shall use any drug which would adversely affect the driver’s
ability or alertness.
   (B)   No owner, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4501.01, of a commercial motor
vehicle, commercial car or commercial tractor or a person employing or
otherwise directing the driver of such vehicle, shall require or knowingly
permit a driver in any such condition described in division (A) above to drive
such vehicle upon any street or highway.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section
or Ohio R.C. 4511.79, or Ohio R.C. 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762,
4511.764 or 4511.77 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent
to any of those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 4511.79)
§ 341.10 DRIVER’S CONSECUTIVE SERVICE AND OFF-DUTY HOURS. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 341.10, formerly codified as § 341.03, was repealed as part of the
1992 updating and revision of this code of ordinances because substantially
equivalent state law (ORC 4511.80) was repealed by the General Assembly by Am.
Sub. S.B. No. 382, effective 12-31-1990.
§ 341.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
303.99 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 343: OFFENSES RELATING TO THEFT AND FRAUD
Section
343.001   Definitions. (Repealed)
343.01   Illegal sale or possession of master vehicle keys. (Repealed)
343.02   Motor vehicle with concealed identity. (Repealed)
343.03   Vehicle trespass. (Repealed)
343.04   Reserved.
343.05   Odometers; tampering with and repairing. (Repealed)
343.06   Devices that cause false registration. (Repealed)
343.07   Operation of vehicles with disconnected odometers. (Repealed)
343.08   Transfers of motor vehicles. (Repealed)
343.09   Disclosure of true readings. (Repealed)
343.10   Violations; liability to transferee; venue; limitations. (Repealed)
343.11   Remedies cumulative. (Repealed)
343.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Criminal damaging or endangering, see GEN. OFF.
642.10
   Criminal mischief (tampering), see GEN. OFF.
642.11
   Receiving stolen property, see GEN. OFF.
642.22
   See section histories for similar state law
   Theft, see GEN. OFF.
642.02,
642.03
   Unauthorized use of a vehicle, see GEN. OFF.
642.04
§ 343.001 DEFINITIONS. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 343.001 was repealed as part of the 1988 updating and revision of
this code of ordinances because violations of Ohio R.C. 4549.41 through
4549.46, from which §§ 343.001 and 343.05 through 343.11 were derived, were
made felonies, by the General Assembly, by Am. Sub. H.B. No. 382, effective 3-
19-1987.
§ 343.01 ILLEGAL SALE OR POSSESSION OF MASTER VEHICLE KEYS. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 343.01 was repealed as part of the 1988 updating and revision of
this code of ordinance because the offense of illegal sale or possession of
master vehicle keys was made a felony by the General Assembly. See Ohio R.C.
4549.042 and 4549.99(C).
§ 343.02 MOTOR VEHICLE WITH CONCEALED IDENTITY. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 343.02 was repealed as part of the 1988 updating and revision of
this code of ordinances because the offense of tampering with motor vehicle
identification numbers was made a felony by the General Assembly. See Ohio R.C.
4549.61 et seq. and 4549.99(F).
§ 343.03 VEHICLE TRESPASS. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 343.03 was repealed as part of the 1998 updating and revision of
this code of ordinances. See §
642.04 of the General Offenses Code.
§ 343.04 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Section 343.04 is reserved for future legislation.
§ 343.05 ODOMETERS; TAMPERING WITH AND REPAIRING. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 343.05 was repealed as part of the 1988 updating and revision of
this code of ordinances because violations of Ohio R.C. 4549.42, from which §
343.05 was derived, were made felonies, by the General Assembly, by Am. Sub.
H.B. No. 382.
§ 343.06 DEVICES THAT CAUSE FALSE REGISTRATION. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 343.06 was repealed as part of the 1988 updating and revision of
this code of ordinances because violations of Ohio R.C. 4549.43, from which §
343.06 was derived, were made felonies, by the General Assembly, by Am. Sub.
H.B. No. 382.
§ 343.07 OPERATION OF VEHICLES WITH DISCONNECTED ODOMETERS. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 343.07 was repealed as part of the 1988 updating and revision of
this code of ordinances because violations of Ohio R.C. 4549.44, from which §
343.07 was derived, were made felonies, by the General Assembly, by Am. Sub.
H.B. No. 382.
§ 343.08 TRANSFERS OF MOTOR VEHICLES. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 343.08 was repealed as part of the 1988 updating and revision of
this code of ordinances because violations of Ohio R.C. 4549.45, from which §
343.08 was derived, were made felonies, by the General Assembly, by Am. Sub.
H.B. No. 382.
§ 343.09 DISCLOSURE OF TRUE READINGS. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 343.09 was repealed as part of the 1988 updating and revision of
this code of ordinances because violations of Ohio R.C. 4549.46, from which §
343.09 was derived, were made felonies, by the General Assembly, by Am. Sub.
H.B. No. 382.
§ 343.10 VIOLATIONS; LIABILITY TO TRANSFEREE; VENUE; LIMITATIONS. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 343.10 was repealed as part of the 1988 updating and revision of
this code of ordinances because violations of Ohio R.C. 4549.41 through
4549.46, from which §§ 343.001 and 343.05 through 343.09 were derived, were
made felonies, by the General Assembly, by Am. Sub. H.B. No. 382, effective 3-
19-1987.
§ 343.11 REMEDIES CUMULATIVE. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 343.11 was repealed as part of the 1988 updating and revision of
this code of ordinances because violations of Ohio R.C. 4549.41 through
4549.46, from which §§ 343.001 and 343.05 through 343.09 were derived, were
made felonies, by the General Assembly, by Am. Sub. H.B. No. 382, effective 3-
19-1987.
§ 343.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
303.99 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
TITLE SEVEN: PARKING
CHAPTER 351: PARKING GENERALLY
Section
351.01   Police may remove unattended vehicle which obstructs traffic.
351.02   Registered owner prima-facie liable for unlawful parking.
351.03   Prohibited standing or parking places.
351.04   Manner of parallel and angle parking.
351.05   Night parking of commercial/recreational vehicles in residential
districts.
351.06   Selling, washing or repairing vehicle upon roadway.
351.07   Unattended vehicle: duty to stop engine, remove key, set brake and
turn wheels.
351.08   Opening vehicle door on traffic side.
351.09   Truck loading zones.
351.10   Bus stops and taxicab stands.
351.11   Parking in alleys and narrow streets; exceptions.
351.12   Prohibition against parking on streets or highways.
351.13   Overnight parking.
351.14   Parking in fire lanes in areas zoned for general business.
351.15   Parking on private property.
351.16   Parking areas for handicapped persons.
351.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Impounding; redemption, see TRAF.
303.08
   Lights on parked or stopped vehicles, see TRAF.
337.09
   Officer may remove ignition key from unattended vehicle, see TRAF.
303.03
   “Parking” defined, see TRAF.
301.21
   Parking Enforcement Unit, see ADM.
238.04
   Parking fine schedule, see ADM. 290.03
   Parking near stopped fire apparatus, see TRAF.
331.27
   Parking of bicycles, see TRAF.
373.09
   See section histories for similar state law
   “Stop” defined, see TRAF.
301.39
   “Stopping and standing” defined, see TRAF.
301.40
   Storage of junk vehicles, see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 632
§ 351.01 POLICE MAY REMOVE UNATTENDED VEHICLE WHICH OBSTRUCTS TRAFFIC.
   (A)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in
violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.66 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, such officer may move such vehicle or require the driver or other
person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved
or improved or main traveled part of such highway.
   (B)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any
highway, bridge or causeway, or in any tunnel, where such vehicles constitutes
an obstruction to traffic, such officer may provide for the removal of such
vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
(ORC 4511.67)
§ 351.02 REGISTERED OWNER PRIMA FACIE LIABLE FOR UNLAWFUL PARKING.
   In any hearing on a charge of illegally parking a motor vehicle, testimony
that a vehicle bearing a certain license plate was found unlawfully parked as
prohibited by the provisions of this traffic code, and further testimony that
the record of the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles shows that the license plate
was issued to the defendant, shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle
which was unlawfully parked, was so parked by the defendant. A certified
registration copy, showing such fact, from the Registrar shall be proof of such
ownership.
§ 351.03 PROHIBITED STANDING OR PARKING PLACES.
   (A)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the provisions of this
title, or while obeying the directions of a police officer or a traffic-control
device, in any of the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk, except a bicycle;
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;
      (5)   On a crosswalk;
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      (7)   Within 30 feet of, and upon the approach to, any flashing beacon,
stop sign or traffic-control device;
      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by a traffic-control device;
      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      (10)   Within 20 feet of a driveway entrance to any fire station and, on
the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75
feet of the entrance when it is properly posted with signs;
      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
such standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (12)   Alongside any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street;
      (13)   Upon any bridge or elevated structure upon a highway, or within a
highway tunnel;
      (14)   At any place where signs prohibit stopping, standing or parking,
or where the curbing is painted yellow, or at any place in excess of the
maximum time limited by signs;
      (15)   Within one foot of another parked vehicle, except that commercial
trucks may park alongside any such stopped or parked vehicle when in front of a
business establishment for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise; but
only for so long as it takes to perform such act, and not when there is parking
space available within reasonable distance of such establishment; or when there
is an alley or other facilities available in connection with a business or
business establishment for such purpose; and also, not when the operator of
such vehicle is performing some act in connection with his or her personal
affairs;
      (16)   On the roadway portion of a freeway, expressway or thruway.
      (17)   In such a manner so as to impede the delivery of mail to a
mailbox.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within on year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
§ 351.04 MANNER OF PARALLEL AND ANGLE PARKING.
   (A)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is an
adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the curbside wheels of such
vehicle parallel with and not more than 12 inches from the curb, unless it is
impossible to approach so close to the curb; in such case the stop shall be as
close to the curb as possible and only for the time necessary to discharge and
receive passengers or to load or unload merchandise.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be stopped or parked on a road or street with the
vehicle facing in a direction other than the direction of travel on that side
of the road or street.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any provision of this code, air compressors, tractors,
trucks and other equipment, while being used in the construction,
reconstruction, installation, repair, or removal of facilities near, on, over
or under a street, may stop, stand or park where necessary in order to perform
such work, provided a flagperson is on duty, or warning signs or lights are
displayed as may be prescribed by the state.
   (D)   Upon streets or other public ways or places where angle parking is
permitted, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than at the
angle to the curb or edge of the roadway as is indicated by appropriate signs
or markings.
(Ord. 270-1999, passed 12-13-1999)
§ 351.05 NIGHT PARKING OF COMMERCIAL/RECREATIONAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS.
   No person shall park a school bus, commercial tractor, agricultural tractor,
truck/vehicle of more than a one-ton capacity, bus, trailer, semitrailer, pole
trailer, moving van/box truck, travel trailer, boat, or recreational vehicle on
any street or highway within the residential districts of the city between one
hour after sunset and one hour before sunrise.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957; Ord. 133-2021, passed 12-13-2021; Ord. 152-
2022, passed 11-14-2022)
§ 351.06 SELLING, WASHING OR REPAIRING VEHICLE UPON ROADWAY.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the
principal purpose of:
   (A)   Displaying such vehicle for sale; or
   (B)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
§ 351.07 UNATTENDED VEHICLES; DUTY TO STOP ENGINE, REMOVE KEY, SET BRAKE AND
TURN WHEELS.
   (A)   (1)   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit
it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition,
removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting the parking brake and,
when the motor vehicle is standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to
the curb or side of the highway.
      (2)   The requirements of this section relating to the stopping of the
engine, locking of the ignition and removing the key from the ignition of a
motor vehicle do not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   A motor vehicle that is parked on residential property;
         (b)   A motor vehicle that is locked, regardless of where it is
parked;
         (c)   An emergency vehicle; and
         (d)   A public safety vehicle.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within on year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.661)
§ 351.08 OPENING VEHICLE DOOR ON TRAFFIC SIDE.
   (A)   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.70)
§ 351.09 TRUCK LOADING ZONES.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or
length of time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup
and loading of materials, in any place marked as a truck loading zone during
hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect.
   (B)   In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials
exceed 30 minutes.
§ 351.10 BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a
bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or
stand has been officially designated and appropriately posted, except that the
driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of,
and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers when such
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter such zone, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes, if
such stopping is not prohibited therein by posted signs.
   (B)   No operator of a bus shall stop, stand or park such vehicle upon any
street or other public way at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading
passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop so designated and posted
as such, except in case of an emergency.
   (C)   No operator of a bus shall fail to enter a bus stop on a street or
other public way in such a manner that the bus when stopped to load or unload
passengers or baggage is in a position with the right front wheel of such
vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately
parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular
traffic.
   (D)   No operator of a taxicab shall stand or park such vehicle upon any
street or other public way at any place other than in a taxicab stand so
designated and posted as such. This provision shall not prevent the operator of
a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
parking provisions at any place for the purpose of, and while actually engaged
in, the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
§ 351.11 PARKING IN ALLEYS AND NARROW STREETS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park or allow to be stopped, stand or
be parked, any vehicle upon a street or alley in such a manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway
for free movement of vehicular traffic.
   (B)   No person shall stop, stand or park, or allow to be stopped, stand or
be parked, any vehicle upon any alley except for the purpose of loading and/or
unloading and then only for a period not to exceed 30 minutes.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply when the person stops,
allows to stand or parks any vehicle in obedience to traffic regulation,
traffic signs, traffic signals or a police officer.
(Ord. 56-1975, passed 3-7-1975)
§ 351.12 PROHIBITION AGAINST PARKING ON STREETS OR HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   (1)   Upon any highway, no person shall stop, park, or leave standing
any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled
part of the highway if it is practicable to stop, park, or so leave such
vehicle off the paved or main traveled part of the highway. In every event a
clear and unobstructed portion of the highway opposite such standing vehicle
shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear view of such
stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each
direction upon such highway.
      (2)   This section does not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is
disabled while on the paved or improved or main traveled portion of a highway
in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in such position.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within on year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.66)
§ 351.13 OVERNIGHT PARKING.
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of division (B) below, no person shall park
a motor vehicle on any paved street or highway of the city between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on any day of the week.
   (B)   Between March 1 and December 15 of each year, no person shall park a
motor vehicle between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following
day on any of the streets and highways of the city that are scheduled to be
swept by the city’s street sweeper during that particular eight-hour period as
shown on Exhibit A, attached to original Ord. 6-1993, passed 1-11-1993.
However, the prohibition set forth in this division (B) shall not apply, from
the Viaduct west to Eighth Street N.W., the period of prohibited parking will
be from 3:00 a.m. until 5:00 a.m.
   (C)   No person shall park a motor vehicle between 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
on any day on Commercial Downtown zoned streets. In the case of a new Barberton
Development Code in which zone names change, the equivalent zone shall apply
this section.
   (D)   Persons residing in Commercial Downtown zoned buildings may apply for
a permit to lawfully park overnight in the Commercial Downtown zoned lots. Such
permit shall be issued by the Director of Safety at their discretion. The
approved permit shall be displayed prominently in the motor vehicle. In the
case of a new Barberton Development Code in which zone names change, the
equivalent zone shall apply this section.
(Ord. 212-1975, passed 6-16-1975; Ord. 6-1993, passed 1-11-1993; Ord. 128-2025,
passed 9-9-2025)
§ 351.14 PARKING IN FIRE LANES IN AREAS ZONED FOR GENERAL BUSINESS.
   (A)   Wherever on public or private premises in an area zoned for general
business, as defined and established by the Zoning Code, the Director of Public
Safety on advice of the Fire Chief finds that parking of vehicles does or will
interfere with ready access by the Fire Division to a structure on the premises
for the purpose of fighting fires therein, or with ready access to a fire
hydrant installed for protection of the premises, the Director shall designate
a reasonable area or areas leading to and adjacent to such structure and
hydrants as fire lanes.
   (B)   Upon the designation of a fire lane as provided in division (A) above,
the Director shall notify, in writing, the owner of the premises of such
designation and of the extent of such lane. The Director shall cause to be
placed or erected signs and markers along the fire lane notifying all persons
of the existence of the fire lane. Thereafter the owner shall maintain the
signs and markers in legible condition. The design and location of the signs
and markers shall be specified by the Director and shall not be less than those
required for such signs and markers on public highways as prescribed by the
Ohio Department of Transportation.
   (C)   No person shall park a vehicle in any fire lane designated as such
pursuant to this section, nor within ten feet of any fire hydrant.
   (D)   No person shall be deemed guilty of violation of division (C) above
unless at the time of the alleged violation there were conspicuously posted the
signs and markers as provided for in division (B) above.
(Ord. 62-1976, passed 3-15-1976)
§ 351.15 PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   The parking of vehicles on public or private property, excluding
dedicated streets and ways set out for public travel and heretofore regulated,
shall be prohibited without the consent of the owner of private property or the
proper governmental agencies in charge of public property.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be parked on public property in violation of rules
and regulations set out by the governmental agencies controlling the public
property.
   (C)   No vehicle shall be parked on any private property in violation of any
regulations set down by the owner of the private property.
   (D)   The provisions of divisions (B) and (C) above shall not be applicable
unless the private or public property is posted in a conspicuous manner setting
forth the prohibition of parking or the conditions and regulations under which
parking is permitted.
   (E)   Subject to the requirements of this section, an owner of private
property or his authorized agent may remove, or cause to be removed, vehicles
parked upon his or her property in violation of the posted parking regulations.
   (F)   An owner of private property may create a private tow-away zone by
posting thereon a sign or signs, no smaller than 18 inches by 24 inches,
visible from all entrances to the private property, which contain at least the
following information:
      (1)   A designation that the area is a “PRIVATE TOW ZONE, UNAUTHORIZED
VEHICLES WILL BE TOWED”;
      (2)   The telephone number of the person from whom the vehicle can be
recovered; and
      (3)   A statement that “VEHICLE MAY BE RECOVERED AT ANY TIME UPON PROOF
OF OWNERSHIP AND PAYMENT OF TOWING CHARGE OF $90.00 AND STORAGE CHARGE OF
$12.00 PER 24 HOURS OR PART THEREOF”.
   (G)   By parking on property posted private property without the consent of
the owner of the property, the owner and operator of a vehicle shall be deemed
to have consented to the removal and storage and the payment of the costs of
removing and storage in an amount not to exceed the rates established by the
Director of Public Safety under the provisions of division (H) below.
   (H)   The Director of Public Safety shall promulgate and publish a set of
rules and regulations to implement this section as he deems proper, including
the establishment of reasonable maximum rates for the removal and storage of
any vehicle removed from private property. The rates established pursuant to
this section shall be posted as provided in division (F)(3) above.
(Ord. 206-1976, passed 9-20-1976; Ord. 171-2000, passed 9-11-2000)
§ 351.16 PARKING AREAS FOR HANDICAPPED PERSONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      HANDICAPPED PERSON. Any person who has lost the use of both legs or one
or both arms, who is blind, deaf or so severely handicapped as to be unable to
move about without the aid of crutches or a wheelchair, or whose mobility is
restricted by a permanent cardiovascular, pulmonary or other handicapping
condition.
      LICENSE PLATE OR PARKING CARD FOR HANDICAPPED PERSONS. A plate or card
issued pursuant to state law or a substantially equivalent license or plate
issued by a state, district, country or sovereignty with which the Ohio
Director of Public Service has an active reciprocity agreement as authorized by
state law.
   (B)   Public parking for handicapped persons.
      (1)   The Director of Public Safety or his or her designee is hereby
authorized to designate on public property special parking places of suitable
size and location for the exclusive use of handicapped persons and persons
transporting handicapped persons.
      (2)   No person shall park in a clearly marked space reserved for
handicapped persons under this division (B) without displaying a license plate
or parking card for handicapped persons.
   (C)   Private parking for handicapped persons.
      (1)   Owners of private property shall designate on their property
special parking places of suitable size and location for the exclusive use of
handicapped persons and persons transporting handicapped persons when required
to do so by this code of ordinances or by state law.
      (2)   No person shall park in a clearly marked space reserved for
handicapped persons under this division (C) without displaying a license plate
or parking card for handicapped persons.
   (D)   Posting of elevated sign. Each space designated under this section for
handicapped parking shall be identified through the posting of an elevated
sign, either permanently fixed or movable, imprinted with the international
symbol of access and located reasonably close to exits, entrances, elevators
and ramps. The distance from the ground to the top edge of the sign shall be
five feet and the sign, or a sign affixed next to the designating sign, shall
have wording that states the fine applicable for the offense of parking a motor
vehicle in the special designated parking location if the motor vehicle is not
legally entitled to be parked in that location pursuant to this section.
   (E)   Prohibited standing, stopping or parking. No person shall stop, stand
or park any motor vehicle at special parking locations provided for handicapped
persons under this section or at special parking locations provided for
handicapped persons in or on privately-owned parking lots, parking garages or
other parking areas and designated in accordance with this section, unless the
motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a handicapped person
and is displaying a license plate or parking card issued to said handicapped
person.
   (F)   Extension of lawful parking period. When a motor vehicle is being
operated by or for the transport of a handicapped person and is displaying a
license plate or parking card for handicapped persons, the motor vehicle shall
be permitted to park for a period of two hours in excess of the legal parking
period permitted by the municipality, except where a local ordinance or police
rule provides otherwise or where the vehicle is parked in such a manner as to
be clearly a traffic hazard.
   (G)   Marking of locations. No owner of an office, facility or parking
garage shall fail to properly mark special parking locations for the
handicapped as required by division (C)(1) above or fail to maintain the
markings of the special locations, including the erection and maintenance of
the fixed or movable signs.
   (H)   Removal of illegally parked motor vehicles. Any motor vehicle that is
parked in violation of divisions (B)(2) or (C)(2) above may be towed or
otherwise removed from the parking location by the Police Division.
(Ord. 270-1999, passed 12-13-1999)
§ 351.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
303.99 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 353: PARKING METERS
Section
353.01   Definitions.
353.02   Marking of parking spaces.   
353.03   Installation of parking meters.
353.04   Depositing of coins.
353.05   Hours of meter zone parking.
353.06   Rules and regulations.
353.07   Issuance of violation tags.
353.08   Purpose of funds.
353.09   Stops for commercial vehicles.
353.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Authority of Safety Director, see TRAF.
305.04
   Criminal mischief (tampering), see GEN. OFF.
642.11
   Municipal parking lots, see TRAF. Ch.
355
   Use of slugs in meters, see GEN. OFF.
642.16
§ 353.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARKING METER. Any mechanical device or meter not inconsistent with this
chapter placed or erected for the regulation of parking by authority of this
chapter. Each PARKING METER installed shall indicate by proper legend the legal
parking time established by the municipality and, when operated, shall at all
times indicate the balance of legal parking time, and at the expiration of such
period shall indicate illegal or overtime parking.
   PARKING METER SPACE. Any space within a parking meter zone, adjacent to a
parking meter and which is duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle
by a line painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb or on the surface of
the street adjacent to or adjoining the parking meters.
   PARKING METER ZONE. Any restricted street upon which parking meters are
installed and in operation.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 353.02 MARKING OF PARKING SPACES.
   The Director of Public Safety is hereby directed and authorized to cause to
be marked off individual parking spaces in the parking meter zones, such
parking spaces to be designated by lines painted or durably marked on the
curbing or surface of the street. At such space so marked off, no person shall
park any vehicle in such a way that such vehicle is not entirely within the
limits of the space so designated.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 353.03 INSTALLATION OF PARKING METERS.
   In the parking meter zones, the Director of Public Safety shall cause
parking meters to be installed upon the curb or sidewalk immediately adjacent
to the parking meter spaces, and the Chief of Police shall be responsible for
the regulation, control, operation, maintenance and use of such parking meters.
Each parking meter shall be so set as to display a signal showing legal parking
upon the deposit of the appropriate coin or coins, lawful money of the United
States, for the period of time prescribed by this chapter. Each parking meter
shall be so arranged that upon the expiration of the lawful time limit it will
indicate by a proper visible signal that the lawful parking period has expired
and in such cases the right of such vehicle to occupy such space shall cease
and the operator, owner, possessor or manager thereof shall be subject to the
penalties provided.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 353.04 DEPOSITING OF COINS.
   (A)   When any vehicle is parked in any parking meter space, the operator of
such vehicle shall, upon entering the parking meter space, immediately deposit
or cause to be deposited in the meter such proper coin of the United States as
may be required for such parking meter and as designed by proper directions on
the meter. Failure to deposit such proper coin or coins shall constitute a
violation of this section. Upon the deposit of such coin, the parking space may
be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the maximum period of time which
has been prescribed for the particular meter space; provided that, any person
placing a vehicle in a parking meter space adjacent to a meter which indicates
that unused time has been left in the meter by the previous occupant of the
space, shall not be required to deposit a coin so long as his occupancy of the
space does not exceed the indicated unused parking time. If the vehicle remains
parked in any such parking meter space beyond the maximum parking time limit
set for such parking meter space as is designated by proper directions on the
meter, irrespective of the number or amount of coins deposited in the meter
and, if the meter indicates illegal or overtime parking, then and in either of
such events, such vehicle shall be considered as parking overtime and beyond
the period of legal parking time, and such parking shall be deemed a violation
of this section.
   (B)   In case of emergency determined by an officer of the Fire Division or
the Police Division, the privilege of parking in any parking meter space may be
withdrawn and the operator of any vehicle shall comply with the orders and
directions of such officer of the Fire Division or member of the Police
Division or shall comply with any traffic-control sign or signal placed on the
street or curb indicating that parking is temporarily prohibited. Parking in
such a prohibited area shall be deemed a violation of this section.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 353.05 HOURS OF METER ZONE PARKING.
   (A)   In the parking meter zones, all parking shall be prohibited between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on every day of the week, except Sundays,
unless the owner or operator of a vehicle parked in a parking meter space
shall, upon entering such parking meter space, immediately deposit or cause to
be deposited coins in such parking meter as herein provided.
   (B)   The provisions herein for the use of parking meters shall not apply to
parking on Sundays and on all legal holidays.
   (C)   During the times when the parking meters are not in operation under
the provisions of this chapter, vehicles may be parked in parking meter spaces
without the deposit of any coins in such parking meters.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 353.06 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   No person shall:
   (A)   Cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of
such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time
established for any parking meter zone as herein described, or deposit in any
parking meter any coin for the purpose of parking beyond the maximum legal
parking time for the particular parking meter space occupied by such vehicle;
   (B)   Cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle operated by such person to
be parked overtime, or beyond the period of legal parking time established for
any parking meter zone as herein described, or deposit in any parking meter any
coin for the purpose of parking beyond the maximum legal parking time for the
particular parking meter space occupied by such vehicle;
   (C)   Permit any vehicle, registered in the name of or operated by such
person, to remain in any parking space adjacent to any parking meter while the
meter is displaying a signal indicating that the vehicle occupying such parking
space has already been parked beyond the period prescribed for such parking
space;
   (D)   Cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of
such person, or operated by such person, to be parked across any line or
marking of a parking meter space or in such position that the vehicle is not
entirely within the area designated by such lines or markings;
   (E)   Deface, injure, tamper, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the
usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this chapter;
and/or
   (F)   Deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device
or metal substance, or other substitute for lawful coins.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 353.07 ISSUANCE OF VIOLATION TAGS.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or other officers in charge,
acting in accordance with instructions issued by the Director of Public Safety,
to report the following:
   (A)   The number of each parking meter which indicates that the vehicle
occupying the parking space adjacent to such parking meter is or has been
parked in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter;
   (B)   The state license number of such vehicle;
   (C)   The approximate length of time during which such vehicle is parked in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; and
   (D)   Any other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending such violation. Each such police
officer shall also attach to the vehicle a notice to the owner or operator
thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of a provision of this
chapter and instructing such owner or operator to report to the Police Division
in regard to such violation.
(Ord. 8-1947, passed 2-17-1947)
§ 353.08 PURPOSE OF FUNDS.
   (A)   The coins deposited in parking meters are required and shall be used
for the purposes of purchasing and defraying the expenses of the operation and
maintenance of the parking meters and the proper regulations of traffic on
public streets, providing street markings, traffic signs and the control
devices and maintaining the same and for similar purposes.
   (B)   The money shall be paid into a special fund known as the “Traffic
Fund”.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 353.09 STOPS FOR COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the municipality from
providing for bus stops, taxicab stands and other matters of a similar nature,
including the loading or unloading of trucks, vans or other commercial
vehicles.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 353.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
303.99 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 355: MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS
Section
355.01   Designation.
355.02   Use of lots.
355.03   Hours of parking.
355.04   Violations.
355.99   Penalty.
Editor’s note:
   This chapter was re-enacted in its entirety by Ord. 192-1991, passed 12-23-
1991.
Cross-reference:
   General parking regulations, see TRAF. Ch.
351
   Municipal off-street parking, see Ohio R.C. 715.05
   Parking Commission, see TRAF. Ch.
359
   Parking meters, see TRAF. Ch.
353
§ 355.01 DESIGNATION.
   The following parking lots are hereby designated by the city as municipal
parking lots and shall be under the jurisdiction of the Director of Public
Safety:
Lot Location
Lot    Location
Red    Northeast corner of Fifth Street NW/W. Tuscarawas
Red    Northwest corner of Fifth Street NW/W. Tuscarawas
Gray   North side of Wooster Road W. between Fourth Street NE and Sixth Street
       NE
Pink   Southwest corner of Second Street NW/Wooster Road W.
Brown  Southeast corner of Second Street NW/Wooster Road W.
Green  First Street NW between W. Paige and W. Park Avenues
Purple Lot on north side of the street between Second Street NW and Third
       Street NW
Orange North side of W. Hopocan Avenue between Newell Street and Wunderlich
       Avenue
Yellow Northwest corner of Second Street NW/W. Paige Avenue
Blue   Lot on east side of 14th Street NW between W. Hopocan Avenue and Wooster
       Road W.
 
(Ord. 199-1993, passed 12-20-1993; Ord. 111- 2023, passed 9-11-2023)
§ 355.02 USE OF LOTS.
   (A)   Municipal parking in Red lots shall be utilized as a combined use for
both reserved and public parking. Except where specifically limited by this
chapter, the Director of Public Safety shall have discretion in the assignment
of reserved parking spaces and the time periods for which spaces are reserved.
The Director shall cause municipal lots to be properly marked and painted with
appropriate signage depicting the location of reserved spaces and time
restrictions. The Director may temporarily close any municipal lot or any
portion thereof to public use due to special events or the temporary needs of
the city.
   (B)   Red lot shall be occupied and used for the parking of vehicles so
reserved to the exclusion of all others from 6:00 a.m. until 6:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday. Reserved space #1 shall be occupied and used for the parking of
the vehicle so reserved and to the exclusion of all others 24 hours a day,
seven days a week. Reserved spaces(A.D.A. compliant) in the southern most row
and closest to the driveway apron on W. Tuscarawas, shall be available to the
public 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
   (C)   Spaces marked “Police” in Red lot shall be occupied and used for the
parking of authorized police vehicles. These spaces shall be reserved for such
vehicles 24 hours a day, seven days a week, to the exclusion of all others. The
east ramp of the municipal building shall also be reserved for police patrol
car storage, with one space provided for the municipal building custodian.
   (D)   Spaces marked “Reserved” shall be occupied and used for parking only
by the authorized person or the authorized person’s designee. Parking in
properly marked spaces by any other person is prohibited.
   (E)   No unauthorized person shall park in any municipal parking lot in
violation of any of the above restrictions.
   (F)   The Police Division shall have the authority to tow all unauthorized
vehicles parked illegally in any space designated reserved in accordance with
this section.
   (G)   Semi-trucks, boats, trailers, food trucks and commercial vehicles are
prohibited from parking unless authorized by the Director of Public Safety.
(Ord. 192-1991, passed 12-23-1991; Ord. 7-2001, passed 2-26-2001; Ord. 54-2018,
passed 5-14-2018; Ord. 111-2023, passed 9-11-2023)
§ 355.03 HOURS OF PARKING.
   Public parking in municipal lots shall not exceed 24 consecutive hours,
unless permission is obtained from the Director of Public Safety.
(Ord. 192-1991, passed 12-23-1991)
§ 355.04 VIOLATIONS.
   Anyone violating this chapter shall be subject to removal of the vehicle by
towing.
(Ord. 192-1991, passed 12-23-1991)
§ 355.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
303.99 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 357: SNOW EMERGENCIES
Section
357.01   Establishment of parking ban.
357.02   Responsibility of owners and operators.
357.03   Removal of vehicles.
357.04   Violations.
357.05   Notice of parking ban.
357.06   Designation of streets. (Repealed)
357.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Impounding of vehicles, see TRAF.
303.08
   Snow removal equipment and lights, see TRAF.
337.26
§ 357.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF PARKING BAN.
   In order to facilitate the cleaning of certain streets and to expedite the
free flow of vehicular traffic, motor vehicles shall not be parked on all
streets of the city at such times as the United States Weather Bureau records
indicate that four inches of snow have fallen and there is a prospect of a
further snowfall. All cars parked prior to the time weather conditions prohibit
parking must be removed by the owner or operator thereof. Any motor vehicle
parked in violation of the prohibition shall be removed at the order of the
Director of Public Safety and/or the Chief of Police and shall subject the
owner or operator to the fines provided herein.
(Ord. 228-1990, passed 1-28-1991)
§ 357.02 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS AND OPERATORS.
   It shall be the responsibility of the owners or operators of motor vehicles
to ascertain whether weather conditions require the removal of their motor
vehicles from any city street and to remove all cars parked in violation of the
provisions of this chapter. While the city will make every effort to inform the
public of the existence of weather conditions requiring removal of parked
automobiles from city streets, the owners and operators of motor vehicles shall
have full responsibility to determine existing weather conditions and to remove
parked automobiles if weather conditions are such as to require their removal
under the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 228-1990, passed 1-28-1991)
§ 357.03 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES.
   After the United States Weather Bureau records indicate that four inches of
snow have fallen and there is a prospect of further snowfall, the Director of
Public Safety and/or the Chief of Police shall order the removal of all
vehicles parked on city streets which have not been removed by the owners or
operators. Such vehicles shall be removed to a motor vehicle pound as
designated by such officer and records of all vehicles removed shall be kept in
the Traffic Section of the Police Station.
(Ord. 228-1990, passed 1-28-1991)
§ 357.04 VIOLATIONS.
   No person shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter with respect
to failure to remove parked motor vehicles, when the weather conditions
described in this chapter require their removal. Failure of an owner or
operator to remove his or her motor vehicle from any city street during the
snow emergency parking ban shall subject the vehicle to a snow ban parking
citation of $20. The citation does not exclude the motor vehicle from being
towed, if conditions warrant. In addition to the penalties provided in §
303.99, when a motor vehicle is towed to a motor vehicle pound, the motor
vehicle can be removed only upon the payment of the towing and storage charges
involved.
(Ord. 9-1994, passed 1-24-1994)
§ 357.05 NOTICE OF PARKING BAN.
   The Director of Public Safety and/or the Chief of Police shall use all
available means of disseminating information as to the existence of weather
conditions requiring the removal of parked motor vehicles from the city
streets. Such notice shall be disseminated through the radio, newspaper and all
other available media to the extent feasible. The dissemination of the
information, however, shall not relieve owners or operators of motor vehicles
from the responsibility of ascertaining the existence of weather conditions
requiring the removal of parked motor vehicles from all city streets.
(Ord. 228-1990, passed 1-28-1991)
§ 357.06 DESIGNATION OF STREETS. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 357.06 was repealed by Ord. 228-1990, passed 1-28-1991.
§ 357.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
303.99 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 359: PARKING COMMISSION
Section
359.01   “Parking facility” defined.
359.02   Establishment; membership.
359.03   Powers generally.
359.04   Power to lease lots, garages, etc.
359.05   Power governing parking hours and fees.
Cross-reference:
   Authority of Safety Director, see TRAF.
305.04
   Municipal parking lots, see TRAF. Ch.
355
   Parking generally, see TRAF. Ch.
351
   Parking meters, see TRAF. Ch.
353
   Snow emergencies, see TRAF. Ch.
357
§ 359.01 “PARKING FACILITY” DEFINED.
   As used in this chapter, PARKING FACILITY means and includes lots, garages,
parking terminals or other structures and accommodations for the parking of
motor vehicles off the street or highway and open to public use with or without
charge.
(Ord. 14-1956, passed 2-6-1956)
§ 359.02 ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Parking Commission which shall consist
of four members. Three members shall be appointed by the Mayor, all of whom
shall be residents of the city and not more than two of whom shall be members
of the same political party. The fourth member shall be the President of
Council and shall not have a voting privilege. The first appointment to the
Parking Commission shall be made on or before 3-1-1956. Those first appointed
shall be designated to serve three, four and five years respectively from such
date and, thereafter, members shall be appointed annually to serve for five
years; except that, any vacancy shall be filled by the Mayor for the unexpired
term. The Commission shall select from among its members a Chairperson. The
members of the Commission shall serve without compensation. No action of the
Commission shall be valid unless authorized by a vote of the majority of its
members taken at a meeting open to the public.
   (B)   The Director of Finance shall maintain proper accounting and financial
records and shall make an annual report to Council.
(Ord. 14-1956, passed 2-6-1956)
§ 359.03 POWERS GENERALLY.
   The Parking Commission shall have the power in the name of the city to
create, establish and operate parking facilities in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, subject to the specific authorization and approval
of Council. The Commission shall have the power to recommend to Council the
acquisition, by purchase, gift, devise, lease, exchange or other contract or
exercise of the power of eminent domain, of real property or any interest
therein necessary for or incidental to the construction, maintenance or
operation of such parking facilities. The Commission, subject to approval of
Council, shall have the power to engage special legal counsel and/or a special
assistant to acquire the real property or any interest therein necessary for or
incidental to the construction, maintenance or operation of such parking
facilities. After the method of financing is established, the Commission shall,
subject to the approval of Council, prepare necessary plans and drawings and
construct or contract for the construction of parking facilities. The
Commission shall submit necessary plans and recommend to Council the
construction of, or contracting for, parking facilities; maintain and operate
parking facilities; establish parking hours and reasonable off-street parking
fees; establish the method of collecting the parking fees; and lease parking
facilities to any individual, firm or corporation, upon such terms and
conditions as the public interest may warrant; provided that, such Commission
shall not dispense or furnish, or permit any lessee or occupant to dispense or
furnish, upon or in connection with any property or facility acquired or
operated pursuant to this chapter, any product or service other than the
parking of motor vehicles.
(Ord. 14-1956, passed 2-6-1956)
§ 359.04 POWER TO LEASE LOTS, GARAGES, ETC.
   Subject to the approval of Council, the Parking Commission shall have the
power in the name of the municipality to lease any and all lots, garages,
parking terminals or other structures and accommodations for the parking of
motor vehicles. Before making or executing any contract for the leasing of such
parking facility, the Commission shall give opportunity for competitive
bidding, under such rules and regulations as are provided by the ordinances of
the city. All such leases or contracts to lease shall be based on at least
three competitive bids and shall be awarded to the highest responsible bidder;
provided that, any such bid or bids shall not be lower than the total
anticipated cost to the city for the acquisition, construction, operation and
maintenance of the parking facility or facilities.
(Ord. 14-1956, passed 2-6-1956)
§ 359.05 POWER GOVERNING PARKING HOURS AND FEES.
   The Parking Commission shall have the power to establish for a trial period,
not to exceed 90 days, the parking hours and reasonable off-street parking fees
and the method of collecting such parking fees. Council may, by ordinance,
change or do away with any regulation established by the Commission at any time
prior to the expiration of the 90-day period. At the expiration of the 90-day
period, any regulation established by the Commission shall be null and void
unless approved by Council.
(Ord. 14-1956, passed 2-6-1956)
TITLE NINE: PEDESTRIANS, BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES
CHAPTER 371: PEDESTRIANS
Section
371.01   Duties of pedestrians and drivers at crosswalks.
371.02   Right-of-way of blind person.
371.03   Crossing roadway outside crosswalk; diagonal crossings at
intersections.
371.04   Moving upon right half of crosswalk.
371.05   Walking along highways.
371.06   Soliciting rides or business; riding on outside of vehicle or in cargo
storage area.
371.07   Right-of-way on sidewalk.
371.08   Yielding to public safety vehicles.
371.09   Walking on highway while under the influence.
371.10   On bridges or railroad crossing.
371.11   Motorized wheelchair operators.
371.12   Operation of electric personal assistive mobility devices.
371.13   Operation of personal delivery device on sidewalks and crosswalks.
371.14   Low-speed micromobility devices.
371.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Obedience to traffic-control devices, see TRAF.
313.01,
313.03
   Opening vehicle door on traffic side, see TRAF.
351.08
   Pedestrian-control signals, see TRAF.
313.05
   “Pedestrian” defined, see TRAF.
301.22
   Pedestrians prohibited on freeways, see TRAF.
303.06
   See sectional histories for similar state law
§ 371.01 DUTIES OF PEDESTRIANS AND DRIVERS AT CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   When traffic-control signals are not in place, not in operation, or
are not clearly assigning the right-of- way, the driver of a vehicle shall
yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, or if
required by Ohio R.C. 4511.132 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the
pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling,
or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the
roadway as to be in danger.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard.
   (C)   Division (A) above does not apply under the conditions stated in Ohio
R.C. 4511.48(B), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (D)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (E), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (F)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.46)
§ 371.02 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF BLIND PERSON.
   (A)   (1)   As used in this section, BLIND PERSON or BLIND PEDESTRIAN means
a person having not more than 20/200 visual acuity in the better eye with
correcting lenses, or visual acuity greater than 20/200, but with a limitation
in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field
subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees.
      (2)   The driver of every vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to every
blind pedestrian guided by a guide dog, or carrying a cane which is
predominantly white or metallic in color, with or without a red tip.
   (B)   No person, other than a blind person, while on any public highway,
street, alley or other public thoroughfare, shall carry a white or metallic
cane, with or without a red tip.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.47)
§ 371.03 CROSSING ROADWAY OUTSIDE CROSSWALK; DIAGONAL CROSSINGS AT
INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all traffic upon the roadway.
   (C)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
   (D)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic- control devices; and when authorized to cross
diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official
traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
   (E)   This section does not relieve the operator of a vehicle from
exercising due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway.
   (F)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (F), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.48)
§ 371.04 MOVING UPON RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALK.
   (A)   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.49)
§ 371.05 WALKING ALONG HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it shall be
unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable from the
edge of the roadway.
   (C)   Where neither a sidewalk, nor a shoulder, is available, any pedestrian
walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an
outside edge of the roadway, and, if on a two-way roadway, shall walk only on
the left side of the roadway.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.13 and 4511.46, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, any pedestrian upon a roadway
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (E), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.50)
§ 371.06 SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS; RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLE OR IN CARGO
STORAGE AREA.
   (A)   No person while on a roadway outside a safety zone shall solicit a
ride from the driver of any vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) below, no person shall
stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting employment, business or
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle.
      (2)   The Council, by ordinance, may authorize the issuance of a permit
to a charitable organization to allow a person acting on behalf of the
organization to solicit charitable contributions from the occupant of a vehicle
by standing on a highway, other than a freeway as provided in Ohio R.C.
4511.051(A), that is under the jurisdiction of the municipality. The permit
shall be valid for only one period of time, which shall be specified in the
permit, in any calendar year. The Council also may specify the locations where
contributions may be solicited and may impose any other restrictions on or
requirements regarding the manner in which the solicitations are to be
conducted that the Council considers advisable.
      (3)   As used in divisions (B)(2) above, CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION means an
organization that has received from the Internal Revenue Service a currently
valid ruling or determination letter recognizing the tax-exempt status of the
organization pursuant to I.R.C. § 501(c)(3).
   (C)   No person shall hang onto or ride on the outside of any motor vehicle
while it is moving upon a roadway, except mechanics or test engineers making
repairs or adjustments, or workers performing specialized highway or street
maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency.
   (D)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person to hang onto or ride on
the outside of any motor vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway, except
mechanics or test engineers making repairs or adjustments, or workers
performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under
authority of a public agency.
   (E)   No driver of a truck, trailer or semitrailer shall knowingly permit
any person who has not attained the age of 16 years to ride in the unenclosed
or unroofed cargo storage area of the driver’s vehicle if the vehicle is
traveling faster than 25 miles per hour, unless either of the following
applies:
      (1)   The cargo storage area of the vehicle is equipped with a properly
secured seat to which is attached a seat safety belt that is in compliance with
federal standards for an occupant restraining device as defined in Ohio R.C.
4513.263(A)(2), the seat and seat safety belt were installed at the time the
vehicle was originally assembled, and the person riding in the cargo storage
area is in the seat and is wearing the seat safety belt; or
      (2)   An emergency exists that threatens the life of the driver or the
person being transported in the cargo storage area of the truck, trailer or
semitrailer.
   (F)   No driver of a truck, trailer or semitrailer shall permit any person,
except for those workers performing specialized highway or street maintenance
or construction under authority of a public agency, to ride in the cargo
storage area or on a tailgate of the driver’s vehicle while the tailgate is
unlatched.
   (G)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (G), whoever
violates any provision of divisions (A) to (D) above is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates any provision of divisions (A) to (D) above is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle
or traffic offenses, whoever violates any provision of divisions (A) to (D)
above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates divisions (E) or (F) above is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(ORC 4511.51)
§ 371.07 RIGHT-OF-WAY ON SIDEWALK.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian
on a sidewalk.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.441)
§ 371.08 YIELDING TO PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE.
   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of a public safety vehicle, as stated in
Ohio R.C. 4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, every
pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the public safety vehicle.
   (B)   This section shall not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle
from the duty to exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.452)
§ 371.09 WALKING ON HIGHWAY WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE.
   (A)   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol, any drug of abuse
or any combination of them to a degree that renders the pedestrian a hazard
shall not walk or be upon a highway.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.481)
§ 371.10 ON BRIDGES OR RAILROAD CROSSINGS.
   (A)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach
thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate or barrier after a bridge operation
signal indication has been given.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
   (C)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.511)
§ 371.11 MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR OPERATORS.
   Every person operating a motorized wheelchair shall have all of the rights
and duties applicable to a pedestrian that are contained in this chapter,
except those provisions which by their nature can have no application.
(ORC 4511.491)
§ 371.12 OPERATION OF ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES.
   (A)   (1)   Electric personal assistive mobility devices may be operated on
the public streets, highways, sidewalks and paths and portions of roadways set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance with this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of
this traffic code that, by their nature, are applicable to an electric personal
assistive mobility device apply to the device and the person operating it
whenever it is operated upon any public street, highway, sidewalk or path or
upon any portion of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
      (3)   The municipality may regulate or prohibit the operation of electric
personal assistive mobility devices on public streets, highways, sidewalks and
paths, or portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles,
under its jurisdiction.
   (B)   No operator of an electric personal assistive mobility device shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians and human-powered
vehicles at all times;
      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian;
      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is
equipped with or wearing both of the following:
         (a)   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 500 feet; and
         (b)   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
      (4)   Operate the device on any portion of a street or highway that has
an established speed limit of 55 miles per hour or more;
      (5)   Operate the device upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of
pedestrians or other specialized use when an appropriate sign giving notice of
the specialized use is posted on the path;
      (6)   If under 18 years of age, operate the device unless wearing a
protective helmet on the person’s head with the chin strap properly fastened;
and
      (7)   If under 16 years of age, operate the device unless, during the
operation, the person is under the direct visual and audible supervision of
another person who is 18 years of age or older and is responsible for the
immediate care of the person under 16 years of age.
   (C)   No person who is under 14 years of age shall operate an electric
personal assistive mobility device.
   (D)   No person shall distribute or sell an electric personal assistive
mobility device unless the device is accompanied by a written statement that is
substantially equivalent to the following: “WARNING: TO REDUCE THE RISK OF
SERIOUS INJURY, USE ONLY WHILE WEARING FULL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT – HELMET,
WRIST GUARDS, ELBOW PADS AND KNEE PADS.”
   (E)   Nothing in this section affects or shall be construed to affect any
rule of the Director of Natural Resources or a board of park district
commissioners governing the operation of vehicles on lands under the control of
the Director or board, as applicable.
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates divisions (B) or (C) above is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be punished as follows:
         (a)   The offender shall be fined $10;
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of divisions (B) or (C) above, or any substantially
similar state law or municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to imposing
the fine required under division (F)(1)(a) above, shall do one of the
following:
            1.   Order the impoundment for not less than one day but no more
than 30 days of the electric personal assistive mobility device that was
involved in the current violation of that division. The court shall order the
device to be impounded at a safe indoor location designated by the court and
may assess storage fees of not more than $5 per day; provided, the total
storage, processing, and release fees assessed against the offender or the
device in connection with the device’s impoundment or subsequent release shall
not exceed $50.
            2.   If the court does not issue an impoundment order pursuant to
division (F)(1)(b)1. above, issue an order prohibiting the offender from
operating any electric personal assistive mobility device on the public
streets, highways, sidewalks and paths and portions of roadways set aside for
the exclusive use of bicycles for not less than one day, but not more than 30
days.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (D) above is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(ORC 4511.512)
   (G)   As used in this code, ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE
means a self- balancing two non-tandem wheeled device that is designed to
transport only one person, has an electric propulsion system of an average of
750 watts, and when ridden on a paved level surface by an operator who weighs
170 pounds has a maximum speed of less than 20 miles per hour.
(ORC 4501.01(TT))
§ 371.13 OPERATION OF PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE ON SIDEWALKS AND CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ELIGIBLE ENTITY. A corporation, partnership, association, firm, sole
proprietorship or other entity engaged in business.
      PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE. An electrically powered device to which all of
the following apply:
         (a)   The device is intended primarily to transport property and cargo
on sidewalks and crosswalks.
         (b)   The device weighs less than 250 pounds excluding any property or
cargo being carried in the device.
         (c)   The device has a maximum speed of ten miles per hour; and
         (d)   The device is equipped with technology that enables the
operation of the device with active control or monitoring by a person, without
active control or monitoring by a person, or both with or without active
control or monitoring by a person.
      PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE OPERATOR. An agent of an eligible entity who
exercises direct physical control over, or monitoring of, the navigation and
operation of a personal delivery device. The phrase does not include, with
respect to a delivery or other service rendered by a personal delivery device,
the person  who requests the delivery or service. The phrase also does not
include a person who only arranges for and dispatches a personal delivery
device for a delivery or other service.
   (B)   An eligible entity may operate a personal delivery device on sidewalks
and crosswalks so long as all of the following requirements are met:
      (1)   The personal delivery device is operated in accordance with all
regulations, if any, established by each local authority within which the
personal delivery device is operated;
      (2)   A personal delivery device operator is actively controlling or
monitoring the navigation and operation of the personal delivery device;
      (3)   The eligible entity maintains an insurance policy that includes
general liability coverage of not less than $100,000 for damages arising from
the operation of the personal delivery device by the eligible entity and any
agent of the eligible entity; and
      (4)   The device is equipped with all of the following:
         (a)   A marker that clearly identifies the name and contact
information of the eligible entity operating the personal delivery device and a
unique identification number;
         (b)   A braking system that enables the personal delivery device to
come to a controlled stop; and
         (c)   If the personal delivery device is being operated between sunset
and sunrise, a light on both the front and rear of the personal delivery device
that is visible in clear weather from a distance of at least 500 feet to the
front and rear of the personal delivery device when directly in front of low
beams of headlights on a motor vehicle.
   (C)   No personal delivery device operator shall allow a personal delivery
device to do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with traffic or pedestrian control devices and
signals;
      (2)   Unreasonably interfere with pedestrians or traffic;
      (3)   Transport any hazardous material that would require a permit issued
by the Public Utilities Commission; and
      (4)   Operate on a street or highway, except when crossing the street or
highway within a crosswalk.
   (D)   A personal delivery device has all of the rights and obligations
applicable to a pedestrian under the same circumstances; except that, a
personal delivery device shall yield the right-of-way to human pedestrians on
sidewalks and crosswalks.
   (E)   (1)   No person shall operate a personal delivery device unless the
person is authorized to do so under this section and complies with the
requirements of this section.
      (2)   An eligible entity is responsible for both of the following:
         (a)   Any violation of this section that is committed by a personal
delivery device operator; and
         (b)   Any other circumstance, including a technological malfunction,
in which a personal delivery device operates in a manner prohibited by
divisions (C)(1) to (C)(4) above.
(ORC 4511.513)
§ 371.14 LOW-SPEED MICROMOBILITY DEVICES.
   (A)   (1)   A low-speed micromobility device may be operated on the public
streets, highways, sidewalks, and shared-use paths, and may be operated on any
portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance
with this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of
this title that by their nature could apply to a low-speed micromobility device
do apply to the device and the person operating it whenever it is operated upon
any public street, highway, sidewalk, or shared-use path, or upon any portion
of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (B)   No operator of a low-speed micromobility device shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians at all times;
      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian;
      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is
equipped with or wearing both of the following:
         (a)   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 500 feet;
         (b)   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
   (C)   (1)   No person who is under 16 years of age shall rent a low-speed
micromobility device.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly rent a low-speed micromobility device to
a person who is under 16 years of age.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly rent a low-speed micromobility device on
behalf of a person who is under 16 years of age.
   (D)   No person shall operate a low-speed micromobility device at a speed
greater than 20 miles per hour.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Unless a mens rea is otherwise specified in this section, an
offense established under this section is a strict liability offense and R.C. §
2901.20 does not apply. The designation of that offense as a strict liability
offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for which there
is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.
   (F)   Notwithstanding division (A)(1) of this section, the municipality,
county, township, metropolitan park district, township park district,
recreation district, or any division of the Ohio Department of Natural
Resources if the division has the approval of the Ohio Director of Natural
Resources may do any of the following:
      (1)   Regulate or prohibit the operation of low-speed micromobility
devices on public streets, highways, sidewalks, and shared-use paths, and
portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, under its
jurisdiction;
      (2)   Include low-speed micromobility devices that are adapted to expand
access for people with various physical limitations into a shared bicycle,
shared electric bicycle, or similar vehicle sharing program, under its
jurisdiction;
      (3)   Require the owner or operator of a low-speed micromobility device
rental service or low-speed micromobility device sharing program to maintain
commercial general liability insurance related to the operation of the devices,
with limits of up to $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 per aggregate.
(R.C. § 4511.514)
§ 371.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
303.99 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 373: BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES GENERALLY
Section
373.01   Code application to bicycles.
373.02   Riding upon seats; handle bars; helmets and glasses.
373.03   Attaching bicycle or sled to vehicle.
373.04   Riding on right side of roadway; riding bicycles and motorcycles
abreast.
373.05   Lights, signal devices, brakes on bicycles.
373.06   Lights and reflector on bicycle; brakes. (Recodified)
373.07   Riding bicycle on right side of roadway; obedience to traffic rules;
passing. (Recodified)
373.08   Reckless operation; control, course and speed.
373.09   Parking of bicycle
373.10   Riding on sidewalk.
373.11   Registration of bicycles.
373.12   Transfer of ownership. (Repealed)
373.13   Operating bicycle without registration tag or number. (Repealed)
373.14   Requirements for tag or number. (Repealed)
373.15   Registration tag or number; fee.
373.16   Bicycle serial numbers.
373.17   Impounding.
373.18   Operation of motorized bicycles.
373.19   Electric bicycles.
373.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   “Bicycle” defined, see TRAF.
301.04
   Bicycle regulations to be consistent with state law, see Ohio R.C. 4511.07
(A)(8)
   Bicycles prohibited on freeways, see TRAF.
303.06
   Motorcycle brakes, see TRAF.
337.18
   “Motorcycle” defined, see TRAF.
301.19
   Motorcycle headlight, see TRAF.
337.03
   Motorcycle operator’s license required, see TRAF.
335.01
   Off-highway motorcycles, see TRAF. Ch.
375
   Operation of vehicles on bicycle paths, see TRAF.
331.42
   See section histories for similar state law
§ 373.01 CODE APPLICATION TO BICYCLES.
   (A)   The provisions of this traffic code which are applicable to bicycles
apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any highway or upon any path set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (D) below, a bicycle operator who
violates any provisions of this traffic code described in division (A) above
that is applicable to bicycles may be issued a ticket, citation or summons by a
law enforcement officer for the violation in the same manner as the operator of
a motor vehicle would be cited for the same violation. A person who commits any
such violation while operating a bicycle shall not have any points assessed
against the person’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit or probationary license under Ohio R.C. 4510.036.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (D) below, in the case of a violation
of any provision of this traffic code described in division (A) above by a
bicycle operator or by a motor vehicle operator when the trier of fact finds
that the violation by the motor vehicle operator endangered the lives of
bicycle riders at the time of the violation, the court, notwithstanding any
provision of the Ohio Revised Code to the contrary, may require the bicycle
operator or motor vehicle operator to take and successfully complete a
bicycling skills course approved by the court in addition to or in lieu of any
penalty otherwise prescribed by this traffic code or the Ohio Revised Code for
that violation.
   (D)   Divisions (B) and (C) above do not apply to violations of Ohio R.C.
4511.19, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(ORC 4511.52)
   (E)   Every person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of
official traffic-control devices and signals applicable to vehicles, unless
otherwise directed by a police officer.
§ 373.02 RIDING UPON SEATS; HANDLE BARS; HELMETS AND GLASSES.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, SNOWMOBILE has the same meaning as given
that term in Ohio R.C. 4519.01.
   (B)   (1)   No person operating a bicycle shall ride other than upon or
astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto or carry any other
person upon such bicycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular seat
thereon, and no person shall ride upon a bicycle other than upon such a firmly
attached and regular seat.
      (2)   No person operating a motorcycle shall ride other than upon or
astride the permanent and regular seat or saddle attached thereto, or carry any
other person upon such motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular
seat or saddle thereon, and no person shall ride upon a motorcycle other than
upon such a firmly attached and regular seat or saddle.
      (3)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a
saddle other than while sitting astride the saddle, facing forward, with one
leg on each side of the motorcycle.
      (4)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a seat
other than while sitting upon the seat.
      (5)   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or
article that prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand upon the
handlebars.
      (6)   No bicycle or motorcycle shall be used to carry more persons at one
time than the number for which it is designed and equipped, nor shall any
motorcycle be operated on a highway when the handlebars or grips are more than
15 inches higher than the seat or saddle for the operator.
      (7)   No person shall operate or be a passenger on a snowmobile or
motorcycle without using safety glasses or other protective eye device. No
person who is under the age of 18 years, or who holds a motorcycle operator’s
endorsement or license bearing a “NOVICE” designation that is currently in
effect as provided in Ohio R.C. 4507.13, shall operate a motorcycle on a
highway, or be a passenger on a motorcycle, unless wearing a protective helmet
on the person’s head, and no other person shall be a passenger on a motorcycle
operated by such a person unless similarly wearing a protective helmet. The
helmet, safety glasses or other protective eye device shall conform with rules
adopted by the Director of Public Safety. The provisions of this division (B)
(7) or a violation thereof shall not be used in the trial of any civil action.
   (C)   (1)   No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary
instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification card issued
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4507.05 unless the
person, at the time of such operation, is wearing on the person’s head a
protective helmet that conforms with rules adopted by the Director of Public
Safety.
      (2)   No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary
instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification card issued
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4507.05 in any of the
following circumstances:
         (a)   At any time when lighted lights are required by Ohio R.C.
4513.03(A)(1);
         (b)   While carrying a passenger; or
         (c)   On any limited access highway or heavily congested roadway.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the carrying
of a child in a seat or trailer that is designed for carrying children and is
firmly attached to the bicycle.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (E), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.53) (Ord. 286-1978, passed 10-16-1978)
§ 373.03 ATTACHING BICYCLE OR SLED TO VEHICLE.
   (A)   (1)   No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled
or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon
a roadway.
      (2)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person riding upon any
bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle to attach the same or
himself or herself to any vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway.
      (3)   This section does not apply to towing a disabled vehicle.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within on year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of ths code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.54)
§ 373.04 RIDING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; RIDING BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES
ABREAST.
   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right side of the roadway as practicable obeying all traffic rules
applicable to vehicles and exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle
or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (B)   Persons riding bicycles or motorcycles upon a roadway shall ride not
more than two abreast in a single lane, except on paths or parts of roadways
set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or motorcycles.
   (C)   This section does not require a person operating a bicycle to ride at
the edge of the roadway when it is unreasonable or unsafe to do so. Conditions
that may require riding away from the edge of the roadway include when
necessary to avoid fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles, surface
hazards or if it otherwise is unsafe or impracticable to do so, including if
the lane is too narrow for the bicycle and an overtaking vehicle to travel
safely side by side within the lane.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (D), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within on year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
303.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(ORC 4511.55)
§ 373.05 LIGHTS, SIGNAL DEVICES, BRAKES ON BICYCLES.
   (A)   Every bicycle when in use at the times specified in Ohio R.C. 4513.03
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be equipped with the
following:
      (1)   A lamp mounted on the front of either the bicycle or the operator
that shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to
the front and 300 feet to the sides. A generator-powered lamp that emits light
only when the bicycle is moving may be used to meet this requirement;
      (2)   A red reflector on the rear that shall be visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle; and
      (3)   A lamp emitting either flashing or steady red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear shall be used in addition to the red
reflector. If the red lamp performs as a reflector in that it is visible as
specified in division (A)(2) above, the red lamp may serve as the reflector and
a separate reflector is not required.
   (B)   Additional lamps and reflectors may be used in addition to those
required under division (A) above, except that red lamps and red reflectors
shall not be used on the front of the bicycle and white lamps and white
reflectors shall not be used on the rear of the bicycle.
   (C)   A bicycle may be equipped with a device capable of giving an audible
signal; except that, a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person
use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
   (D)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with an adequate brake when used on a
street or highway.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (E), whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within on year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.56)
§ 373.06 LIGHTS AND REFLECTOR ON BICYCLE; BRAKES. (RECODIFIED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 373.06 was combined with §
373.05 as part of the 2003 updating and revision of this code of ordinances.
Please see §
373.05 for these provisions.
§ 373.07 RIDING BICYCLE ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC RULES;
PASSING. (RECODIFIED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 373.07 was combined with §
373.04 as part of the 2003 updating and revision of this code of ordinances.
Please see §
373.04 for these provisions.
§ 373.08 RECKLESS OPERATION; CONTROL, COURSE AND SPEED.
   No person shall operate a bicycle:
   (A)   Without due regard for the safety and rights of pedestrians and
drivers and occupants of all other vehicles, and so as to endanger the life,
limb or property of any person while in the lawful use of the streets or
sidewalks or any other public or private property;
   (B)   Without exercising reasonable and ordinary control over such bicycle;
   (C)   In a weaving or zigzag course unless such irregular course is
necessary for safe operation in compliance with law;
   (D)   Without both hands upon the handle grips, except when necessary to
give the required hand and arm signals, or as provided in §
373.02 of this chapter; and
   (E)   At a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions
then existing.
§ 373.09 PARKING OF BICYCLE.
   No person shall park a bicycle upon a sidewalk in such a manner so as to
unduly interfere with pedestrian traffic or upon a roadway so as to unduly
interfere with vehicular traffic.
§ 373.10 RIDING ON SIDEWALK.
   (A)   No person shall operate a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business
district.
   (B)   Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such a person
shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal
before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 373.11 REGISTRATION OF BICYCLES.
   Bicycles operated on the streets of the city may be registered at the Police
Division.
(Ord. 146-1996, passed 10-14-1996)
§ 373.12 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 373.12 was repealed by Ord. 146-1996, passed 10-14-1996.
§ 373.13 OPERATING BICYCLE WITHOUT REGISTRATION TAG OR NUMBER. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 373.13 was repealed by Ord. 146-1996, passed 10-14-1996.
§ 373.14 REQUIREMENTS FOR TAG OR NUMBER. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 373.14 was repealed by Ord. 146-1996, passed 10-14-1996.
§ 373.15 REGISTRATION TAG OR NUMBER; FEE.
   (A)   A registration tag or number shall be issued for each bicycle
registered. The number shall be on a metal band, sticker or decal which shall
be attached to the frame of the bicycle. The numbering system is to be selected
by the Police Division.
   (B)   There shall be a fee of $1 required for the registration of bicycles.
(Ord. 184-1984, passed 11-13-1984; Ord. 48-1985, passed 3-11-1985)
§ 373.16 BICYCLE SERIAL NUMBERS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly, or under circumstances whereby he or she
should have known, sell, receive, dispose of, conceal or have in his or her
possession any bicycle, bicycle part or accessory of which the manufacturer’s
serial number or city registration tag and/or number has been defaced, covered,
altered, removed or destroyed.
   (B)   Every person to whom any bicycle is offered for sale, storage or
dismantling, from which bicycle the serial number has been defaced, covered,
altered, removed or destroyed shall immediately notify the Police Division of
such fact.
(Ord. 67-1938, passed 8-15-1938)
§ 373.17 IMPOUNDING.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter may, in addition to
the penalties provided in §
303.99 of this code of ordinances, have his or her bicycle impounded for a
period of not more than five days.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 373.18 OPERATION OF MOTORIZED BICYCLES.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking, unless all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The person is 14 or 15 years of age and holds a valid probationary
motorized bicycle license issued after the person has passed the test provided
for in this section, or the person is 16 years of age or older and holds either
a valid commercial driver’s license issued under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4506 or a
driver’s license issued under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4507 or a valid motorized bicycle
license issued after the person has passed the test provided for in this
section; except that, if a person is 16 years of age, has a valid probationary
motorized bicycle license and desires a motorized bicycle license, the person
is not required to comply with the testing requirements provided for in this
section;
      (2)   The motorized bicycle is equipped in accordance with the rules
adopted under division (B) below and is in proper working order;
      (3)   The person, if under 18 years of age, is wearing a protective
helmet on the person’s head with the chin strap properly fastened and the
motorized bicycle is equipped with a rearview mirror; and
      (4)   The person operates the motorized bicycle when practicable within
three feet of the right edge of the roadway obeying all traffic rules
applicable to vehicles.
   (B)   The Director of Public Safety, subject to Ohio R.C. Ch. 119, shall
adopt and promulgate rules concerning protective helmets, the equipment of
motorized bicycles and the testing and qualifications of persons who do not
hold a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license. The test shall be as near
as practicable to the examination required for a motorcycle operator’s
endorsement under Ohio R.C. 4507.11. The test shall also require the operator
to give an actual demonstration of the operator’s ability to operate and
control a motorized bicycle by driving one under the supervision of an
examining officer.
   (C)   Every motorized bicycle license expires on the birthday of the
applicant in the fourth or eighth year after the date it is issued, based on
the period of renewal requested by the applicant. No motorized bicycle license
shall be issued for a period longer than eight years. A person who is 65 years
of age or older may only apply for a motorized bicycle license that expires on
the birthday of the applicant in the fourth year after the date it is issued.
   (D)   No person operating a motorized bicycle shall carry another person
upon the motorized bicycle.
   (E)   The protective helmet and rearview mirror required by division (A)(3)
above shall, on and after 1-1-1985, conform with rules adopted by the Director
under division (B) above.
   (F)   Whoever violates divisions (A), (D) or (E) above is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(ORC 4511.521)
Statutory reference:
   Suspension of probationary motorized bicycle license by the state, see Ohio
R.C. 4510.34
§ 373.19 ELECTRIC BICYCLES.
   (A)   (1)   On and after January 1, 2020, manufacturers and distributors of
electric bicycles shall permanently affix a label, in a prominent location, to
each electric bicycle. The label shall specify whether the electric bicycle is
a class 1, class 2, or class 3 electric bicycle, the top assisted speed that
the electric bicycle is capable of reaching, and the motor wattage of the
electric bicycle.
      (2)   No person shall modify an electric bicycle in a manner that changes
the top assisted speed that the electric bicycle is capable of reaching unless
the person also modifies the label required under division (A)(1) of this
section to reflect the modification.
   (B)   (1)   The manufacturer of an electric bicycle shall ensure that the
electric bicycle complies with the equipment and manufacturing requirements for
bicycles established by the consumer product safety commission under 16 C.F.R.
§§ 1512 et seq.
      (2)   The manufacturer shall manufacture all class 1 electric bicycles
and class 3 electric bicycles so that when the rider ceases pedaling the
electric motor ceases to provide assistance. The manufacturer shall manufacture
all class 2 electric bicycles so that when the rider applies the brakes or
releases or activates a switch or similar mechanism the electric motor ceases
to provide assistance.
      (3)   All class 3 electric bicycles shall be equipped with a speedometer
that displays the speed of the electric bicycle in miles per hour.
   (C)   (1)   The operation of a class 1 electric bicycle and a class 2
electric bicycle is permitted on a path set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles or on a shared-use path, unless the county, township, municipal
corporation, other local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60
with control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule prohibits the use
of a class 1 electric bicycle or class 2 electric bicycle on such a path.
      (2)   No person shall operate a class 3 electric bicycle on a path set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or a shared-use path unless that path
is within or adjacent to a highway or the county, township, municipal
corporation, or local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60 with
control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule authorizes the use of a
class 3 electric bicycle on such a path.
      (3)   No person shall operate a class 1 electric bicycle, a class 2
electric bicycle, or a class 3 electric bicycle on a path that is intended to
be used primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or other similar
uses, or any other single track or natural surface trail that has historically
been reserved for non-motorized use, unless the county, township, municipal
corporation, other local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60
with control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule authorizes the use
of a class 1 electric bicycle, a class 2 electric bicycle, or a class 3
electric bicycle on such a path.
      (4)   Divisions (C)(2) and (C)(3) of this section do not apply to a law
enforcement officer, or other person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic
laws of the state, using an electric bicycle while in the performance of the
officer's duties.
   (D)   (1)   No person under 16 years of age shall operate a class 3 electric
bicycle; however, a person under 16 years of age may ride as a passenger on a
class 3 electric bicycle that is designed to accommodate passengers.
      (2)   No person shall operate or be a passenger on a class 3 electric
bicycle unless the person is wearing a protective helmet that meets the
standards established by the Consumer Product Safety Commission or the American
Society for Testing and Materials.
   (E)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever operates
an electric bicycle in a manner that is prohibited under division (C) of this
section and whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   The offenses established under division (E)(1) of this section are
strict liability offenses and strict liability is a culpable mental state for
purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of these offenses as strict
liability offenses shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
(R.C. § 4511.522)
§ 373.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
303.99 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 375: SNOWMOBILES, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLES
AND ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLES
Section
375.01   Definitions.
375.02   Equipment.
375.03   Code application; prohibited operation.
375.04   Permitted operation.
375.05   Licensing requirements of operator.
375.06   Accident reports.
375.07   Local control within police power.
375.08   Registration of vehicles.
375.09   Operation of off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle without
certificate of title; failure to surrender.
375.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Bicycles and motorcycles generally, see TRAF. Ch.
373
   Operation on bicycle paths, see TRAF.
331.42
   Power of court to impound registration certificates for certain violations,
see Ohio R.C. 4519.47
   Power to regulate; municipal licensing prohibited, see Ohio R.C. 4519.48
   Required usage of helmets and safety glasses, see TRAF.
373.02
   See section histories for similar state law
   “Street or highway” defined, see TRAF.
301.42
§ 375.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for
cross-country travel on land and water, or on more than one type of terrain,
and steered by wheels or caterpillar treads, or any combination thereof,
including vehicles that operate on a cushion of air, vehicles commonly known as
all- terrain vehicles, all season vehicles, mini-bikes and trail bikes. The
term does not include a utility vehicle as defined in Ohio R.C. 4501.01 or any
vehicle principally used in playing golf, any motor vehicle or aircraft
required to be registered under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4503 or Ohio R.C. Ch. 4561, and
any vehicle excepted from definition as a motor vehicle by Ohio R.C. 4501.01
(B).
   DEALER. Any person or firm engaged in the business of manufacturing or
selling snowmobiles, off- highway motorcycles or all-purpose vehicles at
wholesale or retail, or who rents, leases or otherwise furnishes snowmobiles,
off-highway motorcycles or all-purpose vehicles for hire.
   ELECTRONIC and ELECTRONIC RECORD. Have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C.
4501.01.
   ELECTRONIC DEALER. A dealer whom the Registrar of Motor Vehicles designates
under Ohio R.C. 4519.511.
   INTERSTATE HIGHWAY. Any part of the interstate system of highways as defined
herein, 90 Stat. 431 (1976), 23 U.S.C. § 103, as amended.
   LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY OR FREEWAY. Have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C.
5511.02.
   MINI-TRUCK. A vehicle that has four wheels, is propelled by an electric
motor with a rated power of 7,500 watts or less or an internal combustion
engine with a piston displacement capacity of 660 cubic centimeters or less,
has a total dry weight of 900 to 2,200 pounds, contains an enclosed cabin and a
seat for the vehicle operator, resembles a pickup truck or van with a cargo
area or bed located at the rear of the vehicle, and was not originally
manufactured to meet federal motor vehicle safety standards.
   OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE. Every motorcycle, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.01,
that is designed to be operated primarily on lands other than a street or
highway.
   OPERATOR. Any person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle.
   OWNER. Any person or firm, other than a lienholder or dealer, having title
to a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, or other right
to the possession thereof.
   PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
4509.01.
   SNOWMOBILE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for use on snow or
ice, and steered by skis, runners or caterpillar treads.
   STATE HIGHWAY and STATE ROUTE. Have the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
4511.01.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. Have the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
(ORC 4519.01)
§ 375.02 EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   In addition to any rules or regulations promulgated by the Ohio
Director of Public Safety pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4519.20 and Ohio R.C. Ch. 119,
equipment of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all- purpose vehicles
shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, requirements for the
following items of equipment:
      (1)   At least one headlight having a minimum candlepower of sufficient
intensity to reveal persons and objects at a distance of at least 100 feet
ahead under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (2)   At least one red tail light having a minimum candlepower of
sufficient intensity to be plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the
rear under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (3)   Every snowmobile, while traveling on packed snow, shall be capable
of carrying a driver who weighs 175 pounds or more, and, while carrying such
driver, be capable of stopping in no more than 40 feet from an initial steady
speed of 20 miles per hour, or locking its traction belt; and
      (4)   A muffler system capable of precluding the emission of excessive
smoke or exhaust fumes, and of limiting the engine noise of vehicles. On
snowmobiles manufactured after 1-1-1973, such requirement shall include sound
dampening equipment such that noise does not exceed 82 decibels on the “A”
scale at 50 feet as measured according to SAE J192 (September 1970).
   (B)   No person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle in violation of this section; except that, equipment
specified in divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) above shall not be required on
snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles or all-purpose vehicles operated during
the daylight hours.
(ORC 4519.20(A), (B))
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), whoever violates
division (B) above shall be fined not more than $50. If the offender within the
preceding year previously has committed a violation of division (B) above or of
Ohio R.C. 4519.20(B), whoever violates division (B) above shall be fined not
less than $15, nor more than $100, imprisoned not more than three days, or
both.
(ORC 4519.20(C))
§ 375.03 CODE APPLICATION; PROHIBITED OPERATION.
   (A)   The applicable provisions of this traffic code apply to the operation
of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles and all-purpose vehicles, except that
no person shall operate a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle as follows:
      (1)   On any state highway, including a limited access highway or freeway
or the right-of-way thereof, except for emergency travel during such time and
in such manner as the Ohio Director of Public Safety designates or except as
authorized by Ohio R.C. 4519.41(F);
      (2)   On any private property, or in any nursery or planting area,
without the permission of the owner or other person having the right to
possession of the property;
      (3)   On any land or waters controlled by the state, except at those
locations where a sign has been posted permitting such operation;
      (4)   On the tracks or right-of-way of any operating railroad;
      (5)   While transporting any firearm, bow or other implement for hunting
that is not unloaded and securely encased;
      (6)   For the purpose of chasing, pursuing, capturing or killing any
animal or wild fowl; or
      (7)   During the time from sunset to sunrise, unless displaying lighted
lights as required by Ohio R.C. 4519.20 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50, nor
more than $500, or imprisoned not less than three, nor more than 30, days, or
both.
(ORC 4519.40)
§ 375.04 PERMITTED OPERATION.
   Snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles and all-purpose vehicles may be
operated as follows:
   (A)   To make a crossing of a highway, other than a highway as designated in
Ohio R.C. 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
whenever the crossing can be made in safety and will not interfere with the
movement of vehicular traffic approaching from any direction on the highway,
and provided that the operator yields the right-of-way to any approaching
traffic that presents an immediate hazard;
   (B)   On highways in the county or township road systems whenever the local
authority having jurisdiction over such highways so permits;
   (C)   Off and alongside street or highway for limited distances from the
point of unloading from a conveyance to the point at which the snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle is intended and authorized to be
operated;
   (D)   On the berm or shoulder of a highway, other than a highway as
designated in Ohio R.C. 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, when the terrain permits such operation to be undertaken safely and
without the necessity of entering any traffic lane;
   (E)   On the berm or shoulder or a county or township road, while traveling
from one area of operation of the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-
purpose vehicle to another such area; and
   (F)   For snowmobiles without metal studded tracks and all-purpose vehicles,
on state highways located on an island in Lake Erie, including limited access
highways and freeways, between November 1 and April 30; provided that, all of
the following conditions apply:
      (1)   The operator has a valid driver’s license as required under Ohio
R.C. 4519.44;
      (2)   The snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle is in compliance with rules
governing safety equipment adopted under Ohio R.C. 4519.20;
      (3)   The owner of the snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle maintains proof
of financial responsibility for both on-road and off-road use of the snowmobile
or all-purpose vehicle; and
      (4)   The operator obeys all traffic rules and regulations.
(ORC 4519.41)
§ 375.05 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS OF OPERATOR.
   (A)   No person who does not hold a valid, current motor vehicle driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, motorcycle operator’s endorsement or probationary
license, issued under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4506 or Ohio R.C. Ch. 4507 or a valid,
current driver’s license issued by another jurisdiction, shall operate a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle on any street or
highway in the municipality, on any portion of the right-of- way thereof or on
any public land or waters.
   (B)   No person who is less than 16 years of age shall operate a snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle on any land or waters other than
private property or waters owned by or leased to the person’s parent or
guardian, unless accompanied by another person who is 18 years of age or older,
and who holds a license as provided in division (A) above; except that, the
Ohio Department of Natural Resources may permit such operation on state-
controlled land under its jurisdiction when such person is less than 16 years
of age and is accompanied by a parent or guardian who is a licensed driver 18
years of age or older.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50, nor
more than $500, or imprisoned not less than three, nor more than 30, days, or
both.
(ORC 4519.44)
§ 375.06 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (A)   The operator of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle involved in any accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any
person or damage to the property of any person in excess of $100 shall report
the accident within 48 hours to the Chief of Police, and within 30 days shall
forward a written report of the accident to the Ohio Registrar of Motor
Vehicles on a form prescribed by the Registrar. If the operator is physically
incapable of making the reports and there is another participant in the
accident not so incapacitated, the participant shall make the reports. In the
event there is no other participant, and the operator is other than the owner,
the owner, within the prescribed periods of time, shall make the reports.
   (B)   Any law enforcement officer or other person authorized by Ohio R.C.
4519.42 and 4519.43 who investigates or receives information of an accident
involving a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all- purpose vehicle shall
forward to the Registrar a written report of the accident within 48 hours.
(ORC 4519.46)
§ 375.07 LOCAL CONTROL WITHIN POLICE POWER.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the municipality from
regulating the operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycle and all-purpose
vehicles on streets and highways and other public property under municipal
jurisdiction, and within the reasonable exercise of the police power; except
that, no registration or licensing of any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle required to be registered or titled under Ohio R.C. Ch.
4519 shall be required.
(ORC 4519.48)
§ 375.08 REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in divisions (B), (C) and (D) below, no
person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle within the municipality unless the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle
or all-purpose vehicle is registered and numbered in accordance with Ohio R.C.
4519.03 and 4519.04.
      (2)   Except as provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.215 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, no registration is required for a mini-truck
that is operated within this state. A mini-truck may be operated only in
accordance with Ohio R.C. 4511.215 and 4519.401, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (B)   (1)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or off-highway
motorcycle that is operated exclusively upon lands owned by the owner of the
snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle, or on lands to which the owner of the
snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle has a contractual right.
      (2)   No registration is required for an all-purpose vehicle that is used
primarily for agricultural purposes when the owner qualifies for the current
agricultural use valuation tax credit, unless it is to be used on any public
land, trail or right-of-way.
      (3)   Any all-purpose vehicle exempted from registration under division
(B)(2) above and operated for agricultural purposes may use public roads and
rights-of-way when traveling from one farm field to another, when such use does
not violate Ohio R.C. 4519.41.
      (4)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle
that is operated on a state highway as authorized by Ohio R.C. 4519.41(F).
   (C)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle
or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in the state by a resident of another
state whenever that state has in effect a registration law similar to R.C. Ch.
4519 and the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle is
properly registered under that state’s law. Any snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in the state by a resident of
a state not having a registration law similar to R.C. Ch. 4519 shall comply
with Ohio R.C. 4519.09.
   (D)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle
or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in the municipality by the United States,
another state or a political subdivision thereof, but the snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle shall display the name of the owner
thereon.
   (E)   The owner or operator of any all-purpose vehicle operated or used upon
the waters in the municipality shall comply with Ohio R.C. Ch. 1547 and R.C.
Ch. 1548 relative to the operation of watercraft.
   (F)   Whoever violates division (A) above shall be fined not less than $50,
nor more than $100.
(ORC 4519.02)
Statutory reference:
   Destruction or disposal of vehicle; transfer of ownership; change of
address; loss of certificate, see Ohio R.C. 4519.05
   Registration of emergency vehicles, see Ohio R.C. 4519.08
   Registration procedure, see Ohio R.C. 4519.03
   Temporary license placards and fees, see Ohio R.C. 4519.10
   Temporary operating permit for certain non-residents, see Ohio R.C. 4519.09
§ 375.09 OPERATION OF OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE OR ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE WITHOUT
CERTIFICATE OF TITLE; FAILURE TO SURRENDER.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in the state an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle without having a certificate of title for the off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle if such a certificate is required by Ohio R.C. Ch. 4519 to
be issued for the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle or, if a
physical certificate of title has not been issued for it, operate an off-
highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle knowing that the ownership
information related to the motorcycle or vehicle has not been entered into the
automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common Pleas;
      (2)   Operate in the municipality an off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle if a certificate of title to the off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle has been issued and then has been canceled;
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title upon cancellation of it
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed
in Ohio R.C. Ch. 4519;
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in Ohio R.C. Ch. 4519, in case of the destruction or
dismantling of, or change in, the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle
described in the certificate of title;
      (5)   Violate any provision of Ohio R.C. 4519.51 to 4519.70 for which no
penalty is otherwise provided or any lawful rules adopted pursuant to those
sections; and
      (6)   Operate in the state an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle knowing that the certificate of title to or ownership of the motorcycle
or vehicle as otherwise reflected in the automated title processing system has
been canceled.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $200, or
imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
(ORC 4519.66)
§ 375.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
303.99 for general traffic code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
PART SIX: GENERAL OFFENSES CODE
   Chapter
      
606.   General Provisions; Administration and Enforcement
      
610.   Air Pollution
      
612.   Alcoholic Beverages
      
618.   Animals
      
624.   Drugs
      
630.   Gambling
      
632.   Junk Cars
      
634.   Minors
      
635.   Noise Abatement
      
636.   Offenses Relating to Persons
      
642.   Offenses Relating to Property
      
648.   Peace Disturbances
      
654.   Railroads
      
656.   Registration of Convicted Persons
      
660.   Safety, Sanitation and Health
      
666.   Sex Related Offenses
      
668.   Streets and Sidewalks
      
670.   Trees, Shrubs, Bushes, Grasses, and Weeds
      
672.   Weapons and Explosives
      
674.   Criminal Activity Nuisances
      
698.   Penalties and Sentencing
CHAPTER 606: GENERAL PROVISIONS; ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
606.01   Definitions.
606.02   Culpable mental states.
606.03   Classification of offenses.
606.04   Offenses defined.
606.05   Rules of construction.
606.055   Criminal law jurisdiction.
606.06   Limitation on criminal prosecutions.
606.07   Requirements for criminal liability; voluntary intoxication.
606.08   Organizational criminal liability.
606.09   Personal accountability for organizational conduct.
606.10   Falsification.
606.105   False report of child abuse or neglect.
606.11   Compounding a crime.
606.12   Failure to report a crime or death.
606.13   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer.
606.14   Obstructing official business.
606.15   Obstructing justice.
606.16   Resisting arrest.
606.165   Compliance with lawful order of police officer; fleeing.
606.17   Having an unlawful interest in a public contract.
606.18   Soliciting or receiving improper compensation.
606.19   Dereliction of duty.
606.20   Interfering with civil rights.
606.21   Attempt.
606.22   Complicity.
606.23   Detention of shoplifters and those committing motion picture piracy;
protection of institutional property.
606.24   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police
Division.
606.25   Burden and degree of proof.
606.26   Impersonating an officer.
606.27   Display of law enforcement agency emblem.
606.28   Misrepresentation of identity.
606.29   Using sham legal process.
606.30   Failure to disclose personal information.
606.31   Misuse of 9-1-1 system.
606.32   Self defense: limitations on duty to retreat prior to using force.
Cross-reference:
   Air Pollution Appeal Board, see GEN. OFF.
610.05
   Arrest without warrant for misdemeanor, see Ohio R.C. 2935.03
   Civil emergencies, see GEN. OFF.
648.13
   Cordoning off riot areas; prohibiting sales of firearms and explosives, see
Ohio R.C. 3761.16
   Criteria for probation; conditions of probation, see Ohio R.C. 2951.02
   Declaratory judgement in sex related offenses, see GEN. OFF.
666.15
   Definition of “imprisoned”, see Ohio R.C. 1.05
   Degree of offense; charge and verdict; prior conviction, see Ohio R.C.
2945.75
   Discharge for delay in trial, see Ohio R.C. 2945.73
   Disposition of unclaimed, abandoned and junk motor vehicles, see Ohio R.C.
737.32, 4513.61 et seq.
   Extension of time for hearing or trial, see Ohio R.C. 2945.72
   Injunction and abatement of nuisance in sex related offenses, see GEN. OFF.
666.16
   Justifiable use of force to suppress riot, see GEN. OFF.
648.03
   License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance, see GEN. OFF.
672.07
   Making false alarms, see GEN. OFF.
648.09
   Misconduct at an emergency, see GEN. OFF.
648.07
   Payment of costs and expenses on change of venue, see Ohio R.C. 2931.31
   Penalties and sentencing, see GEN. OFF. Ch. 698
   Permit required for public speeches, see GEN. OFF.
648.12
   Procedure on affidavit or complaint; withdrawal of unexecuted warrants, see
Ohio R.C. 2935.10
   Procedure on change of venue, see Ohio R.C. 2931.29
   Rabies quarantine, see GEN. OFF.
618.11
   Registration of convicted persons, see GEN. OFF. Ch. 656
   Registration of dogs, see GEN. OFF.
618.08
   Registration of sex offenders in cities and counties, see Ohio R.C. 2950.01
et seq
   Reports of vehicle accidents, see TRAF.
335.12 et seq.
   Right of trial by jury, see Ohio R.C. 2945.17
   Rules of evidence in sex related offenses, see GEN. OFF.
666.10
   Satisfaction of fine; credit for time served, see Ohio R.C. 2947.14
   See section histories for similar state law
   Time within which hearing or trial must be held, see Ohio R.C. 2945.71
   Transfer of prisoner on change of venue, see Ohio R.C. 2931.30
   Venue, see Ohio R.C. 2901.12, 2931.29 et seq.
§ 606.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE, CONTRIBUTION, LEGISLATIVE CAMPAIGN FUND, POLITICAL
ACTION COMMITTEE, POLITICAL CONTRIBUTING ENTITY and POLITICAL PARTY. Have the
same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 3517.01.
   CONTRABAND. Any property that is illegal for a person to acquire or possess
under a statute, ordinance or rule, or that a trier of fact lawfully determines
to be illegal to possess by reason of the property’s involvement in an offense.
CONTRABAND includes, but is not limited to, all of the following:
      (1)   Any controlled substance, as defined in Ohio R.C. 3719.01, or any
device or paraphernalia related thereto;
      (2)   Any unlawful gambling device or paraphernalia; and
      (3)   Any dangerous ordnance or obscene material.
   DEADLY FORCE. Any force that carries a substantial risk that it will
proximately result in the death of any person.
   DETENTION. Arrest; confinement in any vehicle subsequent to an arrest;
confinement in any public or private facility for custody of persons charged
with or convicted of crime in the state or another state or under the laws of
the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent child or unruly child
in the state or another state or under the laws of the United States;
hospitalization, institutionalization or confinement in any public or private
facility that is ordered pursuant to or under the authority of Ohio R.C.
2945.37, 2945.371, 2945.38, 2945.39, 2945.40, 2945.401 or 2945.402; confinement
in any vehicle for transportation to or from any facility of any of those
natures; detention for extradition or deportation; except as provided in this
division, supervision by any employee of any facility of any of those natures
that is incidental to hospitalization, institutionalization or confinement in
the facility but that occurs outside the facility; supervision by an employee
of the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction of a person on any type of
release from a state correctional institution; or confinement in any vehicle,
airplane or place while being returned from outside of the state into the state
by a private person or entity pursuant to a contract entered into under Ohio
R.C. 311.29(E) or Ohio R.C. 5149.03(B). For a person confined in a county jail
who participates in a county jail industry program pursuant to Ohio R.C.
5147.30, DETENTION includes time spent at an assigned work site and going to
and from the work site.
   DETENTION FACILITY. Any public or private place used for the confinement of
a person charged with or convicted of any crime in the state or another state
or under the laws of the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent
child or an unruly child in the state or another state or under the laws of the
United States.
   FORCE. Any violence, compulsion or constraint physically exerted by any
means upon or against a person or thing.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any of the following:
      (1)   A sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, police officer of a township
or joint police district, marshal, deputy marshal, municipal police officer,
member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under
Ohio R.C. 3735.31(D) or state highway patrol trooper;
      (2)   An officer, agent or employee of the state or any of its agencies,
instrumentalities or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute, a duty to
conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and the
authority to arrest violators is conferred, within the limits of such statutory
duty and authority;
      (3)   The Mayor, in a capacity as chief conservator of the peace within
the municipality;
      (4)   A member of an auxiliary police force organized by the county,
township or municipal law enforcement authorities, within the scope of the
member’s appointment or commission;
      (5)   A person lawfully called pursuant to Ohio R.C. 311.07 to aid a
sheriff in keeping the peace, for the purposes and during the time when the
person is called;
      (6)   A person appointed by a Mayor pursuant to Ohio R.C. 737.10 as a
special patrolling officer during a riot or emergency, for the purposes and
during the time when the person is appointed;
      (7)   A member of the organized militia of the state or the armed forces
of the United States, lawfully called to duty to aid civil authorities in
keeping the peace or protect against domestic violence;
      (8)   A prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, secret
service officer or municipal prosecutor;
      (9)   A veterans’ home police officer appointed under Ohio R.C. 5907.02;
      (10)   A member of a police force employed by a regional transit
authority under Ohio R.C. 306.35(Y);
      (11)   A special police officer employed by a port authority under Ohio
R.C. 4582.04 or 4582.28;
      (12)   The House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms if the House of
Representatives Sergeant at Arms has arrest authority pursuant to Ohio R.C.
101.311(E)(1) and an Assistant House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms;
      (13)   The Senate Sergeant at Arms and an Assistant Senate Sergeant at
Arms; and
      (14)   A special police officer employed by a municipal corporation at a
municipal airport, or other municipal air navigation facility, that has
scheduled operations, as defined in 14 C.F.R. § 119.3, as amended, and that is
required to be under a security program and is governed by aviation security
rules of the Transportation Security Administration of the United States
Department of Transportation as provided in 49 C.F.R. parts 1542 and 1544, as
amended.
   NOT GUILTY BY REASON OF INSANITY. A person is “not guilty by reason of
insanity” relative to a charge of an offense only if the person proves, in the
manner specified in Ohio R.C. 2901.05, that at the time of the commission of
the offense, he or she did not know, as a result of a severe mental disease or
defect, the wrongfulness of his or her acts.
   OFFENSE OF VIOLENCE.
      (1)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04,
2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.15, 2903.18, 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22,
2905.01, 2905.02, 2905.11, 2905.32, 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.05, 2909.02,
2909.03, 2909.24, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2917.01, 2917.02, 2917.03,
2917.31, 2917.321, 2919.25, 2921.03, 2921.04, 2921.34 or 2923.161, of division
(A)(1) of Ohio R.C. 2903.34, of divisions (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) of Ohio R.C.
2911.12, or of divisions (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3) or (B)(4) of Ohio R.C. 2919.22,
or felonious sexual penetration in violation of former Ohio R.C. 2907.12;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States, substantially equivalent to
any section, division or offense listed in division (1) above;
      (3)   An offense, other than a traffic offense, under an existing or
former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or of the United
States, committed purposely or knowingly, and involving physical harm to
persons or a risk of serious physical harm to persons;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under divisions (1), (2) or (3) of this definition;
      (5)   A violation of division (C) of R.C. § 959.131.
   OFFICIAL PROCEEDING. Any proceeding before a legislative, judicial,
administrative or other governmental agency or official authorized to take
evidence under oath, and includes any proceeding before a referee, hearing
examiner, commissioner, notary or other person taking testimony or a deposition
in connection with an official proceeding.
   PARTY OFFICIAL. Any person who holds an elective or appointive post in a
political party in the United States or the state, by virtue of which he or she
directs, conducts or participates in directing or conducting party affairs at
any level of responsibility.
   PERSON.
      (1)   (a)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, as used in any
section contained in this General Offenses Code that sets forth a criminal
offense, PERSON includes all of the following:
            1.   An individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership and association; and
            2.   An unborn human who is viable.
         (b)   As used in any section contained in this General Offenses Code
that does not set forth a criminal offense, PERSON includes an individual,
corporation, business trust, estate, partnership and association.
         (c)   As used in division (1)(a)2. of this definition, “unborn human”
means an individual organism of the species Homo sapiens from fertilization
until live birth. “Viable” means the stage of development of a human fetus at
which there is a realistic probability of maintaining and nourishing of a life
outside the womb with or without temporary artificial life-sustaining support.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (1)(a) of this definition, in no case
shall the portion of the definition of the term PERSON that is set forth in
division (1)(a)2. of this definition be applied or construed in any section
contained in this General Offenses Code that sets forth a criminal offense in
any of the following manners:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (2)(a) of this
definition, in a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as
prohibiting any pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion
with the consent of the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman
implied by law in a medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise
authorized by law to consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant
woman. An abortion that violates the conditions described in the immediately
preceding sentence may be punished as a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.01,
2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12,
2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.21 or 2903.22, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, as applicable. An abortion that does not violate the conditions
described in the second immediately preceding sentence, but that does violate
Ohio R.C. 2919.12, 2919.13(B), 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, may be punished as a violation of
such section, as applicable. Consent is sufficient under this division (2)(a)
if it is of the type otherwise adequate to permit medical treatment to the
pregnant woman, even if it does not comply with Ohio R.C. 2919.12;
         (b)   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
            1.   Her delivery of a stillborn baby;
            2.   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a
viable, unborn human that she is carrying;
            3.   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive, but who
dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human;
            4.   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human; or
            5.   Her causing, threatening to cause or attempting to cause, in
any other manner, an injury, illness or other psychological illness or
condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human
that she is carrying.
   PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any injury, illness or other physiological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
   PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY. Any tangible or intangible damage to property
that, in any degree, results in loss to its value or interferes with its use or
enjoyment. PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY does not include wear and tear occasioned
by normal use.
   PRIVILEGE. An immunity, license or right conferred by law, or bestowed by
express or implied grant, or arising out of status, position, office or
relationship, or growing out of necessity.
   PROPERTY.
      (1)   Any property, real or personal, tangible or intangible, and any
interest or license in that property. PROPERTY includes, but is not limited to,
cable television service, other telecommunications service, telecommunications
devices, information service, computers, data, computer software, financial
instruments associated with computers, other documents associated with
computers or copies of the documents, whether in machine or human-readable
form, trade secrets, trademarks, copyrights, patents and property protected by
a trademark, copyright or patent. “Financial instruments associated with
computers” include, but are not limited to, checks, drafts, warrants, money
orders, notes of indebtedness, certificates of deposit, letters of credit,
bills of credit or debit cards, financial transaction authorization mechanisms,
marketable securities or any computer system representations of any of them.
      (2)   As used in this definition, “trade secret” has the same meaning as
in Ohio R.C. 1333.61, and “telecommunications service” and “information
service” have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
      (3)   As used in this definition and in the definition of “contraband” in
this section, “cable television service”, “computer”, “computer network”,
“computer software”, “computer system”, “data” and “telecommunications device”
have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
   PROVIDER AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 5164.01.
   PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Any elected or appointed officer, employee or agent of the
state or any political subdivision thereof, whether in a temporary or permanent
capacity, and includes, but is not limited to, legislators, judges and law
enforcement officers. The term does not include an employee, officer or
governor- appointed member of the board of directors of the non-profit
corporation formed under Ohio R.C. 187.01.
   PUBLIC SERVANT.
      (1)   Any of the following:
         (a)   Any public official;
         (b)   Any person performing ad hoc a governmental function, including,
but not limited to, a juror, member of a temporary commission, master,
arbitrator, advisor or consultant; or
         (c)   A person who is a candidate for public office, whether or not he
or she is elected or appointed to the office for which he or she is a
candidate. A person is a candidate for purposes of this division (1)(c) if he
or she has been nominated according to law for election or appointment to
public office, or if he or she has filed a petition or petitions as required by
law to have his or her name placed on the ballot in a primary, general or
special election, or if he or she campaigns as a write-in candidate in any
primary, general or special election.
      (2)   The term does not include an employee, officer or governor-
appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit corporation formed
under Ohio R.C. 187.01.
   RISK. A significant possibility, as contrasted with a remote possibility,
that a certain result may occur or that certain circumstances may exist.
   SCHOOL, SCHOOL BUILDING and SCHOOL PREMISES. Have the same meanings as in
Ohio R.C. 2925.01.
   SCHOOL ACTIVITY.  Any activity held under the auspices of a board of
education of a city, local, exempted village, joint vocational or cooperative
education school district; a governing authority of a community school
established under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3314; a governing board of an educational
service center; or the governing body of a nonpublic school for which the
Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum standards under Ohio
R.C. 3301.07.
   SCHOOL BUS. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
   SCHOOL SAFETY ZONE. Consists of a school, school building, school premises,
school activity and school bus.
   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any mental illness or condition of such gravity as would normally
require hospitalization or prolonged psychiatric treatment;
      (2)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death;
      (3)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent incapacity, whether
partial or total, or that involves some temporary, substantial incapacity;
      (4)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent disfigurement, or
that involves some temporary, serious disfigurement; or
      (5)   Any physical harm that involves acute pain of such duration as to
result in substantial suffering, or that involves any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain.
   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY. Any physical harm to property that does
either of the following:
      (1)   Results in substantial loss to the value of the property, or
requires a substantial amount of time, effort or money to repair or replace;
and
      (2)   Temporarily prevents the use or enjoyment of the property, or
substantially interferes with its use or enjoyment for an extended period of
time.
   SUBSTANTIAL RISK. A strong possibility, as contrasted with a remote or
significant possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain
circumstances may exist.
   VALUABLE THING or VALUABLE BENEFIT. Includes, but is not limited to, a
contribution. This inclusion does not indicate or imply that a contribution was
not included in those terms before 9-17-1986.
(ORC 2901.01, 2921.01)
§ 606.02 CULPABLE MENTAL STATES.
   (A)   A person acts purposely when it is the person’s specific intention to
cause a certain result or, when the gist of the offense is a prohibition
against conduct of a certain nature, regardless of what the offender intends to
accomplish thereby, it is the offender’s specific intention to engage in
conduct of that nature.
   (B)   A person acts knowingly, regardless of purpose, when the person is
aware that the person’s conduct will probably cause a certain result or will
probably be of a certain nature. A person has knowledge of circumstances when
the person is aware that such circumstances probably exist. When knowledge of
the existence of a particular fact is an element of an offense, such knowledge
is established if a person subjectively believes that there is a high
probability of its existence and fails to make inquiry or acts with a conscious
purpose to avoid learning the fact.
   (C)   A person acts recklessly when, with heedless indifference to the
consequences, the person disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that
the person’s conduct is likely to cause a certain result or is likely to be of
a certain nature. A person is reckless with respect to circumstances when, with
heedless indifference to the consequences, the person disregards a substantial
and unjustifiable risk that such circumstances are likely to exist.
   (D)   A person acts negligently when, because of a substantial lapse from
due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that the person’s
conduct may cause a certain result or may be of a certain nature. A person is
negligent with respect to circumstances when, because of a substantial lapse
from due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that such
circumstances may exist.
   (E)   When the section defining an offense provides that negligence suffices
to establish an element thereof, then recklessness, knowledge or purpose is
also sufficient culpability for such element. When recklessness suffices to
establish an element of an offense, then knowledge or purpose is also
sufficient culpability for such element. When knowledge suffices to establish
an element of an offense, then purpose is also sufficient culpability for such
element.
(ORC 2901.22)
§ 606.03 CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENSES.
   As used in this General Offenses Code:
   (A)   Offenses include misdemeanors of the first, second, third and fourth
degree, minor misdemeanors and offenses not specifically classified;
   (B)   Regardless of the penalty that may be imposed, any offense
specifically classified as a misdemeanor is a misdemeanor;
   (C)   Any offense not specifically classified is a misdemeanor if
imprisonment for not more than one year may be imposed as a penalty; and
   (D)   Any offense not specifically classified is a minor misdemeanor if the
only penalty that may be imposed is one of the following:
      (1)   For an offense committed prior to 1-1-2004, a fine not exceeding
$100; or
      (2)   For an offense committed on or after 1-1-2004, a fine not exceeding
$150, community service under Ohio R.C. 2929.27(D) or a financial sanction
other than a fine under Ohio R.C. 2929.28.
(ORC 2901.02)
§ 606.04 OFFENSES DEFINED.
   (A)   No conduct constitutes a criminal offense against the municipality
unless it is defined as an offense in this General Offenses Code.
   (B)   An offense is defined when one or more sections of this General
Offenses Code state a positive prohibition or enjoin a specific duty, and
provide a penalty for violation of such prohibition or failure to meet such
duty.
   (C)   This section does not affect the power of a court to punish for
contempt or to employ any sanction authorized by law to enforce an order, civil
judgment or decree.
(ORC 2901.03)
§ 606.05 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (C) or (D) below, sections
of this General Offenses Code defining offenses or penalties shall be strictly
construed against the municipality and liberally construed in favor of the
accused.
   (B)   Rules of criminal procedure and sections of this General Offenses Code
providing for criminal procedure shall be construed so as to effect the fair,
impartial, speedy and sure administration of justice.
   (C)   Any provision of a section of this General Offenses Code that refers
to a previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of a section of
this General Offenses Code, the Ohio Revised Code or a division of a section of
this General Offenses Code or the Ohio Revised Code shall be construed to also
refer to a previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a substantially
equivalent offense under an existing or former law of the municipality, state,
another state or the United States or under an existing or former municipal
ordinance.
   (D)   Any provision of this Code that refers to a section, or to a division
of a section, of this Code that defines or specifies a criminal offense shall
be construed to also refer to an existing or former law of the state, another
state or the United States, to an existing or former municipal ordinance, or to
an existing or former division of any such existing or former law or ordinance
that defines or specifies, or that defined or specified, a substantially
equivalent offense.
(ORC 2901.04)
§ 606.055 CRIMINAL LAW JURISDICTION.
   (A)   A person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in the
municipality if any of the following occur:
      (1)   The person commits an offense under the laws of the municipality,
any element of which takes place in the municipality;
      (2)   While in the municipality, the person attempts to commit or is
guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in another jurisdiction,
which offense is an offense under both the laws of the municipality and the
other jurisdiction or, while in the municipality, the person conspires to
commit an offense in another jurisdiction, which offense is an offense under
both the laws of the municipality and the other jurisdiction, and a substantial
overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy is undertaken in the municipality by
the person or another person involved in the conspiracy, subsequent to the
person’s entrance into the conspiracy. In any case in which a person attempts
to commit, is guilty of complicity in the commission of, or conspires to commit
an offense in another jurisdiction as described in this division (A)(2), the
person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in the municipality
for the attempt, complicity or conspiracy, and for any resulting offense that
is committed or completed in the other jurisdiction;
      (3)   While out of the municipality, the person conspires or attempts to
commit, or is guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in the
municipality;
      (4)   While out of the municipality, the person omits to perform a legal
duty imposed by the laws of the municipality, which omission affects a
legitimate interest of the municipality in protecting, governing or regulating
any person, property, thing, transaction or activity in the municipality;
      (5)   While out of the municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
retains property and subsequently brings any of the unlawfully taken or
retained property into the municipality;
      (6)   While out of the municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
entices another person and subsequently brings the other person into the
municipality; or
      (7)   The person, by means of a computer, computer system, computer
network, telecommunication, telecommunications device, telecommunications
service or information service, causes or knowingly permits any writing, data,
image or other telecommunication to be disseminated or transmitted into the
municipality in violation of the law of the state or municipality.
   (B)   In homicide, the element referred to in division (A)(1) above includes
the act that causes death, the physical contact that causes death, the death
itself, or any other element that is set forth in the offense in question. If
any part of the body of a homicide victim is found in the municipality, the
death is presumed to have occurred within the municipality.
   (C)   (1)   The municipality includes the land and water within its
boundaries and the air space above that land and water, with respect to which
the municipality has either exclusive or concurrent legislative jurisdiction.
Where the boundary between the municipality and another jurisdiction is
disputed, the disputed territory is conclusively presumed to be within the
municipality for purposes of this section.
      (2)   The courts of common pleas of Adams, Athens, Belmont, Brown,
Clermont, Columbiana, Gallia, Hamilton, Jefferson, Lawrence, Meigs, Monroe,
Scioto and Washington counties have jurisdiction beyond the north or northwest
shore of the Ohio River extending to the opposite shore line, between the
extended boundary lines of any adjacent counties or adjacent state. Each of
those courts of common pleas has concurrent jurisdiction on the Ohio River with
any adjacent court of common pleas that borders on that river and with any
court of Kentucky or of West Virginia that borders on the Ohio River and that
has jurisdiction on the Ohio River under the law of Kentucky or the law of West
Virginia, whichever is applicable, or under federal law.
   (D)   When an offense is committed under the laws of the municipality, and
it appears beyond a reasonable doubt that the offense or any element of the
offense took place either in the municipality or in another jurisdiction or
jurisdictions, but it cannot reasonably be determined in which it took place,
the offense or element is conclusively presumed to have taken place in the
municipality for purposes of this section.
   (E)   When a person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in the
municipality for an offense committed or completed outside the municipality,
the person is subject to all specifications for that offense that would be
applicable if the offense had been committed within the municipality.
   (F)   Any act, conduct or element that is a basis of a person being subject
under this section to criminal prosecution and punishment in the municipality
need not be committed personally by the person as long as it is committed by
another person who is in complicity or conspiracy with the person.
   (G)   This section shall be liberally construed, consistent with
constitutional limitations, to allow the municipality the broadest possible
jurisdiction over offenses and persons committing offenses in, or affecting,
the municipality.
   (H)   For purposes of division (A)(2) above, an overt act is substantial
when it is of a character that manifests a purpose on the part of the actor
that the object of the conspiracy should be completed.
   (I)   As used in this section, “computer”, “computer system”, “computer
network”, “information service”, “telecommunication”, “telecommunications
device”, “telecommunications service”, “data” and “writing” have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
(ORC 2901.11)
§ 606.06 LIMITATION ON CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5)
of this section or as otherwise provided in this section, a prosecution shall
be barred unless it is commenced within the following periods after an offense
is committed:
         (a)   For a felony: six years;
         (b)   For a misdemeanor other than a minor misdemeanor: two years; and
         (c)   For a minor misdemeanor: six months.
      (2)   There is no period of limitation for the prosecution of a violation
of Ohio R.C. 2903.01 or Ohio R.C. 2903.02 or for the prosecution of a
conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in committing a
violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.01 or Ohio R.C. 2903.02.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (B) to (J) below, a
prosecution of any of the following offenses shall be barred unless it is
commenced within 20 years after the offense is committed:
         (a)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.03, 2903.04, 2905.01, 2905.32,
2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.21, 2909.02, 2909.22, 2909.23, 2909.24, 2909.26,
2909.27, 2909.28, 2909.29, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12 or 2917.02, a
violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.11 or 2903.12 if the victim is a peace officer, a
violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.13 that is a felony or a violation of former Ohio
R.C. 2907.12; or
         (b)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit or complicity in
committing a violation set forth in division (A)(3)(a) above.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (D) to (L) below, a
prosecution of a violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.02 or 2907.03 or a conspiracy to
commit, attempt to commit or complicity in committing a violation of either
section shall be barred unless it is commenced within 25 years after the
offense is committed.
      (5)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (A)(5)(b) and (E) to
(I) of this section, a prosecution of a violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.13 shall be
barred unless it is commenced within five years after the offense is committed.
         B.   Prosecution that would otherwise be barred under division (A)(5)
(a) of this section may be commenced within five years after the date of the
discovery of the offense by either an aggrieved person or the aggrieved
person's legal representative who is not a party to the offense.
         C.   As used in division (A)(5)(b) of this section, "aggrieved person"
includes any of the following individuals with regard to a violation of Ohio
R.C. 2907.13:
            1.   A patient who was the victim of the violation;
            2.   The spouse or surviving spouse of a patient who was the victim
of the violation;
            3.   Any child born as a result of the violation.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) below, if the
period of limitation provided in divisions (A)(1) or (A)(3) above has expired,
prosecution shall be commenced for an offense of which an element is fraud or
breach of fiduciary duty within one year after discovery of the offense either
by an aggrieved person or by the aggrieved person’s legal representative who is
not a party to the offense.
      (2)   If the period of limitation provided in divisions (A)(1) or (A)(3)
above has expired, prosecution for a violation of Ohio R.C. 2913.49 shall be
commenced within five years after discovery of the offense either by an
aggrieved person or the aggrieved person’s legal representative who is not a
party to the offense.
   (C)   (1)   If the period of limitation provided in divisions (A)(1) or (A)
(3) above has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for the following
offenses during the following specified periods of time:
         (a)   For an offense involving misconduct in office by a public
servant at any time while the accused remains a public servant, or within two
years thereafter; and
         (b)   For an offense by a person who is not a public servant, but
whose offense is directly related to the misconduct in office of a public
servant, at any time while that public servant remains a public servant, or
within two years thereafter.
      (2)   For the purpose of this division (C), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         OFFENSE IS DIRECTLY RELATED TO THE MISCONDUCT IN OFFICE OF A PUBLIC
SERVANT. Includes, but is not limited to, a violation of Ohio R.C. 101.71,
101.91, 121.61 or 2921.13, 102.03(F) or (H), 2921.02(A), 2921.43(A) or (B) or
3517.13(F) or (G), that is directly related to an offense involving misconduct
in office of a public servant, or a violation of any municipal ordinance
substantially equivalent to those Ohio Revised Code sections listed herein.
         PUBLIC SERVANT. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2921.01.
   (D)   (1)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal
investigation of the commission of a violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.02 or 2907.03
is determined to match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person and
if the time of the determination is later than 25 years after the offense is
committed, prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may be
commenced within five years after the determination is complete.
      (2)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal investigation
of the commission of a violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.02 or 2907.03 is determined
to match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person and if the time
of the determination is within 25 years after the offense is committed,
prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may be commenced
within the longer of 25 years after the offense is committed or five years
after the determination is complete.
      (3)   As used in this division (D), DNA RECORD has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 109.573.
   (E)   An offense is committed when every element of the offense occurs. In
the case of an offense of which an element is a continuing course of conduct,
the period of limitation does not begin to run until such course of conduct or
the accused’s accountability for it terminates, whichever occurs first.
   (F)   A prosecution is commenced on the date an indictment is returned or an
information filed, or on the date a lawful arrest without a warrant is made, or
on the date a warrant, summons, citation or other process is issued, whichever
occurs first. A prosecution is not commenced by the return of an indictment or
the filing of an information unless reasonable diligence is exercised to issue
and execute process on the same. A prosecution is not commenced upon issuance
of a warrant, summons, citation or other process unless reasonable diligence is
exercised to execute the same.
   (G)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the corpus
delicti remains undiscovered.
   (H)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the
accused purposely avoids prosecution. Proof that the accused departed the
municipality or conceals the accused’s identity or whereabouts is prima facie
evidence of the accused’s purpose to avoid prosecution.
   (I)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time a prosecution
against the accused based on the same conduct is pending in the state, even
though the indictment, information or process that commenced the prosecution is
quashed or the proceedings on the indictment, information or process are set
aside or reversed on appeal.
   (J)   The period of limitation for a violation of this Part 6 or Title XXIX
of the Ohio Revised Code that involves a physical or mental wound, injury,
disability or condition of a nature that reasonably indicates abuse or neglect
of a child under 18 years of age or of a child with a developmental disability
or physical impairment under 21 years of age shall not begin to run until
either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The victim of the offense reaches the age of majority; or
      (2)   A public children services agency, or a municipal or county peace
officer that is not the parent or guardian of the child, in the county in which
the child resides or in which the abuse or neglect is occurring or has occurred
has been notified that abuse or neglect is known, suspected or believed to have
occurred.
   (K)   As used in this section, PEACE OFFICER has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 2935.01.
   (L)   (1)   The amendments to divisions (a) and (d) of this section that
took effect on July 16, 2015, apply to a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03
committed on and after July 16, 2015, and apply to a violation of either of
those sections committed prior to July 16, 2015, if prosecution for that
violation was not barred under this section as it existed on July 16, 2015.
      (2)   The amendment to division (a)(2) of this section that took effect
on April 4, 2023, applies to a conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or
complicity in committing a violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02 if the
conspiracy, attempt, or complicity is committed on or after April 4, 2023, and
applies to a conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing a violation of either of those sections if the conspiracy, attempt,
or complicity was committed prior to April 4, 2023, and prosecution for that
conspiracy, attempt, or complicity was not barred under this section as it
existed on the day prior to April 4, 2023.
(ORC 2901.13)
§ 606.07 REQUIREMENTS FOR CRIMINAL LIABILITY; VOLUNTARY INTOXICATION.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, a person is not guilty of an
offense unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person’s liability is based on conduct that includes either a
voluntary act, or an omission to perform an act or duty that the person is
capable of performing; and
      (2)   The person has the requisite degree of culpability for each element
as to which a culpable mental state is specified by the language defining the
offense.
   (B)   When the language defining an offense does not specify any degree of
culpability, and plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict criminal
liability for the conduct described in the section, then culpability is not
required for a person to be guilty of the offense. The fact that one division
of a section plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict liability for an
offense defined in that division does not by itself plainly indicate a purpose
to impose strict criminal liability for an offense defined in other divisions
of the section that do not specify a degree of culpability.
   (C)   (1)   When language defining an element of an offense that is related
to knowledge or intent or to which mens rea could fairly be applied neither
specifies culpability nor plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict
liability, the element of the offense is established only if a person acts
recklessly.
      (2)   Division (C)(1) above does not apply to offenses defined in Ohio
R.C. Title XLV.
      (3)   Division (C)(1) above does not relieve the prosecution of the
burden of proving the culpable mental state required by any definition
incorporated into the offense.
   (D)   Voluntary intoxication may not be taken into consideration in
determining the existence of a mental state that is an element of a criminal
offense. Voluntary intoxication does not relieve a person of a duty to act if
failure to act constitutes a criminal offense. Evidence that a person was
voluntarily intoxicated may be admissible to show whether or not the person was
physically capable of performing the act with which the person is charged.
   (E)   For the purpose of this division (E), the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CULPABILITY. Purpose, knowledge, recklessness or negligence, as defined
in Ohio R.C. 2901.22.
      INTOXICATION. Includes, but is not limited to, intoxication resulting
from the ingestion of alcohol, a drug or alcohol and a drug.
      INVOLUNTARY ACTS. Reflexes, convulsions, body movements during
unconsciousness or sleep, and body movements that are not otherwise a product
of the actor’s volition are involuntary acts.
      POSSESSION. A voluntary act if the possessor knowingly procured or
received the thing possessed, or was aware of the possessor’s control of the
thing possessed for a sufficient time to have ended possession.
(ORC 2901.21)
§ 606.08 ORGANIZATIONAL CRIMINAL LIABILITY.
   (A)   An organization may be convicted of an offense under any of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   The offense is a minor misdemeanor committed by an officer, agent
or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s or employee’s office or employment; except that, if the
section defining the offense designates the officers, agents or employees for
whose conduct the organization is accountable or the circumstances under which
it is accountable, those provisions shall apply;
      (2)   A purpose to impose organizational liability plainly appears in the
section defining the offense, and the offense is committed by an officer, agent
or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s or employee’s office or employment; except that, if the
section defining the offense designates the officers, agents or employees for
whose conduct the organization is accountable or the circumstances under which
it is accountable, those provisions shall apply;
      (3)   The offense consists of an omission to discharge a specific duty
imposed by law on the organization; and/or
      (4)   If, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for the
commission of the offense, its commission was authorized, requested, commanded,
tolerated or performed by the board of directors, trustees, partners or by a
high managerial officer, agent or employee acting in behalf of the organization
and within the scope of such a board’s or person’s office or employment.
   (B)   If strict liability is imposed for the commission of an offense, a
purpose to impose organizational liability shall be presumed, unless the
contrary plainly appears.
   (C)   In a prosecution of an organization for an offense other than one for
which strict liability is imposed, it is a defense that the high managerial
officer, agent or employee having supervisory responsibility over the subject
matter of the offense exercised due diligence to prevent its commission. This
defense is not available if it plainly appears inconsistent with the purpose of
the section defining the offense.
   (D)   (1)   As used in this section, ORGANIZATION means a corporation for
profit or not for profit, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture,
unincorporated nonprofit association, estate, trust or other commercial or
legal entity.
      (2)   ORGANIZATION does not include an entity organized as or by a
governmental agency for the execution of a governmental program.
(ORC 2901.23)
§ 606.09 PERSONAL ACCOUNTABILITY FOR ORGANIZATIONAL CONDUCT.
   (A)   An officer, agent or employee of an organization, as defined in Ohio
R.C. 2901.23, may be prosecuted for an offense committed by such organization,
if he or she acts with the kind of culpability required for the commission of
the offense, and any of the following apply:
      (1)   In the name of the organization or in its behalf, he or she engages
in conduct constituting the offense, or causes another to engage in such
conduct, or tolerates such conduct when it is of a type for which he or she has
direct responsibility; or
      (2)   He or she has primary responsibility to discharge a duty imposed on
the organization by law, and such duty is not discharged.
   (B)   When a person is convicted of an offense by reason of this section, he
or she is subject to the same penalty as if he or she had acted in his or her
own behalf.
(ORC 2901.24)
§ 606.10 FALSIFICATION.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly swear
or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made, when any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The statement is made in any official proceeding;
      (2)   The statement is made with purpose to incriminate another;
      (3)   The statement is made with purpose to mislead a public official in
performing his or her official function;
      (4)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the payment of
unemployment compensation; Ohio Works First; prevention, retention and
contingency benefits and services; disability assistance; retirement benefits
or health care coverage from a state retirement system; economic development
assistance as defined in Ohio R.C. 9.66; or other benefits administered by a
governmental agency or paid out of a public treasury;
      (5)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the issuance by a
governmental agency of a license, permit, authorization, certificate,
registration, release or provider agreement;
      (6)   The statement is sworn or affirmed before a notary public or
another person empowered to administer oaths;
      (7)   The statement is in writing on or in connection with a report or
return that is required or authorized by law;
      (8)   The statement is in writing, and is made with purpose to induce
another to extend credit to or employ the offender, or to confer any degree,
diploma, certificate of attainment, award of excellence or honor on the
offender, or to extend to or bestow upon the offender any other valuable
benefit or distinction, when the person to whom the statement is directed
relies upon it to his or her detriment;
      (9)   The statement is made with purpose to commit or facilitate the
commission of a theft offense;
      (10)   The statement is knowingly made to a probate court in connection
with any action, proceeding, or other matter within its jurisdiction, either
orally or in a written document, including, but not limited to, an application,
petition, complaint or other pleading, or an inventory, account or report;
      (11)   The statement is made on an account, form, record, stamp, label or
other writing that is required by law;
      (12)   The statement is made in connection with the purchase of a
firearm, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2923.11, and in conjunction with the
furnishing to the seller of the firearm of a fictitious or altered driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit, a fictitious or altered identification
card, or any other document that contains false information about the
purchaser’s identity;
      (13)   The statement is made in a document or instrument of writing that
purports to be a judgment, lien, or claim of indebtedness and is filed or
recorded with the Secretary of State, a county recorder, or the clerk of a
court of record;
      (14)   The statement is made in an application filed with a county
sheriff pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2923.125 in order to obtain or renew a concealed
handgun license or is made in an affidavit submitted to a county sheriff to
obtain a concealed handgun license on a temporary emergency basis under Ohio
R.C. 2923.1213; or
      (15)   The statement is required under Ohio R.C. 5743.71 in connection
with the person’s purchase of cigarettes or tobacco products in a delivery
sale.
   (B)   No person, in connection with the purchase of a firearm as defined in
Ohio R.C. 2923.11, shall knowingly furnish to the seller of the firearm a
fictitious or altered driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit, a
fictitious or altered identification card or any other document that contains
false information about the purchaser’s identity.
   (C)   No person, in an attempt to obtain a concealed handgun license under
Ohio R.C. 2923.125, shall knowingly present to a sheriff a fictitious or
altered document that purports to be certification of the person’s competence
in handling a handgun as described in division (B)(3) of that section.
   (D)   It is no defense to a charge under division (A)(6) above that the oath
or affirmation was administered or taken in an irregular manner.
   (E)   If contradictory statements relating to the same fact are made by the
offender within the period of the statute of limitations for falsification, it
is not necessary for the prosecution to prove which statement was false, but
only that one or the other was false.
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates divisions (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), (A)
(5), (A)(6), (A)(7), (A)(8), (A)(10), (A)(11), (A)(13) or (A)(15) above is
guilty of falsification. Except as otherwise provided in this division (F),
falsification is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(9) above is guilty of falsification
in a theft offense. Except as otherwise provided in this division (F),
falsification in a theft offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
value of the property or services stolen is $1,000 or more, falsification in a
theft offense is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates divisions (A)(12) or (B) above is guilty of
falsification to purchase a firearm, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates Divisions (A)(14) or (C) above is guilty of
falsification to obtain a concealed handgun license, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (A) above in removal proceedings under
Ohio R.C. 319.26, 321.37, 507.13 or 733.78 is guilty of falsification regarding
a removal proceeding, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2921.13)
   (G)   (1)   No person who has knowingly failed to maintain proof of
financial responsibility in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4509.101 shall produce
any document or present to a peace officer an electronic wireless
communications device that is displaying any text or images with the purpose to
mislead a peace officer upon the request of a peace officer for proof of
financial responsibility made in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4509.101(D)(2).
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (G) is guilty of falsification, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 4509.102)
Statutory reference:
   Civil liability for violations of this section, see Ohio R.C. 2921.13(G)
§ 606.105 FALSE REPORT OF CHILD ABUSE OR NEGLECT.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make or cause another person to make a false
report under Ohio R.C. 2151.421(B) alleging that any person has committed an
act or omission that resulted in a child being an abused child, as defined in
Ohio R.C. 2151.031, or a neglected child, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2151.03.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or causing a false
report of child abuse or child neglect, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2921.14)
§ 606.11 COMPOUNDING A CRIME.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly demand, accept or agree to accept anything
of value in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon a pending
criminal prosecution.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section when both
of the following apply:
      (1)   The pending prosecution involved is for a violation of Ohio R.C.
2913.02, 2913.11, 2913.21(B)(2) or 2913.47, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, of which the actor under this section was the victim; and
      (2)   The thing of value demanded, accepted or agreed to be accepted, in
consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon the prosecution, did not
exceed an amount that the actor reasonably believed due him or her as
restitution for the loss caused him or her by the offense.
   (C)   When a prosecuting witness abandons or agrees to abandon a prosecution
under division (B) above, the abandonment or agreement in no way binds the
state to abandoning the prosecution.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of compounding a crime, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2921.21)
§ 606.12 FAILURE TO REPORT A CRIME OR DEATH.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2) above, no person, knowing
that a felony has been or is being committed, shall knowingly fail to report
the information to law enforcement authorities.
      (2)   No person, knowing that a violation of Ohio R.C. 2913.04(B) has
been or is being committed or that the person has received information derived
from such a violation, shall knowingly fail to report the violation to law
enforcement authorities.
   (B)   Except for conditions that are within the scope of division (E) below,
no person giving aid to a sick or injured person shall negligently fail to
report to law enforcement authorities any gunshot or stab wound treated or
observed by the person, or any serious physical harm to persons that the person
knows or has reasonable cause to believe resulted from an offense of violence.
   (C)   No person who discovers the body or acquires the first knowledge of
the death of a person shall fail to report the death immediately to a physician
or advanced practice registered nurse whom the person knows to be treating the
deceased for a condition from which death at such time would not be unexpected,
or to a law enforcement officer, an ambulance service, an emergency squad or
the coroner in a political subdivision in which the body is discovered, the
death is believed to have occurred, or knowledge concerning the death is
obtained. For purposes of this division (C), ADVANCED PRACTICE REGISTERED NURSE
does not include a certified registered nurse anesthetist.
   (D)   No person shall fail to provide upon request of the person to whom a
report required by division (C) above was made, or to any law enforcement
officer who has reasonable cause to assert the authority to investigate the
circumstances surrounding the death, any facts within his or her knowledge that
may have a bearing on the investigation of the death.
   (E)   (1)   As used in this section, BURN INJURY means any of the following:
         (a)   Second or third degree burns;
         (b)   Any burns to the upper respiratory tract or laryngeal edema due
to the inhalation of super- heated air; and
         (c)   Any burn injury or wound that may result in death.
      (2)   No physician, nurse, physician assistant or limited practitioner
who, outside a hospital, sanitarium or other medical facility, attends or
treats a person who has sustained a burn injury inflicted by an explosion or
other incendiary device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a
violent, malicious or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury
immediately to the local arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the
jurisdiction in which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local
law enforcement authorities.
      (3)   No manager, superintendent or other person in charge of a hospital,
sanitarium or other medical facility in which a person is attended or treated
for any burn injury inflicted by an explosion or other incendiary device, or
that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a violent, malicious or
criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury immediately to the local
arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the jurisdiction in which the person
is attended or treated, or otherwise to local law enforcement authorities.
      (4)   No person who is required to report any burn injury under divisions
(E)(2) or (3) above shall fail to file, within three working days after
attending or treating the victim, a written report of the burn injury with the
office of the State Fire Marshal. The report shall be made on a form provided
by the State Fire Marshal.
      (5)   Anyone participating in the making of reports under this division
(E) or anyone participating in a judicial proceeding resulting from the reports
is immune from any civil or criminal liability that otherwise might be incurred
or imposed as a result of such actions. Notwithstanding Ohio R.C. 4731.22, the
physician- patient relationship or advanced practice registered nurse-patient
relationship is not a ground for excluding evidence regarding a person’s burn
injury or the cause of the burn injury in any judicial proceeding resulting
from a report submitted under this division (E).
   (F)   (1)   Any doctor of medicine or osteopathic medicine, hospital intern
or resident, nurse, psychologist, social worker, independent social worker,
social work assistant, licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed
professional counselor, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage
and family therapist who knows or has reasonable cause to believe that a
patient or client has been the victim of domestic violence, as defined in Ohio
R.C. 3113.31, shall note that knowledge or belief and the basis for it in the
patient’s or client’s records.
      (2)   Notwithstanding Ohio R.C. 4731.22, the physician-patient privilege
or advanced practice registered nurse-patient privilege shall not be a ground
for excluding any information regarding the report containing the knowledge or
belief noted under division (F)(1) above, and the information may be admitted
as evidence in accordance with the rules of evidence.
   (G)   Divisions (A) or (D) above does not require disclosure of information,
when any of the following applies:
      (1)   The information is privileged by reason of the relationship between
attorney and client; physician and patient; advanced practice registered nurse
and patient; licensed psychologist or licensed school psychologist and client;
licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed professional counselor,
independent social worker, social worker, independent marriage and family
therapist, or marriage and family therapist and client; member of the clergy,
rabbi, minister or priest and any person communicating information
confidentially to the member of the clergy, rabbi, minister or priest for a
religious counseling purpose of a professional character; husband and wife; or
a communications assistant and those who are a party to a telecommunications
relay service call;
      (2)   The information would tend to incriminate a member of the actor’s
immediate family;
      (3)   Disclosure of the information would amount to revealing a news
source, privileged under Ohio R.C. 2739.04 or 2739.12;
      (4)   Disclosure of the information would amount to disclosure by a
member of the ordained clergy of an organized religious body of a confidential
communication made to that member of the clergy in that member's capacity as a
member of the clergy by a person seeking the aid or counsel of that member of
the clergy.
      (5)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of the actor's duties in connection with a bona fide
program of treatment or services for persons with drug dependencies or persons
in danger of drug dependence, which program is maintained or conducted by a
hospital, clinic, person, agency, or community addiction services provider
whose alcohol and drug addiction services are certified pursuant to Ohio R.C.
5119.36.
      (6)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of the actor's duties in connection with a bona fide
program for providing counseling services to victims of crimes that are
violations of Ohio R.C. 2907.02 or Ohio R.C. 2907.05 or to victims of felonious
sexual penetration in violation of former Ohio R.C. 2907.12. As used in this
division, "counseling services" include services provided in an informal
setting by a person who, by education or experience, is competent to provide
those services.
   (H)   No disclosure of information pursuant to this section gives rise to
any liability or recrimination for a breach of privilege or confidence.
   (I)   Whoever violates divisions (A) or (B) above is guilty of failure to
report a crime. Violation of division (A)(1) above is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. Violation of divisions (A)(2) or (B) above is a misdemeanor of
the second degree.
   (J)   Whoever violates divisions (C) or (D) above is guilty of failure to
report knowledge of a death, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (K)   (1)   Whoever negligently violates division (E) above is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever knowingly violates division (E) above is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (L)   As used in this section, NURSE includes an advanced practice
registered nurse, registered nurse and licensed practical nurse.
(ORC 2921.22)
§ 606.13 FAILURE TO AID A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   (A)   No person shall negligently fail or refuse to aid a law enforcement
officer, when called upon for assistance in preventing or halting the
commission of an offense, or in apprehending or detaining an offender, when the
aid can be given without a substantial risk of physical harm to the person
giving it.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to aid a law
enforcement officer, a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 2921.23)
§ 606.14 OBSTRUCTING OFFICIAL BUSINESS.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so and with purpose to prevent,
obstruct or delay the performance by a public official of any authorized act
within the public official’s official capacity, shall do any act that hampers
or impedes a public official in the performance of the public official’s lawful
duties.
   (B)   Although not exclusive, and not limited to, the following may be
applied in determining whether a violation of this section has taken place:
      (1)   Any peace officer may detain any person whom the officer encounters
under circumstances which reasonably indicate that the person has committed, is
committing or is about to commit, a crime;
      (2)   Any peace officer may detain any person the officer encounters
under circumstances which reasonably indicate that the person has violated, or
is violating, the conditions of his or her parole or probation;
      (3)   The officer may detain the person pursuant to this section only to
ascertain his or her identity and the suspicious circumstances surrounding his
or her presence abroad. Any person so detained shall identify himself or
herself, but may not be compelled to answer any other inquiry of any peace
officer; and/or
      (4)   A person must not be detained longer than is reasonably necessary
to effect the purposes of this section.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing official
business. Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), obstructing
official business is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If a violation of this
section creates a risk of physical harm to any person, obstructing official
business is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2921.31)
(Ord. 167-2004, passed 10-25-2004)
§ 606.15 OBSTRUCTING JUSTICE.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension,
prosecution, conviction or punishment of another for crime, or to assist
another to benefit from the commission of a crime, and no person, with purpose
to hinder the discovery, apprehension, prosecution, adjudication as a
delinquent child or disposition of a child for an act that if committed by an
adult would be a crime or to assist a child to benefit from the commission of
an act that if committed by an adult would be a crime, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Harbor or conceal the other person or child;
      (2)   Provide the other person or child with money, transportation, a
weapon, a disguise or other means of avoiding discovery or apprehension;
      (3)   Warn the other person or child of impending discovery or
apprehension;
      (4)   Destroy or conceal physical evidence of the crime or act, or induce
any person to withhold testimony or information or to elude legal process
summoning him or her to testify or supply evidence;
      (5)   Communicate false information to any person; or
      (6)   Prevent or obstruct any person, by means of force, intimidation or
deception, from performing any act to aid in the discovery, apprehension or
prosecution of the other person or child.
   (B)   A person may be prosecuted for, and may be convicted of or adjudicated
a delinquent child for committing, a violation of division (A) above regardless
of whether the person or child aided ultimately is apprehended for, is charged
with, is convicted of, pleads guilty to or is adjudicated a delinquent child
for committing the crime or act the person or child aided committed. The crime
or act the person or child aided committed shall be used under division (C)
below in determining the penalty for violation of division (A) above,
regardless of whether the person or child aided ultimately is apprehended for,
is charge with, is convicted of, pleads guilty to or is adjudicated a
delinquent child for committing the crime or act the person or child aided
committed.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing justice.
      (1)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a misdemeanor or if
the act committed by the child aided would be a misdemeanor if committed by an
adult, obstructing justice is a misdemeanor of the same degree as the crime
committed by the person aided or a misdemeanor of the same degree that the act
committed by the child aided would be if committed by an adult.
      (2)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a felony or if the
act committed by the child aided would be a felony if committed by an adult, or
if the crime or act committed by the person or child aided is an act of
terrorism, obstructing justice is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACT OF TERRORISM. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2909.21.
      ADULT and CHILD. Have the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2151.011.
      DELINQUENT CHILD. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2152.02.
(ORC 2921.32)
§ 606.16 RESISTING ARREST.
   (A)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of himself, herself or another.
   (B)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person and, during the course of or as a
result of the resistance or interference, cause physical harm to a law
enforcement officer.
   (C)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person if either of the following
applies:
      (1)   The offender, during the course of or as a result of the resistance
or interference, recklessly causes physical harm to a law enforcement officer
by means of a deadly weapon; or
      (2)   The offender, during the course of the resistance or interference,
brandishes a deadly weapon.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of resisting arrest. A
violation of division (A) above is a misdemeanor of the second degree. A
violation of division (B) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree. A
violation of division (C) above is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (E)   As used in this section, DEADLY WEAPON has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 2923.11.
(ORC 2921.33)
Statutory reference:
   Unlawful taking of deadly weapon from law enforcement officer, felony, see
Ohio R.C. 2911.01
§ 606.165 COMPLIANCE WITH LAWFUL ORDER OF POLICE OFFICER; FLEEING.
   (A)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any police officer invested with authority to direct, control or regulate
traffic.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as willfully to elude or
flee a police officer after receiving a visible or audible signal from a police
officer to bring the person’s motor vehicle to a stop.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to comply
with an order or signal of a police officer.
      (2)   A violation of division (A) above is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (C)(4) and (C)(5) below, a
violation of division (B) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (4)   Except as provided in division (C)(5) below, a violation of
division (B) below is a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state
law if the jury or judge as trier of fact finds by proof beyond a reasonable
doubt that in committing the offense, the offender was fleeing immediately
after the commission of a felony.
      (5)   (a)   A violation of division (B) above is a felony and shall be
prosecuted under appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier of fact
finds any of the following by proof beyond a reasonable doubt:
            1.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender was a
proximate cause of serious physical harm to persons or property; or
            2.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender caused a
substantial risk of serious physical harm to persons or property.
         (b)   If a police officer pursues an offender who is violating
division (B) above and division (C)(5)(a) above applies, the sentencing court,
in determining the seriousness of an offender’s conduct for purposes of
sentencing the offender for a violation of division (B) above, shall consider,
along with the factors set forth in Ohio R.C. 2929.12 and 2929.13 that are
required to be considered, all of the following:
            1.   The duration of the pursuit;
            2.   The distance of the pursuit;
            3.   The rate of speed at which the offender operated the motor
vehicle during the pursuit;
            4.   Whether the offender failed to stop for traffic lights or stop
signs during the pursuit;
            5.   The number of traffic lights or stop signs for which the
offender failed to stop during the pursuit;
            6.   Whether the offender operated the motor vehicle during the
pursuit without lighted lights during a time when lighted lights are required;
            7.   Whether the offender committed a moving violation during the
pursuit;
            8.   The number of moving violations the offender committed during
the pursuit; and
            9.   Any other relevant factors indicating that the offender’s
conduct is more serious than conduct normally constituting the offense.
   (D)   In addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of division
(A) above or a misdemeanor violation of division (B) above, the court shall
impose a class five suspension from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)
(5). If the offender previously has been found guilty of an offense under this
section or under Ohio R.C. 2921.331 or any other substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, in addition to any other sanction imposed for the offense,
the court shall impose a class one suspension as described in Ohio R.C. 4510.02
(A)(1). The court may grant limited driving privileges to the offender on a
suspension imposed for a misdemeanor violation of this section as set forth in
Ohio R.C. 4510.021. No judge shall suspend any portion of the suspension under
a class one suspension of an offender’s license, permit or privilege required
by this division (D).
   (E)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      MOVING VIOLATION. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2743.70.
      POLICE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
(ORC 2921.331(A) - (C), (E), (F))
§ 606.17 HAVING AN UNLAWFUL INTEREST IN A PUBLIC CONTRACT.
   (A)   No public official shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Authorize or employ the authority of the public official’s office
to secure authorization of any public contract in which the public official, a
member of the public official’s family or any of the public official’s business
associates has an interest;
      (2)   Authorize or employ the authority or influence of the public
official’s office to secure the investment of public funds in any share, bond,
mortgage or other security with respect to which the public official, a member
of the public official’s family or any of the public official’s business
associates either has an interest, is an underwriter, or receives any
brokerage, origination or servicing fees;
      (3)   During the public official’s term of office or within one year
thereafter, occupy any position of profit in the prosecution of a public
contract authorized by the public official or by a legislative body, commission
or board of which the public official was a member at the time of
authorization, unless the contract was let by competitive bidding to the lowest
and best bidder;
      (4)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
entered into by or for the use of the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality with which the public official is connected; and/or
      (5)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
that is not let by competitive bidding when required by law, and that involves
more than $150.
   (B)   In the absence of bribery or a purpose to defraud, a public official,
member of a public official’s family or any of a public official’s business
associates shall not be considered as having an interest in a public contract
or the investment of public funds, if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The interest of that person is limited to owning or controlling
shares of the corporation, or being a creditor of the corporation or other
organization, that is the contractor on the public contract involved or that is
the issuer of the security in which public funds are invested;
      (2)   The shares owned or controlled by that person do not exceed 5% of
the outstanding shares of the corporation, and the amount due that person as
creditor does not exceed 5% of the total indebtedness of the corporation or
other organization; and
      (3)   That person, prior to the time the public contract is entered into,
files with the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality
involved, an affidavit giving that person’s exact status in connection with the
corporation or other organization.
   (C)   This section does not apply to a public contract in which a public
official, member of a public official’s family or one of a public official’s
business associates has an interest, when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The subject of the public contract is necessary supplies or
services for the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved;
      (2)   The supplies or services are unobtainable elsewhere for the same or
lower cost, or are being furnished to the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality as part of a continuing course of dealing established
prior to the public official’s becoming associated with the political
subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality involved;
      (3)   The treatment accorded the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality is either preferential to or the same as that
accorded other customers or clients in similar transactions; and
      (4)   The entire transaction is conducted at arm’s length, with full
knowledge by the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved, of the interest of the public official, member of the
public official’s family or business associate, and the public official takes
no part in the deliberations or decision of the political subdivision or
governmental agency or instrumentality with respect to the public contract.
   (D)   Division (A)(4) above does not prohibit participation by a public
employee in any housing program funded by public moneys if the public employee
otherwise qualifies for the program and does not use the authority or influence
of the public official’s office or employment to secure benefits from the
program and if the monies are to be used on the primary residence of the public
employee. Such participation does not constitute an unlawful interest in a
public contract in violation of this section.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of having an unlawful interest
in a public contract. Violation of divisions (A)(1) or (A)(2) above is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Violation of divisions (A)(3),
(A)(4) or (A)(5) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (F)   It is not a violation of this section for a prosecuting attorney to
appoint assistants and employees in accordance with Ohio R.C. 309.06 and
2921.421, or for a chief legal officer of a municipality or an official
designated as prosecutor in a municipality to appoint assistants and employees
in accordance with Ohio R.C. 733.621 and 2921.421, or for a township law
director appointed under Ohio R.C. 504.15 to appoint assistants and employees
in accordance with Ohio R.C. 504.151 and 2921.421.
   (G)   Any public contract in which a public official, a member of the public
official’s family or any of the public official’s business associates has an
interest in violation of this section is void and unenforceable. Any contract
securing the investment of public funds in which a public official, a member of
the public official’s family or any of the public official’s business
associates has an interest, is an underwriter or receives any brokerage,
origination or servicing fees and that was entered into in violation of this
section is void and unenforceable.
   (H)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CHIEF LEGAL OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 733.621.
      PUBLIC CONTRACT. Any of the following:
         (a)   The purchase or acquisition, or a contract for the purchase or
acquisition, of property or services by or for the use of the state or any of
its political subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either,
including the employment of an individual by the state, any of its political
subdivisions or any agency or instrumentality of either; or
         (b)   A contract for the design, construction, alteration, repair or
maintenance of any public property.
(ORC 2921.42)
§ 606.18 SOLICITING OR RECEIVING IMPROPER COMPENSATION.
   (A)   No public servant shall knowingly solicit or accept and no person
shall knowingly promise or give to a public servant either of the following:
      (1)   Any compensation, other than as allowed by Ohio R.C. 102.03(G),
(H), (I), or other provisions of law, to perform the public servant’s official
duties, to perform any other act or service in the public servant’s public
capacity, for the general performance of the duties of the public servant’s
public office or public employment or as a supplement to the public servant’s
public compensation; or
      (2)   Additional or greater fees or costs than are allowed by law to
perform the public servant’s official duties.
   (B)   No public servant for the public servant’s own personal or business
use and no person for the person’s own personal or business use or for the
personal or business use of a public servant or party official, shall solicit
or accept anything of value in consideration of either of the following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining, or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment or agency; or
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion or other
material aspects of employment.
   (C)   No person for the benefit of a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity shall coerce any contribution in consideration of either of the
following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining, or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment or agency; or
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion or other
material aspects of employment.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of soliciting improper
compensation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (E)   A public servant who is convicted of a violation of this section is
disqualified from holding any public office, employment or position of trust in
the state for a period of seven years from the date of conviction.
   (F)   Divisions (A), (B) and (C) above do not prohibit any person from
making voluntary contributions to a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity or prohibit a political party, campaign committee, legislative campaign
fund, political action committee or political contributing entity from
accepting voluntary contributions.
(ORC 2921.43)
§ 606.19 DERELICTION OF DUTY.
   (A)   No law enforcement officer shall negligently do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to serve a lawful warrant without delay; and/or
      (2)   Fail to prevent or halt the commission of an offense or to
apprehend an offender, when it is in the law enforcement officer’s power to do
so alone or with available assistance.
   (B)   No law enforcement, ministerial or judicial officer shall negligently
fail to perform a lawful duty in a criminal case or proceeding.
   (C)   No officer, having charge of a detention facility, shall negligently
do any of the following:
      (1)   Allow the detention facility to become littered or unsanitary;
      (2)   Fail to provide persons confined in the detention facility with
adequate food, clothing, bedding, shelter and medical attention;
      (3)   Fail to control an unruly prisoner, or to prevent intimidation of
or physical harm to a prisoner by another;
      (4)   Allow a prisoner to escape; and/or
      (5)   Fail to observe any lawful and reasonable regulation for the
management of the detention facility.
   (D)   No public official shall recklessly create a deficiency, incur a
liability or expend a greater sum than is appropriated by the Council for the
use in any one year of the department, agency or institution with which the
public official is connected.
   (E)   No public servant shall recklessly fail to perform a duty expressly
imposed by law with respect to the public servant’s office, or recklessly do
any act expressly forbidden by law with respect to the public servant’s office.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of dereliction of duty, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (G)   Except as otherwise provided by law, a public servant who is a county
treasurer; county auditor; township fiscal officer; city auditor; city
treasurer; village fiscal officer; village clerk-treasurer; village clerk; in
the case of a municipal corporation having a charter that designates an officer
who, by virtue of the charter, has duties and functions similar to those of the
city or village officers referred to in this section, the officer so designated
by the charter; school district treasurer; fiscal officer of a community school
established under Ohio R.C. Ch. 3314; treasurer of a science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics school established under Ohio R.C. Ch. 3326; or
fiscal officer of a college-preparatory boarding school established under Ohio
R.C. Ch. 3328 and is convicted of or pleads guilty to dereliction of duty is
disqualified from holding any public office, employment or position of trust in
this state for four years following the date of conviction or of entry of the
plea, and is not entitled to hold any public office until any repayment or
restitution required by the court is satisfied.
   (H)   As used in this section, PUBLIC SERVANT includes the following:
      (1)   An officer or employee of a contractor as defined in Ohio R.C.
9.08; and
      (2)   A fiscal officer employed by the operator of a community school
established under Ohio R.C. Ch. 3314 or by the operator of a college-
preparatory boarding school established under Ohio R.C. Ch. 3328.
(ORC 2921.44)
§ 606.20 INTERFERING WITH CIVIL RIGHTS.
   (A)   No public servant, under color of the public servant’s office,
employment, or authority, shall knowingly deprive, or conspire or attempt to
deprive any person of a constitutional or statutory right.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interfering with civil
rights, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.45)
Statutory reference:
   Restraining or confining pregnant children or pregnant women, see R.C. §
2152.75(B) and R.C. § 2901.10
§ 606.21 ATTEMPTS.
   (A)   No person, purposely or knowingly, and when purpose or knowledge is
sufficient culpability for the commission of an offense, shall engage in
conduct that, if successful, would constitute or result in the offense.
   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that, in retrospect,
commission of the offense that was the object of the attempt was either
factually or legally impossible under the attendant circumstances, if that
offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the
actor believed them to be.
   (C)   No person who is convicted of committing a specific offense, of
complicity in the commission of an offense or of conspiracy to commit an
offense, shall be convicted of an attempt to commit the same offense in
violation of this section.
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
actor abandoned his or her effort to commit the offense or otherwise prevented
its commission, under circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary
renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an attempt to commit
an offense. An attempt to commit aggravated murder, murder or an offense for
which the maximum penalty is imprisonment for life is a felony of the first
degree, to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to commit a
drug abuse offense for which the penalty is determined by the amount or number
of unit doses of the controlled substance involved in the drug abuse offense is
an offense of the same degree as the drug abuse offense attempted would be if
that drug abuse offense had been committed and had involved an amount or number
of unit doses of the controlled substance that is within the next lower range
of controlled substance amounts than was involved in the attempt. An attempt to
commit any other offense is an offense of the next lesser degree than the
offense attempted. In the case of an attempt to commit an offense other than a
violation of Ohio R.C. Ch. 3734 that is not specifically classified, an attempt
is a misdemeanor of the first degree if the offense attempted is a felony and a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the offense attempted is a misdemeanor. In
the case of an attempt to commit a violation of any provision of Ohio R.C. Ch.
3734, other than Ohio R.C. 3734.18, that relates to hazardous wastes, an
attempt is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to
commit a minor misdemeanor, or to engage in conspiracy, is not an offense under
this section.
      (2)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to division (E)
(1) above for an attempt to commit aggravated murder or murder in violation of
division (A) above, if the offender used a motor vehicle as the means to
attempt to commit the offense, the court shall impose upon the offender a class
two suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license or non-resident operating
privilege as specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(2).
      (3)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to attempted rape and
also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a specification of the type described
in Ohio R.C. 2941.1418, 2941.1419 or 2941.1420, the offender shall be sentenced
to a prison term or term of life imprisonment pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2971.03.
   (F)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2925.01.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
(ORC 2923.02)
§ 606.22 COMPLICITY.
   (A)   No person, acting with the kind of culpability required for the
commission of an offense, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Solicit or procure another to commit the offense;
      (2)   Aid or abet another in committing the offense;
      (3)   Conspire with another to commit the offense in violation of Ohio
R.C. 2923.01; and/or
      (4)   Cause an innocent or irresponsible person to commit the offense.
   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that no person with
whom the accused was in complicity has been convicted as a principal offender.
   (C)   No person shall be convicted of complicity under this section unless
an offense is actually committed, but a person may be convicted of complicity
in an attempt to commit an offense in violation of Ohio R.C. 2923.02 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (D)   If an alleged accomplice of the defendant testifies against the
defendant in a case in which the defendant is charged with complicity in the
commission of or an attempt to commit an offense, an attempt to commit an
offense or an offense, the court shall charge the jury in accordance with Ohio
R.C. 2923.03(D).
   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that,
prior to the commission of or attempt to commit the offense, the actor
terminated his or her complicity, under circumstances manifesting a complete
and voluntary renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of complicity in the
commission of an offense, and shall be prosecuted and punished as if he or she
were a principal offender. A charge of complicity may be stated in terms of
this section, or in terms of the principal offense.
(ORC 2923.03)
§ 606.23 DETENTION OF SHOPLIFTERS AND THOSE COMMITTING MOTION PICTURE PIRACY;
PROTECTION OF INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ARCHIVAL INSTITUTION. Any public or private building, structure or
shelter in which are stored historical documents, devices, records, manuscripts
or items of public interest, which historical materials are stored to preserve
the materials or the information in the materials, to disseminate the
information contained in the materials or to make the materials available for
public inspection or for inspection by certain persons who have a particular
interest in, use for or knowledge concerning the materials.
      AUDIOVISUAL RECORDING FUNCTION AND FACILITY. Have the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 2913.07.
      MUSEUM. Any public or private non-profit institution that is permanently
organized for primarily educational or aesthetic purposes, owns or borrows
objects or items of public interest and cares for and exhibits to the public
the objects or items.
      PRETRIAL DIVERSION PROGRAM. A rehabilitative, educational program
designed to reduce recidivism and promote personal responsibility that is at
least four hours in length and that has been approved by any court in the
state.
   (B)   A merchant, or an employee or agent of a merchant, who has probable
cause to believe that things offered for sale by a mercantile establishment
have been unlawfully taken by a person, may, for the purposes set forth in
division (D) below, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable
length of time within the mercantile establishment or its immediate vicinity.
   (C)   Any officer, employee or agent of a library, museum or archival
institution may, for the purposes set forth in division (D) below or for the
purpose of conducting a reasonable investigation of a belief that the person
has acted in a manner described in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) below, detain a
person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time within, or in the
immediate vicinity of, the library, museum or archival institution, if the
officer, employee or agent has probable cause to believe that the person has:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly moved, defaced, damaged,
destroyed or otherwise improperly tampered with property owned by or in the
custody of the library, museum or archival institution; or
      (2)   With purpose to deprive the library, museum or archival institution
of property owned by it or in its custody, knowingly obtained or exerted
control over the property without the consent of the owner or person authorized
to give consent, beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the
owner or person authorized to give consent, by deception or by threat.
   (D)   An officer, agent or employee of a library, museum or archival
institution pursuant to division (C) above or a merchant or an employee or
agent of a merchant pursuant to division (B) above may detain another person
for any of the following purposes:
      (1)   To recover the property that is the subject of the unlawful taking,
criminal mischief or theft;
      (2)   To cause an arrest to be made by a peace officer;
      (3)   To obtain a warrant of arrest; and/or
      (4)   To offer the person, if the person is suspected of the unlawful
taking, criminal mischief or theft and notwithstanding any other provision of
this Code or the Ohio Revised Code, an opportunity to complete a pretrial
diversion program and to inform the person of the other legal remedies
available to the library, museum, archival institution or merchant.
   (E)   The owner or lessee of a facility in which a motion picture is being
shown, or the owner’s or lessee’s employee or agent, who has probable cause to
believe that a person is or has been operating an audiovisual recording
function of a device in violation of Ohio R.C. 2917.07 may, for the purpose of
causing an arrest to be made by a peace officer or of obtaining an arrest
warrant, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of
time within the facility or its immediate vicinity.
   (F)   The officer, agent or employee of the library, museum or archival
institution, the merchant or an employee or agent of a merchant or the owner,
lessee, employee or agent of the facility acting under divisions (B), (C) or
(E) above shall not search the person detained, search or seize any property
belonging to the person detained without the person’s consent, or use undue
restraint upon the person detained.
   (G)   Any peace officer may arrest without a warrant any person that the
officer has probable cause to believe has committed any act described in
divisions (C)(1) or (C)(2) above, that the officer has probable cause to
believe has committed an unlawful taking in a mercantile establishment, or that
the officer has reasonable cause to believe has committed an act prohibited by
Ohio R.C. 2913.07. An arrest under this division (G) shall be made within a
reasonable time after the commission of the act or unlawful taking.
(ORC 2935.041) (Ord. 287-1978, passed 10-16-1978)
§ 606.24 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED OR FORFEITED PROPERTY HELD BY POLICE
DIVISION.
   (A)   Safekeeping of property in custody.
      (1)   (a)   Any property that has been lost, abandoned, stolen, seized
pursuant to a search warrant, or otherwise lawfully seized or forfeited and
that is in the custody of the Police Department shall be kept safely by the
Police Department, pending the time it no longer is needed as evidence or for
another lawful purpose, and shall be disposed of pursuant to this section or
Ohio R.C. 2981.12 and 2981.13.
         (b)   This section does not apply to the custody and disposal of any
of the following:
            1.   Vehicles subject to forfeiture under Ohio R.C. Title 45,
except as provided in division (B)(1)(f) below;
            2.   Abandoned junk motor vehicles or other property of negligible
value;
            3.   Property held by a department of rehabilitation and correction
institution that is unclaimed, that does not have an identified owner, that the
owner agrees to dispose of, or that is identified by the department as having
little value;
            4.   Animals taken, and devices used in unlawfully taking animals,
under Ohio R.C. 1531.20;
            5.   Controlled substances sold by a peace officer in the
performance of the officer’s official duties under Ohio R.C. 3719.141;
            6.   Property recovered by a township law enforcement agency under
Ohio R.C. 505.105 to 505.109;
            7.   Property held and disposed of under an ordinance of the
Municipality or under Ohio R.C. 737.29 to 737.33, except that if the
Municipality has received notice of a citizens’ reward program as provided in
division (B)(5) below and disposes of property under an ordinance shall pay 25%
of any moneys acquired from any sale or auction to the citizens’ reward
program.
      (2)   (a)   The Police Department shall adopt and comply with a written
internal control policy that does all of the following:
            1.   Provides for keeping detailed records as to the amount of
property acquired by the Police Department and the date property was acquired;
            2.   Provides for keeping detailed records of the disposition of
the property, which shall include, but not be limited to, both of the
following:
               a.   The manner in which it was disposed, the date of
disposition, detailed financial records concerning any property sold, and the
name of any person who received the property. The record shall not identify or
enable identification of the individual officer who seized any item of
property; and
               b.   An itemized list of the specific expenditures made with
amounts that are gained from the sale of the property and that are retained by
the agency, including the specific amount expended on each expenditure; except
that, the policy shall not provide for or permit the identification of any
specific expenditure that is made in an ongoing investigation.
            3.   Complies with Ohio R.C. 2981.13 if the Police Department has a
law enforcement trust fund or similar fund created under that section.
         (b)   The records kept under the internal control policy shall be open
to public inspection during the Police Department’s regular business hours. The
policy adopted under this section is a public record open for inspection under
Ohio R.C. 149.43.
      (3)   The Police Department, with custody of property to be disposed of
under this section or Ohio R.C. 2981.12 or 2981.13, shall make a reasonable
effort to locate persons entitled to possession of the property, to notify them
of when and where it may be claimed, and to return the property to them at the
earliest possible time. In the absence of evidence identifying persons entitled
to possession, it is sufficient notice to advertise in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county and to briefly describe the nature of the property in
custody and inviting persons to view and establish their right to it.
      (4)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         CITIZENS’ REWARD PROGRAM. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 9.92.
         LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Includes correctional institutions.
         TOWNSHIP LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. An organized police department of a
township, a township police district, a joint police district or the office of
a township constable.
(ORC 2981.11)
   (B)   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property.
      (1)   Unclaimed or forfeited property in the custody of the Police
Department, other than property described in division (A)(1)(b) above, shall be
disposed of by order of any court of record that has territorial jurisdiction
over the municipality, as follows.
         (a)   Drugs shall be disposed of pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3719.11 or
placed in the custody of the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States for
disposal or use for medical or scientific purposes under applicable federal
law.
         (b)   Firearms and dangerous ordnance suitable for police work may be
given to a law enforcement agency for that purpose. Firearms suitable for
sporting use or as museum pieces or collectors’ items may be sold at public
auction pursuant to division (B)(2) below. The Police Department may sell other
firearms and dangerous ordnance to a federally licensed firearms dealer in a
manner that the court considers proper. The Police Department shall destroy any
firearms or dangerous ordnance not given to a law enforcement agency or sold or
shall send them to the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation for
destruction by the Bureau.
         (c)   Obscene materials shall be destroyed.
         (d)   Beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol seized from a person who
does not hold a permit issued under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4301 and 4303 or otherwise
forfeited to the state for an offense under Ohio R.C. 4301.45 or Ohio R.C.
4301.53 shall be sold by the Division of Liquor Control if the Division
determines that it is fit for sale or shall be placed in the custody of the
Investigations Unit in the Ohio Department of Public Safety and be used for
training relating to law enforcement activities. The Ohio Department of Public
Safety, with the assistance of the Division of Liquor Control, shall adopt
rules in accordance with Ohio R.C. Ch. 119 to provide for the distribution to
state or local law enforcement agencies upon their request. If any tax imposed
under Ohio R.C. Title 43 has not been paid in relation to the beer,
intoxicating liquor or alcohol, any moneys acquired from the sale shall first
be used to pay the tax. All other money collected under this division (B)(1)(d)
shall be paid into the State Treasury. Any beer, intoxicating liquor or alcohol
that the Division determines to be unfit for sale shall be destroyed.
         (e)   Money received by an inmate of a correctional institution from
an unauthorized source or in an unauthorized manner shall be returned to the
sender, if known, or deposited in the inmates’ industrial and entertainment
fund of the institution if the sender is not known.
         (f)   1.   Any mobile instrumentality forfeited under Ohio R.C. Ch.
2981 may be given to the law enforcement agency that initially seized the
mobile instrumentality for use in performing its duties, if the agency wants
the mobile instrumentality. The agency shall take the mobile instrumentality
subject to any security interest or lien on the mobile instrumentality.
            2.   Vehicles and vehicle parts forfeited under Ohio R.C. 4549.61
to 4549.63 may be given to a law enforcement agency for use in performing its
duties. Those parts may be incorporated into any other official vehicle. Parts
that do not bear vehicle identification numbers or derivatives of them may be
sold or disposed of as provided by rules of the Director of Public Safety.
Parts from which a vehicle identification number or derivative of it has been
removed, defaced, covered, altered or destroyed and that are not suitable for
police work or incorporation into an official vehicle shall be destroyed and
sold as junk or scrap.
         (g)   Computers, computer networks, computer systems and computer
software suitable for police work may be given to a law enforcement agency for
that purpose or disposed of under division (B)(2) below.
         (h)   Money seized in connection with a violation of Ohio R.C.
2905.32, 2907.21, or 2907.22 shall be deposited in the Victims of Human
Trafficking Fund created by Ohio R.C. 5101.87.
      (2)   (a)   Unclaimed or forfeited property that is not described in
division (B)(1) above or division (A)(1)(b) above, with court approval, may be
used by the law enforcement agency in possession of it.
         (b)   If it is not used by the agency, it may be sold without
appraisal at a public auction to the highest bidder for cash or disposed of in
another manner that the court considers proper.
      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (B)(1) above and (B)(5) below and
after compliance with division (B)(4) below when applicable, any moneys
acquired from the sale of property disposed of pursuant to this section shall
be placed in the General Revenue Fund of the state or the General Fund of the
municipality.
      (4)   (a)   If the property was in the possession of the Police
Department in relation to a delinquent child proceeding in a juvenile court,
10% of any moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of under this
section shall be applied to one or more community addiction services providers,
as defined in Ohio R.C. 5119.01.
         (b)   A juvenile court shall not specify a services provider, except
as provided in this division (B), unless the services provider is in the same
county as the court or in a contiguous county.
         (c)   If no services provider is located in any of those counties, the
juvenile court may specify a services provider anywhere in Ohio.
         (d)   The remaining 90% of the proceeds or cash shall be applied as
provided in division (B)(3) above.
      (5)   (a)   If the Board of County Commissioners recognizes a citizens’
reward program under Ohio R.C. 9.92, the Board shall notify the Police
Department of the recognition by filing a copy of its resolution conferring
that recognition with the Police Department. When the Board recognizes a
citizens’ reward program and the county includes a part, but not all, of the
territory of the municipality, the Board shall so notify the Police Department
of the recognition of the citizens’ reward program only if the county contains
the highest percentage of the municipality’s population.
         (b)   Upon being so notified, the Police Department shall pay 25% of
any forfeited proceeds or cash derived from each sale of property disposed of
pursuant to this section to the citizens’ reward program for use exclusively to
pay rewards. No part of the funds may be used to pay expenses associated with
the program. If a citizens’ reward program that operates in more than one
county or in another state, in addition to the state receives funds under this
section, the funds shall be used to pay rewards only for tips and information
to law enforcement agencies concerning offenses committed in the county from
which the funds were received.
      (6)   Any property forfeited under Ohio R.C. Ch. 2981 not be used to pay
any fine imposed upon a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to an
underlying criminal offense or a different offense arising out of the same
facts and circumstances.
      (7)   Any moneys acquired from the sale of personal effects, tools or
other property seized because the personal effects, tools or other property
were used in the commission of a violation of Ohio R.C. 2905.32, 2907.21 or
2907.22 or derived from the proceeds of the commission of a violation of Ohio
R.C. 2905.32, 2907.21 or 2907.22 and disposed of pursuant to this division (B)
shall be placed in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund created by Ohio R.C.
5101.87.
(ORC 2981.12)
   (C)   Disposition of contraband, proceeds or instrumentalities.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. 2981.13, property ordered
forfeited as contraband, proceeds or an instrumentality pursuant to Ohio R.C.
Ch. 2981 shall be disposed of, used, or sold pursuant to division (B) above or
Ohio R.C. 2981.12.
      (2)   If the property is to be sold under division (B) above or Ohio R.C.
2981.12, the prosecutor shall cause notice of the proposed sale to be given in
accordance with law.
(ORC 2981.13(A))
Statutory reference:
   Forfeiture of property generally, see R.C. Ch. 2981
§ 606.25 BURDEN AND DEGREE OF PROOF.
   (A)   Every person accused of an offense is presumed innocent until proven
guilty beyond a reasonable doubt, and the burden of proof for all elements of
the offense is upon the prosecution. The burden of going forward with the
evidence of an affirmative defense, and the burden of proof by a preponderance
of the evidence, for an affirmative defense other than self-defense, defense of
another, or defense of the accused’s residence presented as described in
division (B)(1) of this section, is upon the accused.
   (B)   (1)   A person is allowed to act in self-defense, defense of another,
or defense of that person’s residence. If, at the trial of a person who is
accused of an offense that involved the person’s use of force against another,
there is evidence presented that tends to support that the accused person used
the force in self-defense, defense of another, or defense of that person’s
residence, the prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the
accused person did not use the force in self-defense, defense of another, or
defense of that person’s residence, as the case may be.
      (2)   Subject to division (B)(3) of this section, a person is presumed to
have acted in self-defense or defense of another when using defensive force
that is intended or likely to cause death or great bodily harm to another if
the person against whom the defensive force is used is in the process of
unlawfully and without privilege to do so entering, or has unlawfully and
without privilege to do so entered, the residence or vehicle occupied by the
person using the defensive force.
      (3)   The presumption set forth in division (B)(2) of this section does
not apply if either of the following is true:
         (a)   The person against whom the defensive force is used has a right
to be in, or is a lawful resident of, the residence or vehicle.
         (b)   The person who uses the defensive force uses it while in a
residence or vehicle and the person is unlawfully, and without privilege to be,
in that residence or vehicle.
      (4)   The presumption set forth in division (B)(2) of this section is a
rebuttable presumption and may be rebutted by a preponderance of the evidence,
provided that the prosecution’s burden of proof remains proof beyond a
reasonable doubt as described in divisions (A) and (B)(1) of this section.
   (C)   As part of its charge to the jury in a criminal case, the court shall
read the definitions of “reasonable doubt” and “proof beyond a reasonable
doubt”, contained in division (E) of this section.
   (D)   As used in this section:
      AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE. An affirmative defense is either of the following:
         (a)   A defense expressly designated as affirmative;
         (b)   A defense involving an excuse or justification peculiarly within
the knowledge of the accused, on which the accused can fairly be required to
adduce supporting evidence.
      DWELLING. Means a building or conveyance of any kind that has a roof over
it and that is designed to be occupied by people lodging in the building or
conveyance at night, regardless of whether the building or conveyance is
temporary or permanent or is mobile or immobile. As used in this division, a
building or conveyance includes but is not limited to an attached porch, and a
building or conveyance with a roof over it includes but is not limited to a
tent.
      RESIDENCE. Means a dwelling in which a person resides either temporarily
or permanently or is visiting as a guest.
      VEHICLE. Means a conveyance of any kind, whether or not motorized, that
is designed to transport people or property.
   (E)   “Reasonable doubt” is present when the jurors, after they have
carefully considered and compared all the evidence, cannot say they are firmly
convinced of the truth of the charge. It is a doubt based on reasonable and
common sense. Reasonable doubt is not mere possible doubt, because everything
relating to human affairs or depending on moral evidence is open to some
possible or imaginary doubt. “Proof beyond a reasonable doubt” is proof of such
character that an ordinary person would be willing to rely and act upon it in
the most important of the person's own affairs.
(R.C. § 2901.05)
§ 606.26 IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. An employee of the United States who
serves in a position the duties of which are primarily the investigation,
apprehension, or detention of individuals suspected or convicted of offenses
under the criminal laws of the United States.
      IMPERSONATE. To act the part of, assume the identity of, wear the uniform
or any part of the uniform of, or display the identification of a particular
person or of a member of a class of persons with purpose to make another person
believe that the actor is that particular person or is a member of that class
of persons.
      INVESTIGATOR OF THE BUREAU OF CRIMINAL IDENTIFICATION AND INVESTIGATION.
Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2903.11.
      PEACE OFFICER. A Sheriff, Deputy Sheriff, Marshal, Deputy Marshal, member
of the organized police department of a municipal corporation or township
constable, who is employed by a political subdivision of this state; a member
of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under R.C. §
3735.31(D); a member of a police force employed by a regional transit authority
under R.C. § 306.35(Y); a state university law enforcement officer appointed
under R.C. § 3345.04; a veterans’ home police officer appointed under R.C. §
5907.02; a special police officer employed by a port authority under R.C. §
4582.04 or § 4582.28; an officer, agent or employee of the state or any of its
agencies, instrumentalities or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute, a
duty to conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and the
authority to arrest violators is conferred, within limits of that statutory
duty and authority; or a State Highway Patrol trooper whose primary duties are
to preserve the peace, to protect life and property and to enforce the laws,
ordinances or rules of the state or any of its political subdivisions.
      PRIVATE POLICE OFFICER. Any security guard, special police officer,
private detective, or other person who is privately employed in a police
capacity.
   (B)   No person shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation or
federal law enforcement officer.
   (C)   No person, by impersonating a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation or
federal law enforcement officer, shall arrest or detain any person, search any
person, or search the property of any person.
   (D)   No person, with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of an
offense, shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer, federal law
enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the municipality or the
state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation.
   (E)   No person shall commit a felony while impersonating a peace officer,
private police officer, federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or
employee of the municipality or of the state, or investigator of the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation.
   (F)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B) above that
the impersonation of the peace officer, private police officer, federal law
enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the municipality or of
the state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation was for a lawful purpose.
   (G)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. Whoever violates divisions (C) or (D) above is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the purpose of a violation of division (D)
above is to commit or facilitate the commission of a felony, a violation of
division (D) above is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
Whoever violates division (E) above is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2921.51)
§ 606.27 DISPLAY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY EMBLEM.
   (A)   No person who is not entitled to do so shall knowingly display on a
motor vehicle the emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law
enforcement officers.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of the unlawful display of the
emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law enforcement
officers, a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 2913.441)
§ 606.28 MISREPRESENTATION OF IDENTITY.
   (A)   No person, with the purpose to avoid arrest, citation or prosecution,
shall misrepresent his or her identity to a law enforcement officer by
presenting, displaying or orally communicating false information concerning his
or her name, address, date of birth or Social Security number to the officer.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misrepresentation of
identity, a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be subject to the penalty
provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 108-1991, passed 6-24-1991)
§ 606.29 USING SHAM LEGAL PROCESS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LAWFULLY ISSUED. Adopted, issued or rendered in accordance with the
United States Constitution, the constitution of a state, and the applicable
statutes, rules, regulations and ordinances of the United States, a state and
the political subdivisions of a state.
      POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS. Municipal corporations, townships, counties,
school districts and all other bodies corporate and politic that are organized
under state law and are responsible for governmental activities only in
geographical areas smaller than that of a state.
      SHAM LEGAL PROCESS. An instrument that meets all of the following
conditions:
         (a)   It is not lawfully issued;
         (b)   It purports to do any of the following:
            1.   To be a summons, subpoena, judgment or order of a court, a law
enforcement officer, or a legislative, executive or administrative body;
            2.   To assert jurisdiction over or determine the legal or
equitable status, rights, duties, powers or privileges of any person or
property; or
            3.   To require or authorize the search, seizure, indictment,
arrest, trial or sentencing of any person or property.
         (c)   It is designed to make another person believe that it is
lawfully issued.
      STATE. A state of the United States, including without limitation the
state legislature, the highest court of the state that has statewide
jurisdiction, the offices of all elected state officers, and all departments,
boards, offices, commissions, agencies, institutions and other
instrumentalities of the state. STATE does not include the political
subdivisions of the state.
   (B)   No person shall, knowing the sham legal process to be a sham legal
process, do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly issue, display, deliver, distribute or otherwise use sham
legal process;
      (2)   Knowingly use sham legal process to arrest, detain, search or seize
any person or the property of another person;
      (3)   Knowingly commit or facilitate the commission of an offense using
sham legal process; and
      (4)   Knowingly commit a felony by using sham legal process.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under divisions (B)(1) or (B)
(2) above that the use of sham legal process was for a lawful purpose.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using sham legal process. A
violation of division (B)(1) above is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A
violation of divisions (B)(2) or (B)(3) above is a misdemeanor of the first
degree, except that if the purpose of a violation of division (B)(3) above is
to commit or facilitate the commission of a felony, a violation of division (B)
(3) above is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation
of division (B)(4) above is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
(ORC 2921.52(A) - (D))
§ 606.30 FAILURE TO DISCLOSE PERSONAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   No person who is in a public place shall refuse to disclose the
person’s name, address or date of birth, when requested by a law enforcement
officer who reasonably suspects either of the following:
      (1)   The person is committing, has committed or is about to commit a
criminal offense; and/or
      (2)   The person witnessed any of the following:
         (a)   An offense of violence that would constitute a felony under the
laws of the state;
         (b)   A felony offense that causes or results in, or creates a
substantial risk of, serious physical harm to another person or property;
         (c)   Any attempt or conspiracy to commit, or complicity in
committing, any offenses identified in divisions (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) above;
or
         (d)   Any conduct reasonably indicating that any offense identified in
divisions (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) above or any attempt, conspiracy or complicity
described in division (A)(2)(c) above has been, is being or is about to be
committed.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of failure to disclose
one’s personal information, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (C)   Nothing in division (A) above requires a person to answer any
questions beyond that person’s name, address or date of birth. Nothing in
division (A) above authorizes a law enforcement officer to arrest a person for
not providing any information beyond the person’s name, address or date of
birth or for refusing to describe the offense observed.
   (D)   It is not a violation of division (A) above to refuse to answer a
question that would reveal a person’s age or date of birth if age is an element
of the crime that the person is suspected of committing.
(ORC 2921.29)
   (E)   No person entering an airport, train station, port or other similar
critical transportation infrastructure site shall refuse to show identification
when requested by a law enforcement officer when there is a threat to security
and the law enforcement officer is requiring identification of all persons
entering the site.
   (F)   A law enforcement officer may prevent any person who refuses to show
identification when asked under the circumstances described in division (E)
above from entering the critical transportation infrastructure site.
(ORC 2909.31)
§ 606.31 MISUSE OF 9-1-1 SYSTEM.
   (A)   As used in this section, 9-1-1 SYSTEM means a system through which
individuals can request emergency service using the access number 9-1-1.
(ORC 128.01(A))
   (B)   No person shall knowingly use the telephone number of a 9-1-1 system
established under Ohio R.C. Ch. 128 to report an emergency if the person knows
that no emergency exists.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly use a 9-1-1 system for a purpose other than
obtaining emergency service.
   (D)   No person shall disclose or use any information concerning telephone
numbers, addresses or names obtained from the database that serves the public
safety answering point of a 9-1-1 system established under Ohio R.C. Ch. 128,
except for any of the following purposes or under any of the following
circumstances:
      (1)   For the purpose of the 9-1-1 system;
      (2)   For the purpose of responding to an emergency call to an emergency
service provider;
      (3)   In the circumstance of the inadvertent disclosure of such
information due solely to technology of the wireless telephone network portion
of the 9-1-1 system not allowing access to the database to be restricted to 9-
1-1 specific answering lines at a public safety answering point;
      (4)   In the circumstance of access to a database being given by a
telephone company that is a wireless service provider to a public utility or
municipal utility in handling customer calls in times of public emergency or
service outages. The charge, terms and conditions for the disclosure or use of
such information for the purpose of such access to a database shall be subject
to the jurisdiction of the Steering Committee; and
      (5)   In the circumstance of access to a database given by a telephone
company that is a wireline service provider to a state and local government in
warning of a public emergency, as determined by the Steering Committee. The
charge, terms and conditions for the disclosure or use of that information for
the purpose of access to a database is subject to the jurisdiction of the
Steering Committee.
(ORC 128.96(F) - (H))
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates divisions (C) or (D) above is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
(ORC 128.99(A), (B))
§ 606.32 SELF DEFENSE: LIMITATIONS ON DUTY TO RETREAT PRIOR TO USING FORCE.
   (A)   As used in this section, "residence" has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2901.05.
   (B)   For purposes of any section of this code that sets forth a criminal
offense, a person has no duty to retreat before using force in self-defense,
defense of another, or defense of that person's residence if that person is in
a place in which the person lawfully has a right to be.
   (C)   A trier of fact shall not consider the possibility of retreat as a
factor in determining whether or not a person who used force in self-defense,
defense of another, or defense of that person's residence reasonably believed
that the force was necessary to prevent injury, loss, or risk to life or
safety.
(R.C. § 2901.09)
CHAPTER 610: AIR POLLUTION
Section
610.01   Adoption of Ohio Administrative Code chapters and sections; file and
distribution copies.
610.02   Permits.
610.03   Amendments.
610.04   Definitions.
610.05   Division of Air Quality Management.
610.06   Inspections.
610.07   Abatement of pollution.
610.08   Confidentiality of records.
610.09   Conflict of interest.
610.10   Service of notices.
610.11   False statements or advertisements.
610.12   Air Quality Management Advisory Board.
610.13   Certificates of operation and fees.
610.99   Penalty; other remedies.
Editor’s note:
   This chapter was re-enacted in its entirety by Ord. 103-1993, passed 12-20-
1993.
Cross-reference:
   Burning rubber, see GEN. OFF.
660.13
   Motor vehicle exhaust smoke and gas, see TRAF.
337.20
   Municipal smoke abatement, see Ohio R.C. 715.44
   Open burning, see GEN. OFF.
660.20
§ 610.01 ADOPTION OF OHIO ADMINISTRATIVE CODE CHAPTERS AND SECTIONS; FILE AND
DISTRIBUTION COPIES.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted, as if fully set out at length herein, the
following specific chapters and sections of the Ohio Administrative Code, as
amended from time to time, save and except such portions as are hereinafter
deleted, modified or amended:
3745-15    Air pollution control
3745-16    Stack height requirements
3745-17    Emissions of particulate matter
3745-18-01 Sulfur dioxide emission limits, definitions
3745-18-02 Sulfur dioxide emission limits, ambient air quality standards-sulfur
           dioxide
3745-18-03 Sulfur dioxide emission limits, attainment dates and compliance time
           schedules
3745-18-04 Sulfur dioxide emission limits, measurement methods and procedures
3745-18-05 Sulfur dioxide emission limits, ambient and meteorological
           monitoring requirements
3745-18-06 Sulfur dioxide emission limits, general emission limit provisions
3745-18-83 Sulfur dioxide emission limits, Summit County emission limits
3745-19    Open burning standards
3745-20    Asbestos emission
3745-21    Emission or organic compounds and carbon monoxide
3745-23    Nitrogen oxide standards
3745-25    Emergency episode standards
3745-71    Lead emission limits
3745-74    Acrylonitrile
3745-75    Infectious waste; incinerator limitations
 
   (B)   A complete copy of the Ohio Administrative Code is on file with the
Clerk of Council for inspection by the public. Complete copies of the chapters
and sections herein adopted are on file with the Clerk of Council for
distribution to the public at cost. A complete copy of the Ohio Administrative
Code is also on file in the Summit County Law Library in Akron, Ohio.
(Ord. 103-1993, passed 12-20-1993)
§ 610.02 PERMITS.
   Applications for Ohio Environmental Protection Agency permits shall be made
to the Administrator of the Akron Regional Air Quality Management District and
in compliance with O.A.C. 3745-31 and 3745-35.
(Ord. 103-1993, passed 12-20-1993)
§ 610.03 AMENDMENTS.
   Adopted chapters and sections of the Ohio Administrative Code are hereby
amended in the following respects:
   (A)   “Agency”, “Ohio EPA”, “OEPA” and Board are hereby amended to include
the Barberton Board of Health, the Director of the Health Board or the
Administrator of the Division of Akron Regional Quality Management, as the
context of other law may require.
   (B)   Except for the following chapters and subsections, which shall remain
unchanged, all references to the Director of the Ohio Environmental Protection
Agency are hereby amended to refer, in addition to the Director of the Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency, to the Director of the Health Board or to his
or her delegee, or to the Administrator of the Air Quality Management District,
as the context of other rules or law may require:
      (1)   3745-16-02(C), (D);
      (2)   3745-17-04(A)(3);
      (3)   3745-17-07(A)(3)(a)(i), (ii), (A)(3)(b)(1)(ii), (C)(3)(b);
      (4)   3745-17-10(B)(3)(c), (C)(5);
      (5)   3745-17-14(C), (D);
      (6)   3745-18-04(D)(3)(a), (D)(5)(c)(i);
      (7)   3745-18-05(A), (E);
      (8)   3745-21-09(B)(2), (I)(2), (K)(3), (DD)(16)(a), (MM)(4)(b)(ii); and
      (9)   3745-71-05.
(Ord. 103-1993, passed 12-20-1993)
§ 610.04 DEFINITIONS.
   In addition to those definitions set forth in O.A.C. 3745, as adopted herein
and as amended, the following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall
have the following meanings.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The Akron Regional Air Quality Management Administrator, as
prescribed and defined by the Akron Civil Service Commission, or his or her
designee.
   AGENCY. A multi-county entity, that being the Akron Regional Air Quality
Management District (ARAQMD), created by delegation from the state of Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency.
   APPLICABLE LAW. Unless otherwise expressly specified, include any applicable
provisions of this chapter; Ohio R.C. Ch. 3704, as amended; rules, regulations
and orders of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; the Clean Air Act, as
amended; and rules and regulations of the Administrator of the Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency.
(Ord. 103-1993, passed 12-20-1993)
§ 610.05 DIVISION OF AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   Establishment. For the purpose of protecting the health, welfare and
property of the citizens of the City of Barberton, there is hereby established
a Division of Air Quality Management in the Board of Health and under the
supervision and administration of the Health Commissioner. The Division of Air
Quality Management shall adopt a comprehensive and integrated plan to control
excessive emission of air pollutants within the corporate limits so that the
resultant adverse effect upon the public health, welfare and property may be
abated. It is desirable to adopt appropriate regulations to reduce air
pollution caused by excessive smoke, soot, cinders, fly ash, dust, noxious
gases, fumes and vapors, the emission of which is detrimental to the health,
welfare and property of the residents of the city.
   (B)   Composition; appointments. The Division of Air Quality Management
shall include one Administrator and such deputies and employees as may be
provided for by the City Council, all of whom shall be appointed in accordance
with the Charter of the City of Barberton.
   (C)   Authority of Health Commissioner. The Health Commissioner is
authorized to enter into contracts with other political subdivisions of the
State of Ohio and the United States Environmental Protection Agency and the
Ohio Environmental Protection Agency to reconfirm the role of the Akron
Regional Air Quality Management District in the enforcement of the State of
Ohio air pollution control law and regulations and local air pollution control
ordinances.
(Ord. 103-1993, passed 12-20-1993)
§ 610.06 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Administrator or other member of the Agency may enter, at any
reasonable time, with reasonable notice, into or upon any private or public
property, for the purpose of inspection and investigation of any condition or
equipment which the Administrator has reasonable cause to believe is causing
pollution in violation of this chapter.
   (B)   The Administrator or other member of the Agency may inspect, at any
reasonable time and in a reasonable manner, with reasonable notice, any record
relating to the use of equipment or control apparatus which may affect the
emission of air contaminants or any record relating to the use of fuel or the
distribution, storage or transportation of fuel.
   (C)   During the course of any inspection, if the Administrator or other
member of the Agency obtains a sample of contaminant, fuel, process material or
other material which may affect the emission of contaminants, he or she shall
give the person in charge a receipt for the sample obtained, if requested to do
so prior to leaving the premises.
   (D)   If samples of air contaminants are taken for analysis, a duplicate of
the analytical report shall be furnished, upon request, to the person in
charge.
   (E)   If photographs are taken on private property, such photographs must be
offered for inspection to the person in charge, and the Administrator shall
cooperate in providing copies of the photographs at the expense of the person
requesting them.
   (F)   If the Administrator believes that a consultant is needed to accompany
him or her or another member of the Agency in making an inspection or assisting
in conducting tests, the person in charge is to be given advance notice
thereof.
   (G)   No person shall refuse entry to, or obstruct, delay, prevent or in any
way interfere with, the Administrator or other member of the Agency while the
Administrator or such other member is carrying out an inspection or in the
performance of his or her duties. Should such right of entry be unreasonably
denied, then the Administrator is authorized to obtain a search warrant.
(Ord. 103-1993, passed 12-20-1993)
§ 610.07 ABATEMENT OF POLLUTION.
   (A)   Upon discovery of a violation of any city, state or federal
environmental law, standard, order, rule or regulation, the Administrator or
ARAQMD or his or her designee shall serve a notice of violation upon the
violator. The notice of violation shall identify the specific violation, the
applicable law, standard, order, rule or regulation, the possible penalties for
noncompliance and a recommendation for remedial action.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the notice of violation, the violator shall have 14
calendar days to abate the violation or provide for a remedy acceptable to the
Administrator.
   (C)   When the time period for response and remedy has elapsed, the
Administrator, when local regulations are violated, may issue findings and
orders to the violator. Such findings and orders shall include the factual and
legal basis for the Administrator’s action, a mandatory program for remedial
action and the penalties that will be assessed for past and future non-
compliance.
   (D)   In the event that the Administrator has reasonable cause to determine
that any person is causing air pollution which would constitute an emergency
requiring immediate action to protect the public health, welfare, safety or
property of the people of the city, the Administrator shall take the immediate
and necessary action to abate and eliminate the pollution.
(Ord. 103-1993, passed 12-20-1993)
§ 610.08 CONFIDENTIALITY OF RECORDS.
   Any records, books, files, reports or other data furnished to or obtained by
the Administrator or his or her employees and/or agents, for which the owner
has required confidential treatment, shall not be published or made available
to the public by the Agency or the Appeals Board, unless it has been determined
by the Administrator that such records, books, files, reports or other data are
not entitled to such confidential treatment. The Administrator shall use, as
the basis for this decision, Ohio R.C. 3704.08, which addresses the subject of
trade secrets. Emissions information shall not be considered confidential.
(Ord. 103-1993, passed 12-20-1993)
§ 610.09 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   (A)   The Administrator, or his or her employees or agents, shall not be
directly or indirectly interested in the manufacture, ownership, agency or sale
of fuel, steam or hot water boilers, fuel-burning combustion process equipment
or devices for air pollution control, or any apparatus or device connected
therewith.
   (B)   Neither the Administrator, nor any of his or her employees or agents,
shall act as a consultant for any person within the jurisdiction of this
chapter, nor shall they recommend the employment of a particular consultant to
anyone affected by this chapter.
   (C)   Neither the Administrator, nor any of his or her employees or agents
shall perform or assist in any test or other service in connection with
equipment, which might cause pollution for any person within the jurisdiction
of this chapter which test or service is not otherwise required in the
performance of their duties.
(Ord. 103-1993, passed 12-20-1993)
§ 610.10 SERVICE OF NOTICES.
   (A)   Service of any written notice required by this chapter may be given by
certified mail directly to the last known address of the person to be notified
or delivered personally in the same manner as a summons in a civil action by
the Agency or, if the whereabouts of such person are unknown, by posting such
notice on or near the entrance to the premises source or equipment wherein the
violations have occurred.
   (B)   Service of any written notice required by this chapter shall be made
on the Administrator personally or by certified mail directed to:
Administrator
Akron Regional Air Quality Management Administration
177 S. Broadway
Akron, Ohio 44308
(Ord. 103-1993, passed 12-20-1993)
§ 610.11 FALSE STATEMENTS OR ADVERTISEMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall willfully make a false or misleading statement to the
Advisory Board or to any employee of the city relative to any matter regulated
by this chapter.
   (B)   No person shall falsely advertise or make a statement that any
pollution control device has been approved by the Administrator.
(Ord. 103-1993, passed 12-20-1993)
§ 610.12 AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENT ADVISORY BOARD.
   (A)   There is hereby established the Air Quality Management Advisory Board,
hereinafter referred to as the Advisory Board. The appointees shall consist of
electors, from within the territorial limits of each adjoining contracting
political subdivision who are knowledgeable and interested in the field of air
pollution control.
   (B)   Each contracting agency shall have and be entitled to one
representative for the first 50,000 inhabitants, or fraction thereof, and an
additional representative for each 100,000 inhabitants thereafter.
   (C)   Delegates representing the City of Barberton shall be appointed by the
Mayor of Barberton in accordance with the Charter of the City of Barberton, and
all other appointments to the Board from the contracting political subdivisions
shall be made in accordance with their prescribed appointment procedures, by
the appropriate governmental official or body, used for original appointments
to any and all local boards.
   (D)   Original appointments shall be made for a term of four years.
   (E)   The Air Quality Administrator or his or her representative shall serve
as Chairperson of the Advisory Board.
   (F)   The Advisory Board may consider and make recommendations concerning
rules and regulations, as provided in this chapter, and on other matters
relating to the purposes of this chapter which may be submitted to it by the
Agency, and make recommendations to the Agency on its own initiative concerning
the administration of this chapter. The Advisory Board shall meet at the call
of its Chairperson or the Air Quality Administrator, or at the written request
of three members.
   (G)   All meetings of the Advisory Board shall be public and shall be held
at such public places as the Board shall select. Regular meetings of the Board
shall be at least three times a year.
   (H)   The Advisory Board shall, in matters relating to air pollution and air
pollution control:
      (1)   Advise and counsel the Administrator of the Division of Air Quality
Management and any deputy or employee thereof;
      (2)   Draft and recommend changes or amendments to the provisions of this
chapter so that the city’s standards are consistent with state and federal
standards;
      (3)   Recommend and assist the Agency in making known rules and
regulations and ambient air emissions standards consistent with the emission
standards contained in this chapter.
      (4)   Bring to the attention of the Mayor and City Council such matters
as it deems relevant; and
      (5)   Perform such other duties and advisory functions, not inconsistent
with the provisions of this chapter, as might be prescribed by the Mayor, City
Council or the Director of Health.
(Ord. 103-1993, passed 12-20-1993)
§ 610.13 CERTIFICATES OF OPERATION AND FEES.
   Certificate of operation requirements and fees shall be established by the
Barberton Health Board.
(Ord. 103-1993, passed 12-20-1993)
§ 610.99 PENALTY; OTHER REMEDIES.
   (A)   Criminal.
      (1)   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this
chapter or any rule or regulation of the Administrator is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be subject to the penalty provided in
§
698.02 of this code of ordinances.
      (2)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
      (3)   All persons owning, operating or in charge or control of any
equipment which shall permit any violation of this chapter shall be
individually and collectively liable for any penalties imposed by this chapter.
      (4)   Prosecutions shall be instituted by the Administrator in the name
of the city. The city may, in addition to the prosecutions hereinabove
authorized, maintain any other legal or equitable action for the abatement of
pollution.
   (B)   Civil.
      (1)   The Administrator shall have the right to assess appropriate civil
penalties for non-compliance.
      (2)   The Administrator shall consider the following criteria in
assessing civil penalties:
         (a)   The economic benefit to the violator of the deferral of a
remedial action;
         (b)   The degree of environmental harm from the violation;
         (c)   The recalcitrance of the violator;
         (d)   Good faith efforts on behalf of the violator to take appropriate
remedial action; and
         (e)   The duration of the violation.
   (C)   Other remedies. The imposition of a penalty or any restriction in this
chapter shall not be construed to abridge or otherwise impair the right of any
person to maintain any action or take other appropriate measures to obtain
damages or other relief on account of injuries to persons or property.
(Ord. 103-1993, passed 12-20-1993)
CHAPTER 612: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
612.01   Definitions.
612.02   Sales to underage persons; prohibitions and misrepresentations.
612.03   Sales to intoxicated persons.
612.04   Liquor consumption in motor vehicle.
612.05   Permit required.
612.06   Posting liquor age and firearm warning signs.
612.07   Open container prohibited.
612.08   Hours of sale or consumption.
612.09   Conveying intoxicating liquor or cash onto grounds of detention
facilities or other specified governmental facilities.
612.10   Sales of low-alcohol beverages to underage persons; prohibitions and
misrepresentations.
612.11   Alcohol vaporizing devices prohibited.
Cross-reference:
   Definitions generally, see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Disorderly conduct while voluntarily intoxicated, see GEN. OFF.
648.04
   Driving or physical control while intoxicated, see TRAF.
333.01
   Effect of voluntary intoxication on criminal liability, see GEN. OFF.
606.07
   Liquor Control Law, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4301
   Liquor permits, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4303
   Local option, see Ohio R.C. 4303.29
   See section histories for similar state law
   Suspension of alcohol sales during emergency, see Ohio R.C. 4301.251
   Using weapons while intoxicated, see GEN. OFF.
672.03
§ 612.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, whether rectified or diluted with water or not,
whatever its origin may be, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol. The term does
not include denatured alcohol and wood alcohol.
   AT RETAIL. For use or consumption by the purchaser and not for resale.
   BEER.
      (1)   Includes all beverages brewed or fermented wholly or in part from
malt products and containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.
      (2)   Beer, regardless of the percent of alcohol by volume, is not
intoxicating liquor for purposes of this code, the Ohio Revised Code or any
rules adopted under it.
   CIDER. All liquids that are fit to use for beverage purposes that contain
0.5% of alcohol by volume, but not more than 6% of alcohol by weight that are
made through the normal alcoholic fermentation of the juice of sound, ripe
apples, including, without limitation, flavored, sparkling or carbonated cider
and cider made from pure condensed apple must.
   CLUB. A corporation or association of individuals organized in good faith
for social, recreational, benevolent, charitable, fraternal, political,
patriotic or athletic purposes, which is the owner, lessor or occupant of a
permanent building or part of a permanent building operated solely for such
purposes, membership in which entails the prepayment of regular dues, and
includes the place so operated.
   COMMUNITY FACILITY. Either of the following:
      (1)   Any convention, sports or entertainment facility or complex, or any
combination of these, that is used by or accessible to the general public and
that is owned or operated in whole or in part by the state, a state agency or a
political subdivision of the state or that is leased from, or located on
property owned by or leased from, the state, a state agency, a political
subdivision of the state or a convention facilities authority created pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 351.02; and
      (2)   An area designated as a community entertainment district pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 4301.80.
   CONTROLLED ACCESS ALCOHOL AND BEVERAGE CABINET. A closed container, either
refrigerated, in whole or in part, or non-refrigerated, access to the interior
of which is restricted by means of a device that requires the use of a key,
magnetic card or similar device and from which beer, intoxicating liquor, other
beverages or food may be sold.
   HOTEL. The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3731.01, subject to the exceptions
mentioned in Ohio R.C. 3731.03.
   INTOXICATING LIQUOR and LIQUOR. All liquids and compounds, other than beer,
containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume which are fit to use for beverage
purposes, from whatever source and by whatever process produced, by whatever
name called, and whether they are medicated, proprietary or patented.
INTOXICATING LIQUOR and LIQUOR include cider and alcohol, and all solids and
confections which contain 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.
   LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGE. Any brewed or fermented malt product or any product
made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits or other agricultural products
that contains either no alcohol or less than 0.5% of alcohol by volume. The
beverages described in this definition do not include a soft drink such as root
beer, birch beer or ginger beer.
   MANUFACTURE. All processes by which beer or intoxicating liquor is produced,
whether by distillation, rectifying, fortifying, blending, fermentation,
brewing or in any other manner.
   MANUFACTURER. Any person engaged in the business of manufacturing beer or
intoxicating liquor.
   MIXED BEVERAGES. Includes bottled and prepared cordials, cocktails,
highballs and solids and confections that are obtained by mixing any type of
whiskey, neutral spirits, brandy, gin or other distilled spirits with, or over,
carbonated or plain water, pure juices from flowers and plants and other
flavoring materials. The completed product shall contain not less than 0.5% of
alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume. The phrase
includes the contents of a pod.
   NIGHTCLUB. A place habitually operated for profit, where food is served for
consumption on the premises, and one or more forms of amusement are provided or
permitted for a consideration that may be in the form of a cover charge or may
be included in the price of the food and beverages, or both, purchased by
patrons.
   PERSON. Includes firms and corporations.
   PHARMACY. An establishment, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4729.01, that is under
the management or control of a licensed pharmacist in accordance with Ohio R.C.
4729.27.
   POD. A sealed capsule made from plastic, glass, aluminum, or a combination
thereof to which all of the following apply:
      (1)   The capsule contains intoxicating liquor of more than 21% of
alcohol by volume.
      (2)   The capsule also contains a concentrated flavoring mixture.
      (3)   The contents of the capsule are not readily accessible or intended
for consumption unless certain manufacturer's processing instructions are
followed.
      (4)   The instructions include releasing the contents of the capsule
through a machine specifically designed to process the contents.
      (5)   After being properly processed according to the manufacturer's
instructions, the final product produced from the capsule contains not less
than 0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume.
   RESTAURANT. A place located in a permanent building provided with space and
accommodations wherein, in consideration of the payment of money, hot meals are
habitually prepared, sold and served at noon and evening, as the principal
business of the place. The term does not include pharmacies, confectionery
stores, lunch stands, nightclubs and filling stations.
   SALE and SELL. The exchange, barter, gift, offer for sale, sale,
distribution and delivery of any kind, and the transfer of title or possession
of beer and intoxicating liquor either by constructive or actual delivery by
any means or devices whatever, including the sale of beer or intoxicating
liquor by means of a controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 4301.21. Such terms do not include the mere solicitation of orders
for beer or intoxicating liquor from the holders of permits issued by the
Division of Liquor Control authorizing the sale of the beer or intoxicating
liquor, but no solicitor shall solicit any orders until the solicitor has been
registered with the Division pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4303.25.
   SALES AREA OR TERRITORY. An exclusive geographic area or territory that is
assigned to a particular A or B permit holder and that either has one or more
political subdivisions as its boundaries or consists of an area of land with
readily identifiable geographic boundaries. SALES AREA OR TERRITORY does not
include, however, any particular retail location in an exclusive geographic
area or territory that had been assigned to another A or B permit holder before
4-9-2001.
   SEALED CONTAINER. Any container having a capacity of not more than 128 fluid
ounces, the opening of which is closed to prevent the entrance of air.
   SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR. All intoxicating liquors containing more than 21% of
alcohol by volume. The phrase does not include the contents of a pod.
   VEHICLE. All means of transportation by land, by water or by air, and
everything made use of in any way for such transportation.
   WHOLESALE DISTRIBUTOR and DISTRIBUTOR. A person engaged in the business of
selling to retail dealers for purposes of resale.
   WINE. All liquids fit to use for beverage purposes containing not less than
0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume, that is
made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other agricultural
products. The term includes cider, except as used in R.C. §§ 4301.13, 4301.421,
4301.422, 4301.432, and 4301.44, and, for purposes of determining the rate of
the tax that applies, R.C. § 4301.43(B), the term does not include cider.
(ORC 4301.01, 4301.244)
§ 612.02 SALES TO UNDERAGE PERSONS; PROHIBITIONS AND MISREPRESENTATIONS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in Ohio R.C. Ch. 4301,
no person shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor to an underage person, shall
buy beer or intoxicating liquor for an underage person, or shall furnish it to
an underage person unless given by a physician in the regular line of the
physician’s practice or given for established religious purposes or unless the
underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an underage person
or legal guardian. In proceedings before the Liquor Control Commission, no
permit holder, or no employee or agent of a permit holder, charged with a
violation of this division (A) shall be charged, for the same offense, with a
violation of Ohio R.C. 4301.22(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (B)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private place
shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place while
possessing or consuming beer or intoxicating liquor, unless the intoxicating
liquor or beer is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that
person’s parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian and
the parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present
at the time of the person’s possession or consumption of the beer or
intoxicating liquor. An owner of a public or private place is not liable for
acts or omissions in violation of this division (B) that are committed by a
lessee of that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee’s
acts or omissions.
   (C)   No person shall engage or use accommodations at a hotel, inn, cabin,
campground or restaurant when the person knows or has reason to know either of
the following:
      (1)   That beer or intoxicating liquor will be consumed by an underage
person on the premises of the accommodations that the person engages or uses,
unless the person engaging or using the accommodations is the spouse of the
underage person and who is not an underage person, or is the parent or legal
guardian of all of the underage persons, who consume beer or intoxicating
liquor on the premises and that person is on the premises at all times when
beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by an underage person; and/or
      (2)   That a drug of abuse will be consumed on the premises of the
accommodations by any person, except a person who obtained the drug of abuse
pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed health professionals authorized
to prescribe drugs and has the drug of abuse in the original container in which
it was dispensed to the person.
   (D)   (1)   No person is required to permit the engagement of accommodations
at any hotel, inn, cabin or campground by an underage person or for an underage
person, if the person engaging the accommodations knows or has reason to know
that the underage person is intoxicated, or that the underage person possesses
any beer or intoxicating liquor and is not supervised by a parent, spouse who
is not an underage person or legal guardian who is or will be present at all
times when the beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by the underage
person.
      (2)   No underage person shall knowingly engage or attempt to engage
accommodations at any hotel, inn, cabin or campground by presenting
identification that falsely indicates that the underage person is 21 years of
age or older for the purpose of violating this section.
   (E)   (1)   No underage person shall knowingly order, pay for, share the
cost of, attempt to purchase, possess or consume any beer or intoxicating
liquor in any public or private place. No underage person shall knowingly be
under the influence of any beer or intoxicating liquor in any public place. The
prohibitions set forth in this division against an underage person knowingly
possessing, consuming or being under the influence of any beer or intoxicating
liquor shall not apply if the underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse
who is not an underage person or legal guardian, or the beer or intoxicating
liquor is given by a physician in the regular line of the physician’s practice
or given for established religious purposes.
      (2)   (a)   If a person is charged with violating division (E)(1) above
in a complaint filed under Ohio R.C. 2151.27, the court may order the child
into a diversion program specified by the court and hold the complaint in
abeyance pending successful completion of the diversion program. A child is
ineligible to enter into a diversion program under this division (E)(2) if the
child previously has been diverted pursuant to this division (E)(2). If the
child completes the diversion program to the satisfaction of the court, the
court shall dismiss the complaint and order the child’s record in the case
sealed under Ohio R.C. 2151.356 through 2151.358. If the child fails to
satisfactorily complete the diversion program, the court shall proceed with the
complaint.
         (b)   If a person is charged in a criminal complaint with violating
division (E)(1) above, Ohio R.C. 2935.36 shall apply to the offense, except
that a person is ineligible for diversion under that section if the person
previously has been diverted pursuant to divisions (E)(2)(a) or (E)(2)(b) of
this section. If the person completes the diversion program to the satisfaction
of the court, the court shall dismiss the complaint and order the record in the
case sealed under Ohio R.C. 2953.33. If the person fails to satisfactorily
complete the diversion program, the court shall proceed with the complaint.
   (F)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
a minor shall knowingly permit the minor to violate this section or Ohio R.C.
4301.63, 4301.632, 4301.633 or 4301.634, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (G)   The operator of any hotel, inn, cabin or campground shall make the
provisions of this section available in writing to any person engaging or using
accommodations at the hotel, inn, cabin or campground.
   (H)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3719.011.
      HOTEL. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3731.01.
      LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS and
PRESCRIPTION. Have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
      MINOR. A person under the age of 18 years.
      UNDERAGE PERSON. A person under the age of 21 years.
(ORC 4301.69)
   (I)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in Ohio R.C. Ch. 4301,
no person under the age of 21 years shall purchase beer or intoxicating liquor.
(ORC 4301.63)
   (J)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in Ohio R.C. Ch. 4301,
no person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the name, age, or
other identification of any person under 21 years of age, for the purpose of
obtaining, or with the intent to obtain, beer or intoxicating liquor for a
person under 21 years of age, by purchase or as a gift.
(ORC 4301.633)
   (K)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in Ohio R.C. Ch. 4301,
no person under the age of 21 years shall knowingly show or give false
information concerning his or her name, age or other identification for the
purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining beer or intoxicating liquor in any
place in this municipality where beer or intoxicating liquor is sold under a
permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control, or sold by the Division of
Liquor Control.
(ORC 4301.634)
   (L)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of a misdemeanor, shall
be fined not less than $500, nor more than $1,000, and, in addition to the
fine, may be imprisoned for a definite term of not more than six months.
(ORC 4301.99(I))
   (M)   Whoever violates division (B), (C), (D),(F), (G) or (J) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 4301.99(C))
   (N)   Whoever violates division (E)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If an offender who violates division (E)(1) of
this section was under the age of 18 years at the time of the offense and the
offense occurred while the offender was the operator of or a passenger in a
motor vehicle, the court, in addition to any other penalties it imposes upon
the offender, shall suspend the offender's temporary instruction permit or
probationary driver's license for a period of not less than six months and not
more than one year. If the offender is 15 years and six months of age or older
and has not been issued a temporary instruction permit or probationary driver's
license, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued such a license or
permit for a period of six months. If the offender has not attained the age of
15 years and six months, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued a
temporary instruction permit until the offender attains the age of 16 years.
(ORC 4301.99(D))
   (O)   Whoever violates division (I) above shall be fined not less than $25,
nor more than $100. The court imposing a fine for a violation of this section
may order that the fine be paid by the performance of public work at a
reasonable hour rate established by the court. The court shall designate the
time within which the public work shall be completed.
(ORC 4301.99(E))
   (P)   (1)   Whoever violates division (K) above is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If, in committing a first violation of division (K) above,
the offender presented to the permit holder or his or her employee or agent a
false, fictitious or altered identification card, a false or fictitious
driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s license issued
by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree and shall be fined not less than $250, and not more than
$1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six
months.
      (2)   On a second violation in which, for the second time, the offender
presented to the permit holder or his or her employee or agent a false,
fictitious or altered identification card, a false or fictitious driver’s
license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s license issued by any
state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree and shall be fined not less than $500, nor more than $1,000, and
may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months. The
court also may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or non- resident operation privilege from
the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(7).
      (3)   On a third or subsequent violation in which, for the third or
subsequent time, the offender presented to the permit holder or his or her
employee or agent a false, fictitious or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $500, nor more
than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than
six months. Except as provided in this division (P)(3), the court also may
impose a class six suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit or non-resident operating privilege from the range specified
in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(6), and the court may order that the suspension or
denial remain in effect until the offender attains the age of 21 years. The
court, in lieu of suspending the offender’s temporary instruction permit,
probationary driver’s license or driver’s license, instead may order the
offender to perform a determinate number of hours of community service, with
the court determining the actual number of hours and the nature of the
community service the offender shall perform.
(ORC 4301.99(F))
§ 612.03 SALES TO INTOXICATED PERSONS.
   (A)   No permit holder and no agent or employee of a permit holder shall
sell or furnish beer or intoxicating liquor to an intoxicated person.
(ORC 4301.22)
   (B)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4301.99(D), (H))
§ 612.04 LIQUOR CONSUMPTION IN MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person shall consume any beer or intoxicating liquor in a motor
vehicle. This section does not apply to persons described in Ohio R.C. 4301.62
(D) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(ORC 4301.64)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If an offender who violates this section was under the age of 18 years
at the time of the offense, the court, in addition to any other penalties it
imposes upon the offender, may suspend the offender’s temporary instruction
permit, probationary driver’s license or driver’s license for a period of not
less than six months and not more than one year. In lieu of suspending the
offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or
driver’s license, the court instead may require the offender to perform
community service for a number of hours determined by the court. If the
offender is 15 years and six months of age or older and has not been issued a
temporary instruction permit or probationary driver’s license, the offender
shall not be eligible to be issued such a license or permit for a period of six
months. If the offender has not attained the age of 15 years and six months,
the offender shall not be eligible to be issued a temporary instruction permit
until the offender attains the age of 16 years.
(ORC 4301.99(B))
§ 612.05 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   No person personally or by the person’s clerk, agent or
employee, shall manufacture, manufacture for sale, offer, keep or possess for
sale, furnish or sell, or solicit the purchase or sale of any beer or
intoxicating liquor in the state, or transport, import or cause to be
transported or imported any beer, intoxicating liquor or alcohol in or into
this municipality for delivery, use or sale, unless the person has fully
complied with Ohio R.C. Ch. 4301 and 4303 or is the holder of a permit issued
by the Division of Liquor Control and in force at the time.
      (2)   No manufacturer, supplier, wholesale distributor, broker, or
retailer of beer or intoxicating liquor, or other person shall employ, retain
or otherwise utilize any person in this state to act as an employee, agent,
solicitor or salesperson, or act in any other representative capacity to sell,
solicit, take orders or receive offers to purchase or expressions of interest
to purchase beer or intoxicating liquor from any person, at any location other
than a liquor permit premises, except as specifically authorized by Ohio R.C.
Ch. 4301 or Ohio R.C. Ch. 4303 or rules adopted thereunder. No function, event
or party shall take place at any location other than a liquor permit premises
where any person acts in any manner to sell, solicit, take orders or receive
offers to purchase or expressions of intent to purchase beer or intoxicating
liquor to or from any person, except as specifically authorized by Ohio R.C.
Ch. 4301 or Ohio R.C. Ch. 4303 or rules adopted thereunder.
(ORC 4303.25)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 612.06 POSTING LIQUOR AGE AND FIREARM WARNING SIGNS.
   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. 4301.691, every place
in the municipality where beer, intoxicating liquor, or any low-alcohol
beverage is sold for beverage purposes shall display at all times, in a
prominent place on the premises thereof, a printed card, which shall be
furnished by the Division of Liquor Control and which shall read substantially
as follows:
 
WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER AGE
   If you are under the age of 21
Under the statutes of the state of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the cost
of, or attempt to purchase, or possess or consume beer or intoxicating liquor
in any public place, or furnish false information as to name, age, or other
identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $1,000, or imprisonment up
to 6 months, or both.
 
   If you are under the age of 18
Under the statutes of the state of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the cost
of, or attempt to purchase, or posses or consume, any type of beer or wine that
contains either no alcohol or less than one-half of one per cent of alcohol by
volume in any public place, or furnish false information as to the name, age,
or other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $250 or to
imprisonment up to 30 days, or both.
 
      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any
proceedings before the Department or the Liquor Control Commission for failing
to display this card. No permit issued by the Department shall be suspended,
revoked or canceled because of the failure of the permit holder to display this
card.
   (B)   (1)   Every place in this municipality for which a D permit has been
issued under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4303 shall be issued a printed card by the Division
of Liquor Control that shall read substantially as follows:
 
   WARNING
 
   If you are carrying a firearm
Under the statutes of Ohio, if you possess a firearm in any room in which
liquor is being dispensed in premises for which a D permit has been issued
under Chapter 4303 of the Revised Code, you may be guilty of a felony and may
be subjected to a prison term of up to one year.
 
      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any
proceedings before the Division of Liquor Control or the Liquor Control
Commission for failing to display this card. No permit issued by the Department
shall be suspended, revoked or canceled because of the failure of the permit
holder to display this card.
(ORC 4301.637)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4301.70, 4301.99(A))
§ 612.07 OPEN CONTAINER PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE. A vehicle registered under Ohio R.C. 4503.24.
      STREET, HIGHWAY and MOTOR VEHICLE. Have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C.
4511.01.
   (B)   No person shall have in the person’s possession an opened container of
beer or intoxicating liquor in any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(1)(e) below, in a state liquor
store;
      (2)   Except as provided in division (C) or (J) of this section, on the
premises of the holder of any permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control;
      (3)   In any other public place;
      (4)   Except as provided in divisions (D) or (E) below while operating or
being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on any street, highway or other
public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking;
      (5)   Except as provided in divisions (D) or (E) below while being in or
on a stationary motor vehicle on any street, highway or other public or private
property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking.
   (C)   (1)   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened container
of any of the following:
         (a)   Beer or intoxicating liquor that has been lawfully purchased for
consumption on the premises where bought from the holder of an A-1-A, A-2, A-
2f, A-3a, D-1, D-2, D-3, D-3a, D-4, D-4a, D-5, D-5a, D-5b, D-5c, D-5d, D-5e, D-
5f, D-5g, D-5h, D-5i, D-5j, D-5k, D-5l, D-5m, D-5n, D-5o, D-7, D-8, D-9, E, F,
F-2, F-5, F-7 or F-8 permit;
         (b)   Beer, wine, or mixed beverages served for consumption on the
premises by the holder of an F-3 permit, wine served as a tasting sample by an
A-2, A-2f, S-1, or S-2 permit holder for consumption on the premises of a
farmers market for which an F-10 permit has been issued, or wine served for
consumption on the premises by the holder of an F-4 or F-6 permit;
         (c)   Beer or intoxicating liquor consumed on the premises of a
convention facility as provided in Ohio R.C. 4303.201;
         (d)   Beer or intoxicating liquor to be consumed during tastings and
samplings approved by rule of the Liquor Control Commission;
         (e)   Spiritous liquor to be consumed for purposes of a tasting
sample, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4301.171;
         (f)   Beer or intoxicating liquor to be consumed in an outdoor area
described in Ohio R.C. 4303.188(B)(1).
      (2)   A person may have in the person’s possession on an F liquor permit
premises an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was not
purchased from the holder of the F permit if the premises for which the F
permit is issued is a music festival and the holder of the F permit grants
permission for that possession on the premises during the period for which the
F permit is issued. As used in this division (C)(2), MUSIC FESTIVAL means a
series of outdoor live musical performances extending for a period of at least
three consecutive days and located on an area of land of at least 40 acres.
      (3)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession on a D-2 liquor
permit premises an opened or unopened container of wine that was not purchased
from the holder of the D-2 permit if the premises for which the D-2 permit is
issued is an outdoor performing arts center, the person is attending an
orchestral performance and the holder of the D-2 permit grants permission for
the possession and consumption of wine in certain predesignated areas of the
premises during the period for which the D-2 permit is issued.
         (b)   As used in division (C)(3)(a) above:
            ORCHESTRAL PERFORMANCE. A concert comprised of a group of not fewer
than 40 musicians playing various musical instruments.
            OUTDOOR PERFORMING ARTS CENTER. An outdoor performing arts center
that is located on not less than 150 acres of land and that is open for
performances from April 1 to October 31 of each year.
      (4)   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened or unopened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location at which the
person is attending an orchestral performance as defined in division (C)(3)(b)
above if the person with supervision and control over the performance grants
permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor in
certain predesignated areas of that outdoor location.
      (5)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession on an F-9 liquor
permit premises an opened or unopened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
that was not purchased from the holder of the F-9 permit if the person is
attending either of the following:
            1.   An orchestral performance and the F-9 permit holder grants
permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor in
certain predesignated areas of the premises during the period for which the F-
9 permit is issued; and
            2.   An outdoor performing arts event or orchestral performance
that is free of charge and the F-9 permit holder annually hosts not less than
25 other events or performances that are free of charge on the permit premises.
         (b)   As used in division (C)(5)(a) above, ORCHESTRAL PERFORMANCE has
the same meaning as in division (C)(3)(b) above.
      (6)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession on the property
of an outdoor motorsports facility an opened or unopened container of beer or
intoxicating liquor that was not purchased from the owner of the facility if
both of the following apply:
            1.   The person is attending a racing event at the facility; and
            2.   The owner of the facility grants permission for the possession
and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor on the property of the facility.
         (b)   As used in division (C)(6)(a) above:
            OUTDOOR MOTORSPORTS FACILITY. An outdoor racetrack to which all of
the following apply:
               a.   It is 2.4 miles or more in length;
               b.   It is located on 200 acres or more of land;
               c.   The primary business of the owner of the facility is the
hosting and promoting of racing events; and
               d.   The holder of a D-1, D-2 or D-3 permit is located on the
property of the facility.
            RACING EVENT. A motor vehicle racing event sanctioned by one or
more motor racing sanctioning organizations.
      (7)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location within an
outdoor refreshment area created under Ohio R.C. 4301.82 if the opened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor was purchased from a qualified permit
holder to which both of the following apply:
            1.   The permit holder’s premises is located within the outdoor
refreshment area; and
            2.   The permit held by the permit holder has an outdoor
refreshment area designation.
         (b)   This division (C)(7) does not authorize a person to do either of
the following:
            1.   Enter the premises of an establishment within an outdoor
refreshment area while possessing an opened container of beer or intoxicating
liquor acquired elsewhere; or
            2.   Possess an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
while being in or on a motor vehicle within an outdoor refreshment area, unless
the motor vehicle is stationary and is not being operated in a lane of
vehicular travel or unless the possession is otherwise authorized under
divisions (D) or (E) below.
      (8)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession on the property
of a market, within a defined F-8 permit premises, an opened container of beer
or intoxicating liquor that was purchased from a D permit premises that is
located immediately adjacent to the market if both of the following apply:
            1.   The market grants permission for the possession and
consumption of beer and intoxicating liquor within the defined F-8 permit
premises; and
            2.   The market is hosting an event pursuant to an F-8 permit and
the market has notified the division of liquor control about the event in
accordance with Ohio R.C. 4303.208(A)(3).
         (b)   As used in this division (C)(8), MARKET means a market, for
which an F-8 permit is held, that has been in operation since 1860.
   (D)   This section does not apply to a person who pays all or a portion of
the fee imposed for use of a chauffeured limousine pursuant to a prearranged
contract or the guest of the person, when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The person or guest is a passenger in the limousine;
      (2)   The person or guest is located in the limousine, but is not
occupying a seat in the front compartment of the limousine where the operator
of the limousine is located; and
      (3)   The limousine is located on any street, highway or other public or
private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking.
   (E)   An opened bottle of wine that was purchased from the holder of a
permit that authorizes the sale of wine for consumption on the premises where
sold is not an opened container for the purposes of this section if both of the
following apply:
      (1)   The opened bottle of wine is securely resealed by the permit holder
or an employee of the permit holder before the bottle is removed from the
premises. The bottle shall be secured in such a manner that it is visibly
apparent if the bottle has been subsequently opened or tampered with; and
      (2)   The opened bottle of wine that is resealed in accordance with
division (E)(1) above is stored in the trunk of a motor vehicle or, if the
motor vehicle does not have a trunk, behind the last upright seat or in an area
not normally occupied by the driver or passengers and not easily accessible by
the driver.
   (F)   (1)   Except if an ordinance or resolution is enacted or adopted under
division (F)(2) below, this section does not apply to a person who, pursuant to
a prearranged contract, is a passenger riding on a commercial quadricycle when
all of the following apply:
         (a)   The person is not occupying a seat in the front of the
commercial quadricycle where the operator is steering or braking;
         (b)   The commercial quadricycle is being operated on a street,
highway or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking;
         (c)   The person has in their possession on the commercial quadricycle
an opened container of beer or wine; and
         (d)   The person has in their possession on the commercial quadricycle
not more than either 36 ounces of beer or 18 ounces of wine.
      (2)   The legislative authority may enact an ordinance or adopt a
resolution, as applicable, that prohibits a passenger riding on a commercial
quadricycle from possessing an opened container of beer or wine.
      (3)   As used in this section, COMMERCIAL QUADRICYCLE means a vehicle
that has fully- operative pedals for propulsion entirely by human power and
that meets all of the following requirements:
         (a)   It has four wheels and is operated in a manner similar to a
bicycle;
         (b)   It has at least five seats for passengers;
         (c)   It is designed to be powered by the pedaling of the operator and
the passengers;
         (d)   It is used for commercial purposes; and
         (e)   It is operated by the vehicle owner or an employee of the owner.
   (G)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person that has in the person’s
possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor on the premises
of a market if the beer or intoxicating liquor has been purchased from a D
liquor permit holder that is located in the market.
      (2)   As used in this division (G), MARKET means an establishment that:
         (a)   Leases space in the market to individual vendors, not less than
50% of which are retail food establishments or food service operations licensed
under Ohio R.C. Ch. 3717;
         (b)   Has an indoor sales floor area of not less than 22,000 square
feet; and
         (c)   Hosts a farmer’s market on each Saturday from April through
December.
   (H)   (1)   As used in this section, "alcoholic beverage" has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 4303.185.
      (2)   An alcoholic beverage in a closed container being transported under
R.C. § 4303.185 to its final destination is not an opened container for the
purposes of this section if the closed container is securely sealed in such a
manner that it is visibly apparent if the closed container has been
subsequently opened or tampered with after sealing.
   (I)   This section does not apply to a person who has in the person's
possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor in a public-use
airport, as described in R.C. § 4303.181(D)(2)(a)(iii), when both of the
following apply:
      (1)   Consumption of the opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
occurs in the area of the airport terminal that is restricted to persons taking
flights to and from the airport; and
      (2)   The consumption is authorized under R.C. § 4303.181(D)(2)(a).
(R.C. § 4301.62)
   (J)   This section does not apply to a person that has in the person’s
possession an opened container of homemade beer or wine that is served in
accordance with R.C. § 4301.201(E).
(R.C. § 4301.62)
   (K)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4301.99(A))
§ 612.08 HOURS OF SALE OR CONSUMPTION.
   (A)   This section shall apply to the retail sale of beer, wine, mixed
beverages or spirituous liquor.
   (B)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages or spirituous liquor shall be sold or
delivered by an A-1, A-1C, A-2, B-1, B-2, B-4, B-5, C-1, C-2, C-2X, D-1, D-2,
D-2X, D-3 when issued without a D-3A, D-3X, D-4, D-5H, D-5K, D-8, F, F-1, F-2,
F-3, F-4, F-5, F-6, F-7, F-8, F-9, G or I permit holder:
      (1)   From Monday to Saturday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30
a.m.;
      (2)   On Sunday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and Sunday midnight,
unless statutorily authorized otherwise; and
      (3)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages or spirituous liquor is
also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit
holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages
or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.
   (C)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages or spirituous liquor shall be sold or
delivered by an A-1A, D-3 when issued with a D-3A, D-4A, D-5, D-5A, D-5B, D-5C,
D-5D, D-5E, D-5F, D-5G, D-5I, D-5J, D-5L, D-5M, D- 5N, D-5O or D-7 permit
holder:
      (1)   From Monday to Saturday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:30
a.m.;
      (2)   On Sunday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and Sunday midnight,
unless statutorily authorized otherwise; and
      (3)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages or spirituous liquor is
also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit
holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages
or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.
   (D)   Permit holders authorized to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages or
spirituous liquor at retail who are not specifically identified in divisions
(B) or (C) above shall be subject to the provisions of division (B) above,
unless statutorily authorized otherwise.
   (E)   The hours on Sunday during which sales, delivery or consumption of
alcoholic beverages may take place are established by statute, but in no event
shall they begin prior to 5:30 a.m.
(O.A.C. 4301:1-1-49)
   (F)   No association, corporation, local unit of an association or
corporation, or D permit holder who holds an F-2 permit shall sell beer or
intoxicating liquor beyond the hours of sale allowed by the permit. This
division (F) imposes strict liability on the holder of such permit and on any
officer, agent or employee of such permit holder.
(ORC 4303.202(D)(2))
   (G)   No F-8 permit holder shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor beyond the
hours of sale allowed by the permit. This division (G) imposes strict liability
on the holder of an F-8 permit and on any officer, agent or employee of that
permit holder.
(ORC 4303.208(C))
   (H)   Whoever violates divisions (F) or (G) above is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree.
(ORC 4303.99(D))
§ 612.09 CONVEYING INTOXICATING LIQUOR OR CASH ONTO GROUNDS OF DETENTION
FACILITIES OR OTHER SPECIFIED GOVERNMENTAL FACILITIES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly convey, or attempt to convey, onto the
grounds of a detention facility or of an institution, office building or other
place that is under the control of the Department of Mental Health and
Addiction Services, the Department of Developmental Disabilities, the
Department of Youth Services or the Department of Rehabilitation and
Correction, any of the following items:
      (1)   Any deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance, as defined in Ohio R.C.
2923.11, or any part of or ammunition for use in such deadly weapon or
dangerous ordnance;
      (2)   Any drug of abuse, as defined in Ohio R.C. 3719.011; and/or
      (3)   Any intoxicating liquor, as defined in R.C. § 4301.01, except for
small amounts of wine for sacramental purposes when the person engaging in the
specified conduct is a cleric, as defined in R.C. § 2317.02.
   (B)   Division (A) above does not apply to any person who conveys or
attempts to convey an item onto the grounds of a detention facility or of an
institution, office building or other place under the control of the Department
of Mental Health and Addiction Services, the Department of Developmental
Disabilities, the Department of Youth Services or the Department of
Rehabilitation and Correction, with written authorization of the person in
charge of the detention facility or the institution and in accordance with the
written rules of the detention facility or the institution, office building or
other place.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, to a prisoner who is temporarily released from confinement
for a work assignment, or to any patient in an institution under the control of
the Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services or the Department of
Developmental Disabilities, any item listed in division (A) above.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly deliver or attempt to deliver cash to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from confinement
for a work assignment.
   (E)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment a cellular telephone, two-way radio or other
electronic communications device.
   (F)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(1)
above that the weapon or dangerous ordnance in question was being transported
in a motor vehicle for any lawful purpose, that it was not on the actor’s
person, and if the weapon or dangerous ordnance was a firearm, that it was
unloaded and was being carried in a closed package, box or case or in a
compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (C) above
that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by law from delivering the item to
the confined person, the child, the prisoner or the patient and that either of
the following applies:
         (a)   The actor was permitted by the written rules of the detention
facility or the institution, office building or other place to deliver the item
to the confined person or the patient; or
         (b)   The actor was given written authorization by the person in
charge of the detention facility or the institution, office building or other
place to deliver the item to the confined person or the patient.
   (G)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) above or commits a violation of
division (C) above involving any item listed in division (A)(1) above is guilty
of illegal conveyance of weapons onto the grounds of a specified governmental
facility, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) above or commits a violation of
division (C) above involving any drug of abuse is guilty of illegal conveyance
of drugs of abuse onto the grounds of a specified governmental facility, a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(3) above or commits a violation of
division (C) above involving any intoxicating liquor is guilty of illegal
conveyance of intoxicating liquor onto the grounds of a specified governmental
facility, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (D) above is guilty of illegal conveyance
of cash onto the grounds of a detention facility, a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of division (D) above or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, illegal conveyance of cash onto the grounds of a detention
facility is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (E) above is guilty of illegal conveyance
of a communications device onto the grounds of a specified governmental
facility, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E) above or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, illegal conveyance
of a communications device onto the grounds of a detention facility is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2921.36)
§ 612.10 SALES OF LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGES TO UNDERAGE PERSONS; PROHIBITIONS AND
MISREPRESENTATIONS.
   (A)   As used in this section, UNDERAGE PERSON means a person under 18 years
of age.
   (B)   No underage person shall purchase any low-alcohol beverage.
   (C)   No underage person shall order, pay for, share the cost of or attempt
to purchase any low-alcohol beverage.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the
name, age or other identification of any underage person for the purpose of
obtaining or with the intent to obtain any low-alcohol beverage for an underage
person, by purchase or as a gift.
   (E)   No underage person shall knowingly show or give false information
concerning his or her name, age or other identification for the purpose of
purchasing or otherwise obtaining any low-alcohol beverage in any place in the
municipality.
   (F)   No person shall sell or furnish any low-alcohol beverage to, or buy
any low-alcohol beverage for, an underage person, unless given by a physician
in the regular line of his or her practice or given for established religious
purposes, or unless the underage person is accompanied by a parent, spouse who
is not an underage person or legal guardian.
   (G)   (1)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private
place shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place
while possessing or consuming any low-alcohol beverage, unless the low-alcohol
beverage is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that person’s
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, and the
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present when
the person possesses or consumes the low-alcohol beverage.
      (2)   An owner of a public or private place is not liable for acts or
omissions in violation of division (G)(1) above that are committed by a lessee
of that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee’s acts
or omissions.
   (H)   No permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control shall be suspended,
revoked or cancelled because of a violation of either divisions (F) or (G)
above.
   (I)   No underage person shall knowingly possess or consume any low-alcohol
beverage in any public or private place, unless he or she is accompanied by a
parent, spouse who is not an underage person or legal guardian, or unless the
low-alcohol beverage is given by a physician in the regular line of his or her
practice or given for established religious purposes.
   (J)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person or legal guardian of
an underage person shall knowingly permit the underage person to violate this
section.
(ORC 4301.631)
   (K)   No low-alcohol beverage shall be sold to any person under 18 years of
age.
(ORC 4301.22)
   (L)   Whoever violates division (B) above shall be fined not less than $25,
nor more than $100. The court imposing a fine for a violation of division (B)
above may order that the fine be paid by the performance of public work at a
reasonable hour rate established by the court. The court shall designate the
time within which the public work shall be completed.
(ORC 4301.99(E))
   (M)   Whoever violates divisions (C) through (K) above is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 4301.99(B))
§ 612.11 ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   As used in this section, ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICE means a machine or
other device that mixes beer or intoxicating liquor with pure oxygen or any
other gas to produce a vaporized product for the purpose of consumption by
inhalation.
   (B)   No person shall sell or offer for sale an alcohol vaporizing device.
   (C)   No person shall purchase or use an alcohol vaporizing device.
(ORC 4301.65)
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of misdemeanor of
the third degree. For a second or subsequent violation occurring within a
period of five consecutive years after the first violation, a person is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 4301.99(J))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) above is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(ORC 4301.99(A))
CHAPTER 618: ANIMALS
Section
618.01   Dogs and other animals running at large.
618.02   Abandoning animals.
618.03   Killing or injuring animals.
618.04   Poisoning animals.
618.05   Cruelty to animals; cruelty to companion animals.
618.06   Coloring rabbits and baby poultry; sale or display of poultry.
618.07   Animal fights.
618.08   Registration of dogs required.
618.09   Hindering capture of unregistered dog.
618.095   Dogs required to wear tags.
618.10   Unlawful tags.
618.11   Rabies quarantine.
618.12   Assistance dogs with blind, deaf, or hearing impaired person, or
person with a mobility impairment, or trainer.
618.13   Barking dogs.
618.14   Birds.
618.15   Harboring of bees; notification to abate.
618.16   Hunting.
618.17   Dog nuisance prohibited; abatement.
618.18   Dangerous animals.
618.19   Dangerous dogs.
618.20   Teasing or striking police dog or horse or handicapped assistance dog.
618.21   Assaulting police dog or horse or assistance dog.
618.22   Animal feed nuisance prevention.
618.23   Restrictions on dog ownership for certain convicted felons.
618.24   Feeding of waterfowl prohibited.
618.25   Sexual conduct with an animal.
Cross-reference:
   Animal Control Warden, see ADM. Ch.
238
   Animals upon roadways, see TRAF.
303.05,
303.06
   Definitions generally, see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Offensive odors from places where animals are kept or fed, see GEN. OFF.
660.04
   Pets at Lake Anna Park, see S.U. & P.S.
1068.03
   Power to restrain and impound animals, see Ohio R.C. 715.23
   See section histories for similar state law
§ 618.01 DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   No person, who is the owner or keeper of horses, mules, cattle, bison,
sheep, goats, swine, llamas, alpacas or poultry, shall permit them to run at
large in the public road, highway, street, lane or alley, or upon unenclosed
land, or cause the animals to be herded, kept or detained for the purpose of
grazing on premises other than those owned or lawfully occupied by the owner or
keeper of the animals.
(ORC 951.02)
   (B)   (1)   No owner, keeper or harborer of any dog shall permit such dog to
go beyond the premises of such owner or keeper at any time, unless such dog is
properly in leash.
      (2)   As used in this section, PROPERLY IN LEASH means that the dog must
be restrained by a leash not to exceed five feet in length and of sufficient
strength to allow the person in control of the dog to maintain proper control
over the dog.
(Ord. 146-1977, passed 7-5-1977)
   (C)   (Reserved)
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates any provision of this section for a first or
second offense is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and any subsequent offense(s)
shall constitute a fourth degree misdemeanor, and shall be fined as follows:
         (a)   Not less than $100 for the first offense;
         (b)   Not less than $150 for the second offense; and
         (c)   Not less than $250 for any subsequent offense(s).
      (2)   All fines collected shall be placed in a separate fund devoted
solely to furthering animal control purposes.
      (3)   The owner of the animal shall also be responsible for the costs
incurred by the city in boarding such animal, if any.
   (E)   The Finance Director is hereby authorized to create the fund referred
to above in division (D)(2) above.
(Ord. 124-1977, passed 6-20-1977; Ord. 80-2007, passed 5-29-2007)
§ 618.02 ABANDONING ANIMALS.
   (A)   No owner or keeper of a dog, cat or other domestic animal shall
abandon the animal.
(ORC 959.01)
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the first degree on each
subsequent offense.
(ORC 959.99(E)(2))
§ 618.03 KILLING OR INJURING ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the consent of
the owner, kill or injure a dog, cat or any other domestic animal that is the
property of another. This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian
acting in an official capacity.
(ORC 959.02)
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates
division (A) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
value of the animal killed or the injury done amounts to $300 or more, whoever
violates division (A) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 959.99(B))
§ 618.04 POISONING ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the consent of
the owner, administer poison, except a licensed veterinarian acting in such
capacity, to a dog, cat, or any other domestic animal that is the property of
another; and no person shall, willfully and without the consent of the owner,
place any poisoned food where it may be easily found and eaten by any such
animal, either upon his or her own lands or the lands of another.
(ORC 959.03)
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(ORC 959.99(C))
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 618.05 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS; CRUELTY TO COMPANION ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall:
      (1)   Torture an animal, deprive one of necessary sustenance,
unnecessarily or cruelly beat, needlessly mutilate or kill or impound or
confine an animal without supplying it during the confinement with a sufficient
quantity of good wholesome food and water;
      (2)   Impound or confine an animal without affording it, during the
confinement, access to shelter from wind, rain, snow or excessive direct
sunlight, if it can reasonably be expected that the animal would otherwise
become sick or in some other way suffer. The shelter shall be appropriate to
the animal’s size, weight and other characteristics, with sufficient space to
allow the animal to turn about freely and in a normal position. The shelter
shall provide sufficient shade to allow the animal to escape the direct rays of
the sun at all times; the shelter shall be regularly cleaned and sanitized.
This division (A)(2) does not apply to animals impounded or confined prior to
slaughter. For the purpose of this section, SHELTER means an artificial
enclosure, windbreak, sunshade or natural windbreak or sunshade that is
developed from the earth’s contour, tree development or vegetation;
      (3)   Carry or convey an animal in a cruel or inhuman manner;
      (4)   Keep animals other than cattle, poultry or fowl, swine, sheep or
goats in an enclosure without wholesome exercise and change of air, nor feed
cows on food that produces impure or unwholesome milk;
      (5)   Detain livestock in railroad cars or compartments longer than 28
hours after they are so placed without supplying them with necessary food,
water and attention, nor permit the stock to be so crowded as to overlie,
crush, wound or kill each other.
      (6)   Neglect an animal. No owner of a domestic animal shall fail to
bring that animal indoors, into the habitable, temperature-controlled portion
of the residence, if either of the following have been issued by the National
Weather Service or a local or state authority:
         (a)   Heat or cold advisory; or
         (b)   Sever weather warning.
      (7)   Tethering animals. No person shall tether an animal in any of the
following circumstances:
         (a)   For more than ten hours total in a 24-hour period;
         (b)   If a heat or cold advisory has been issued by the National
Weather Service or a local or state authority;
         (c)   If a severe weather warning has been issued by the National
Weather Service or a local or state authority;
         (d)   If the length of the tether is less than five times the length
of the animal;
         (e)   If the tether allows the animal to touch the fence or cross the
property line or cross onto public property;
         (f)   If the tether is attached by means of a pinch-type, prong-type,
or choke-type collar or if the collar is unsafe or is not properly fitted;
         (g)   If the tether may cause injury or entanglement;
         (h)   If the tether is made of a material that is unsuitable for the
animal’s size and weight or that causes any unnecessary discomfort to the
animal; and
         (i)   If no owner or occupant is present at the premises.
   (B)   Upon the written request of the owner or person in custody of any
particular shipment of livestock, which written request shall be separate and
apart from any printed bill of lading or other railroad form, the length of
time in which the livestock may be detained in any cars or compartment without
food, water and attention may be extended to 36 hours without penalty therefor.
Division (A) above does not prevent the dehorning of cattle.
   (C)   All fines collected for violations of division (A) above shall be paid
to the society or association for the prevention of cruelty to animals, if
there is one in the municipality; otherwise, all fines shall be paid to the
General Fund.
(ORC 959.13)
   (D)   (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         ANIMAL RESCUE FOR DOGS. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 956.01.
         BOARDING KENNEL. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 956.01.
         CAPTIVE WHITE-TAILED DEER. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
1531.01.
         COMPANION ANIMAL. Any animal that is kept inside a residential
dwelling and any dog or cat regardless of where it is kept, including a pet
store as defined in Ohio R.C. 956.01. “Companion animal” does not include
livestock or any wild animal.
         CRUELTY. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1717.01.
         DOG KENNEL. An animal rescue for dogs, a boarding kennel, or a
training kennel.
         FEDERAL ANIMAL WELFARE ACT. The Laboratory Animal Act of 1966, Pub.
Law No. 89-544, 80 Stat. 350 (1966), 7 U.S.C. §§ 2131 et seq., as amended by
the Animal Welfare Act of 1970, Pub. Law No. 91-579, 84 Stat. 1560 (1970), the
Animal Welfare Act Amendments of 1976, Pub. Law No. 94-279, 90 Stat. 417 (1976)
and the Food Security Act of 1985, Pub. Law No. 99-198, 99 Stat. 1354 (1985),
and as it may be subsequently amended.
         LIVESTOCK. Horses, mules and other equidae; cattle, sheep, goats and
other bovidae; swine and other suidae; poultry; alpacas; llamas; captive white-
tailed deer; and any other animal that is raised or maintained domestically for
food or fiber.
         PRACTICE OF VETERINARY MEDICINE. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
4741.01.
         RESIDENTIAL DWELLING. A structure or shelter or the portion of a
structure or shelter that is used by one or more humans for the purpose of a
habitation.
         SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM. Any of the following:
            1.   Physical harm that carries an unnecessary or unjustifiable
substantial risk of death;
            2.   Physical harm that involves either partial or total permanent
incapacity;
            3.   Physical harm that involves acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering or that involves any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain.
         TORMENT. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1717.01.
         TORTURE. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1717.01.
         WILD ANIMAL. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1531.01.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or
maim, cruelly beat, poison, needlessly kill or commit an act of cruelty against
a companion animal.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly cause serious physical harm to a
companion animal.
      (4)   No person who confines or who is the custodian or caretaker of a
companion animal shall negligently do any of the following:
         (a)   Torture, torment or commit an act of cruelty against the
companion animal;
         (b)   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it can reasonably be
expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way
as a result of or due to the deprivation or confinement; and/or
         (c)   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow or excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected
that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a
result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (5)   No person who confines or who is the custodian or caretaker of a
companion animal shall recklessly deprive the companion animal of necessary
sustenance or confine the companion animal without supplying it during the
confinement with sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water.
      (6)   No owner, manager or employee of a dog kennel who confines or is
the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall knowingly do any of the
following:
         (a)   Torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or maim, cruelly beat,
poison, needlessly kill or commit an act of cruelty against the companion
animal;
         (b)   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it is reasonably
expected that the companion animal would die or experience unnecessary or
unjustifiable pain or suffering as a result of the deprivation or confinement;
and/or
         (c)   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow or excessive direct sunlight if it is reasonably expected that
the companion animal would die or experience unnecessary or unjustifiable pain
or suffering as a result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (7)   No owner, manager, or employee of a dog kennel who confines or is
the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall negligently do any of
the following:
         (a)   Torture, torment or commit an act of cruelty against the
companion animal;
         (b)   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it can reasonably be
expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way
as a result of or due to the deprivation or confinement; and/or
         (c)   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow or excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected
that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a
result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (8)   Divisions (D)(2), (D)(3), (D)(4), (D)(5),(D)(6), and (d)(7) above
do not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   A companion animal used in scientific research conducted by an
institution in accordance with the federal animal welfare act and related
regulations;
         (b)   The lawful practice of veterinary medicine by a person who has
been issued a license, temporary permit or registration certificate to do so
under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4741;
         (c)   Dogs being used or intended for use for hunting or field trial
purposes; provided that, the dogs are being treated in accordance with usual
and commonly accepted practices for the care of hunting dogs;
         (d)   The use of common training devices, if the companion animal is
being treated in accordance with usual and commonly accepted practices for the
training of animals; or
         (e)   The administering of medicine to a companion animal that was
properly prescribed by a person who has been issued a license, temporary
permit, or registration certificate under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4741.
      (9)   Notwithstanding any section of the Ohio Revised Code that otherwise
provides for the distribution of fine moneys, the Clerk of Court shall forward
all fines the Clerk collects that are so imposed for any violation of this
division (D) to the Treasurer of the municipality, whose county humane society
or law enforcement agency is to be paid the fine money as determined under this
division (D). The Treasurer shall pay the fine moneys to the county humane
society or the county, township, municipal corporation or state law enforcement
agency in this state that primarily was responsible for or involved in the
investigation and prosecution of the violation. If a county humane society
receives any fine moneys under this division (D), the county humane society
shall use the fine moneys either to provide the training that is required for
humane agents under Ohio R.C. 1717.06 or to provide additional training for
humane agents.
(ORC 959.131)
   (E)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
second degree. In addition, the court may order the offender to forfeit the
animal or livestock and may provide for its disposition including, but not
limited to, the sale of the animal or livestock. If an animal or livestock is
forfeited and sold pursuant to this division (E), the proceeds from the sale
first shall be applied to pay the expenses incurred with regard to the care of
the animal from the time it was taken from the custody of the former owner. The
balance of the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be paid to the former
owner of the animal.
(ORC 959.99(D))
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (D)(2) or (D)(5) above is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (D)(3) above is guilty of a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (D)(4) above is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the first degree
on each subsequent offense.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (D)(6) above is guilty of a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (D)(7) above is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
      (6)   (a)   A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of division (D) above to forfeit to an impounding agency,
as defined in Ohio R.C. 959.132, any or all of the companion animals in that
person’s ownership or care. The court also may prohibit or place limitations on
the person’s ability to own or care for any companion animals for a specified
or indefinite period of time.
         (b)   A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty
to a violation of division (D) above to reimburse an impounding agency for the
reasonably necessary costs incurred by the agency for the care of a companion
animal that the agency impounded as a result of the investigation or
prosecution of the violation; provided that, the costs were not otherwise paid
under Ohio R.C. 959.132.
      (7)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of division (D) of this section has a mental or
emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may impose as a
community control sanction or as a condition of probation a requirement that
the offender undergo psychological evaluation or counseling. The court shall
order the offender to pay the costs of the evaluation or counseling.
(ORC 959.99(E))
(Ord. 86-2018, passed 9-24-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Impoundment of companion animals; notice and hearing, see Ohio R.C. 959.132
§ 618.06 COLORING RABBITS AND BABY POULTRY; SALE OR DISPLAY OF POULTRY.
   (A)   No person shall dye or otherwise color any rabbit or baby poultry,
including, but not limited to, chicks and ducklings. No person shall sell,
offer for sale, expose for sale, raffle or give away any rabbit or baby poultry
which has been dyed or otherwise colored. No poultry younger than four weeks of
age may be sold, given away or otherwise distributed to any person in lots of
less than three. Stores, shops, vendors and others offering young poultry for
sale or other distribution shall provide and operate brooders or other heating
devices that may be necessary to maintain poultry in good health and shall keep
adequate food and water available to the poultry at all times.
(ORC 925.62)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on a first offense; each subsequent offense is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
(ORC 925.99(B))
§ 618.07 ANIMAL FIGHTS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Engage in cockfighting, bearbaiting, or pitting an animal against
another;
      (2)   Use, train, or possess any animal for seizing, detaining, or
maltreating a domestic animal.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Be employed at cockfighting, bearbaiting, or pitting an animal
against another;
      (2)   Do any of the following regarding an event involving cockfighting,
bearbaiting, or pitting an animal against another:
         (a)   Wager money or anything else of value on the results of the
event;
         (b)   Pay money or give anything else of value in exchange for
admission to or being present at the event;
         (c)   Receive money or anything else of value in exchange for the
admission of another person to the event or for another person to be present at
the event;
         (d)   Use, possess, or permit or cause to be present at the event any
device or substance intended to enhance an animal's ability to fight or to
inflict injury on another animal;
         (e)   Permit or cause a minor to be present at the event if any person
present at or involved with the event is conducting any of the activities
described in division (B)(1) or (B)(2)(a), (B)(2)(b), (B)(2)(c), or (B)(2)(d)
of this section.
   (C)   A person who knowingly witnesses cockfighting, bearbaiting, or an
event in which one animal is pitted against another when a violation of
division (B) of this section is occurring at the cockfighting, bearbaiting, or
event is an aider and abettor and has committed a violation of this division.
(R.C. § 959.15)
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates divisions (B) or (C) above is guilty of a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 959.99(C), (I))
Statutory reference:
   Dogfighting, felony provisions, see Ohio R.C. 959.16
§ 618.08 REGISTRATION OF DOGS REQUIRED.
   (A)   No owner, keeper or harborer of a dog more than three months of age,
nor owner of a dog kennel, shall fail to file an application for registration
required by Ohio R.C. 955.01, nor shall he or she fail to pay the legal fee
therefor.
(ORC 955.21)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $25, nor
more than $100, on a first offense, and on each subsequent offense shall be
fined not less than $75, nor more than $250, and may be imprisoned for not more
than 30 days.
(ORC 955.99(E))
§ 618.09 HINDERING CAPTURE OF UNREGISTERED DOG.
   (A)   No person shall obstruct or interfere with anyone lawfully engaged in
capturing an unlicensed dog or making an examination of a dog wearing a tag.
(ORC 955.24)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 955.99(B))
§ 618.095 DOGS REQUIRED TO WEAR TAGS.
   (A)   No owner of a dog, except a dog constantly confined to a dog kennel
registered under Ohio R.C. Ch. 955 or one licensed under Ohio R.C. Ch. 956,
shall fail to require the dog to wear, at all times, a valid tag issued in
connection with a certificate of registration. A dog found not wearing at any
time a valid tag shall be prima facie evidence of lack of registration and
shall subject any dog found not wearing such a tag to impounding, sale or
destruction.
(ORC 955.10)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 955.99(B))
§ 618.10 UNLAWFUL TAGS.
   (A)   No person shall own, keep or harbor a dog wearing a fictitious,
altered or invalid registration tag or a registration tag not issued by the
County Auditor in connection with the registration of that animal.
(ORC 955.25)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 955.99(B))
§ 618.11 RABIES QUARANTINE.
   (A)   No person shall violate a rabies quarantine order issued under Ohio
R.C. 955.26.
(ORC 955.39)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for a
first offense; for each subsequent offense such person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 955.99(C))
§ 618.12 ASSISTANCE DOGS WITH BLIND, DEAF, OR HEARING IMPAIRED PERSON, OR
PERSON WITH A MOBILITY IMPAIRMENT, OR TRAINER.
   (A)   When a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired, a person with a
mobility impairment, or a trainer of an assistance dog is accompanied by an
assistance dog, the person or trainer, as applicable, is entitled to the full
and equal accommodations, advantages, facilities, and privileges of all public
conveyances, hotels, and lodging places, all places of public accommodation,
amusement, or resort, and other places to which the general public is invited,
and may take the dog into such conveyances and places, subject only to the
conditions and limitations applicable to all persons not so accompanied, except
that:
      (1)   The dog shall not occupy a seat in any public conveyance;
      (2)   The dog shall be leashed while using the facilities of a common
carrier; and
      (3)   Any dog in training to become an assistance dog shall be covered by
a liability insurance policy provided by the non-profit special agency engaged
in such work protecting members of the public against personal injury or
property damage caused by the dog.
   (B)   No person shall deprive a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing
impaired, a person who has a mobility impairment, or a trainer of an assistance
dog when the person or trainer, as applicable, is accompanied by an assistance
dog of any of the advantages, facilities, or privileges provided in division
(A) of this section, and no person shall charge the person or trainer a fee or
charge for the dog.
(ORC 955.43(A), (B))
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ASSISTANCE DOG. A dog that has been trained by a nonprofit or for-profit
special agency and that is one of the following:
         (a)   A guide dog;
         (b)   A hearing dog;
         (c)   A service dog.
      BLIND. Either of the following:
         (a)   Vision 20/200 or less in the better eye with proper correction;
or
         (b)   Field defect in the better eye with proper correction that
contracts the peripheral field so that the diameter of the visual field
subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees.
      GUIDE DOG. A dog that has been trained or is in training to assist a
blind person.
      HEARING DOG. A dog that has been trained or is in training to assist a
deaf or hearing-impaired person.
      INSTITUTIONS OF EDUCATION.
         (a)   Any state university or college as defined in Ohio R.C. 3345.32;
         (b)   Any private college or university that holds a certificate of
authorization issued by the Ohio Board of Regents pursuant to Ohio R.C. Ch.
1713;
         (c)   Any elementary or secondary school operated by a board of
education;
         (d)   Any chartered or non-chartered non-public elementary or
secondary school; or
         (e)   Any school issued a certificate of registration by the state
Board of Career Colleges and Schools.
      PERSON WITH A MOBILITY IMPAIRMENT. Any person, regardless of age, who is
subject to a physiological impairment regardless of its cause, nature, or
extent that renders the person unable to move about without the aid of
crutches, a wheelchair, or any other form of support, or that limits the
person's functional ability to ambulate, climb, descend, sit, rise, or perform
any related function. The phrase includes a person with a neurological or
psychological disability that limits the person's functional ability to
ambulate, climb, descend, sit, rise, or perform any related function. The
phrase also includes a person with a seizure disorder and a person who is
diagnosed with autism.
      SERVICE DOG. Means a dog that has been trained or is in training to
assist a person with a mobility impairment.
(ORC 955.011(B), 955.43(C))
   (D)   Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 955.99(D))
§ 618.13 BARKING DOGS.
   (A)   No person shall keep, harbor or maintain, within the city, any dog
which, by loud, frequent or habitual barking, yelping or howling, disturbs the
peaceful living of any person or makes such a noise as is likely to cause
inconvenience or annoyance to persons of ordinary sensibilities.
   (B)   It is prima facie unlawful, during any hours of the day, for a person
to keep, harbor or maintain a dog that barks, howls or yelps for more than ten
minutes substantially uninterrupted in an area zoned residential under the
Barberton Zoning Code, or any amendments thereto, or in a commercial area
adjacent to said residential area.
   (C)   None of the provisions of divisions (A) and (B) above shall apply to
owners, operators or employees of duly licensed veterinary hospitals; owners,
operators or employees of duly licensed kennels or animal boarding
establishments; and blind persons when the dog serves as a guide or leader.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for a
first offense and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree for each subsequent
offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 46-1992, passed 4-27-1992)
§ 618.14 BIRDS.
   (A)   No person shall kill or injure any wild bird, or throw, fire or shoot
a bullet, stone, arrow or other missile at a bird; or break, tear down or
destroy any bird nest or the eggs or other contents of the nest; or catch or
capture any wild bird; or set traps or spread nets or snares with intent to
catch or capture the same; or follow or pursue the same with intent to catch or
injure it.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 618.15 HARBORING OF BEES; NOTIFICATION TO ABATE.
   (A)   No person shall keep or harbor bees which cause annoyance to other
persons or damage to the property of others.
   (B)   Upon complaint being made, the Mayor is authorized and directed to
notify the owner or keeper of the bees to abate the nuisance and to remove the
hives or other contrivances, where the bees are kept or harbored, within ten
days after being notified thereof. No person shall fail to comply with such
abatement order.
   (C)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 618.16 HUNTING.
   (A)   No person shall hunt any wild animal, fowl or other game within the
corporate limits of the city. The provisions of this section shall apply
regardless of the weapon, instrument or other device used.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 5-1971, passed 1-4-1971)
§ 618.17 DOG NUISANCE PROHIBITED; ABATEMENT.
   No person being the owner or person in charge of a dog shall permit such dog
while at large or upon a leash in the city to:
   (A)   Defecate upon any public land or any private land other than the land
where the owner or person in charge of such dog resides;
   (B)   The owner or person in charge of any dog which defecates on any such
prohibited land shall immediately clean such and cause its removal to a proper
receptacle;
   (C)   The owner or person in charge of any dog shall keep the property where
he or she resides in a clean and sanitary condition by regularly removing the
defecation of his or her dog to prevent accumulations;
   (D)   The terms of this section shall not apply to any dog which has been
expressly invited to enter upon private property by notification to the owner
or keeper of such dog, or to any dog engaging in the pursuit of hunting;
   (E)   The defecation of any dog is hereby declared to be a nuisance,
creating an unsanitary and unhealthful condition, causing an accumulation of
insects and bacteria, and in violation of the regulations of this section, is
hereby declared to be unlawful and a misdemeanor; and/or
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 241-1977, passed 10-3-1977)
§ 618.18 DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   As used in this section, DANGEROUS ANIMAL means and includes any
mammal, amphibian, reptile or fowl which is of a species which is wild by
nature, and of a species which, due to its size, vicious nature or other
characteristic, is dangerous to human beings. Such animals include, but are not
limited to, lions, tigers, leopards, panthers, bears, wolves, apes, gorillas,
monkeys of a species whose average adult weight is twenty pounds or more,
foxes, elephants, rhinoceroses, alligators, crocodiles and all forms of
venomous, poisonous or constricting reptiles. DANGEROUS ANIMAL does not include
gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, mice or rabbits.
   (B)   No person shall possess, keep or maintain a dangerous animal in the
city.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the keeping of
dangerous animals in the following cases:
       (1)   The keeping of such animals in zoos, bona fide education or
medical institutions, museums or any other place where they are kept as live
specimens for the public view or for the purpose of instruction or study;
      (2)   The keeping of such animals for exhibition to the public by a
circus, carnival or other exhibit or show;
      (3)   The keeping of such animals in a bona fide, licensed veterinary
hospital for treatment; or
      (4)   The keeping and offering for sale of such animals by a bona fide
commercial pet shop establishment.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 107-1981, passed 7-13-1981)
§ 618.19 DANGEROUS DOGS.
   (A)   (1)   As used in this section, DANGEROUS DOG means and includes:
         (a)   Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to
attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human
beings or domestic animals;
         (b)   Any dog which attacks a human being or domestic animal without
provocation; or
         (c)   Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose
of dog fighting or any dog trained for dog fighting.
         (d)   The term DANGEROUS DOG shall include Pit Bull Terriers. The term
“Pit Bull Terrier” is hereby defined as any Staffordshire Bull Terrier breed of
dog, any American Staffordshire breed of dog, or any mixed breed of dog which
contains as an element of its breeding the breed of Staffordshire Terrier as to
be identifiable as partially of the breed of Staffordshire Bull Terrier or
American Staffordshire Terrier.
      (2)   No dog shall be deemed dangerous if it bites, attacks or menaces a
trespasser on the property of its owner or harms or menaces anyone who has
tormented or abused it.
   (B)   No person owning, harboring or having the care or custody of a
dangerous dog shall suffer or permit such dog to go unconfined on the premises
of such person. A dangerous dog is “unconfined” if such dog is not securely
confined indoors or confined in a securely enclosed and locked pen or dog run
area upon the premises of such person. Such pen or dog run area must have
either a secure top or sides that are at least six feet high. If the pen or
structure has no bottom secured to the sides, or if a dog is a type which
burrows, the sides must be imbedded into the ground not less than one foot.
Such pen or structure shall be set back at least four feet from any adjacent
property line. Such structure shall be clearly marked with a sign containing
the words “Dangerous Dog”. Further, a sign shall also be placed on the premises
where the pen or structure is located so as to be clearly legible from the
public street or sidewalk adjacent to the premises, indicating that a dangerous
dog is located on said premises.
   (C)   No person owning, harboring or having the care or custody of a
dangerous dog shall suffer or permit such dog to go beyond the premises of such
person unless such dog is securely muzzled and restrained with a chain having a
minimum tensile strength of 300 pounds and not exceeding three feet in length.
   (D)   No person shall own or harbor any dog for the purpose of dog fighting,
or train, torment, badger, bait or use any dog for the purpose of causing or
encouraging such dog to unprovoked attacks upon human beings or domestic
animals.
   (E)   No person shall possess with intent to sell, or offer for sale, breed,
buy or attempt to buy, within the city, any dangerous dog.
   (F)   Any person owning, harboring or having the care or custody of any
dangerous dog shall maintain a policy of insurance in an amount not less than
$100,000 insuring such person against any claim, loss, damage or injury to
persons, domestic animals or property resulting from the acts of the dangerous
dog. Such person shall file a copy of such insurance policy with the Police
Division.
   (G)   If a law enforcement agent has probable cause to believe that a
dangerous dog is being harbored or cared for in violation of divisions (B), (C)
or (D) above, the law enforcement agent may petition a court of competent
jurisdiction to order the seizure and impoundment of the dangerous dog pending
trial. If a law enforcement agent has probable cause to believe that a
dangerous dog is being harbored or housed in violation of divisions (C) or (D)
above, the law enforcement agent may seize and impound the dangerous dog
pending trial.
   (H)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. For a second offense, whoever violates any of
the provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree
and shall be fined $1,000, which fine shall be mandatory and shall not be
suspended or remitted, and may be imprisoned for not more than six months.
   (I)   Any dangerous dog which attacks a human being or another domestic
animal may be ordered destroyed when, in the court’s judgment, such dangerous
dog represents a continuing threat of serious harm to human beings or domestic
animals.
   (J)   Any person found guilty of violating this section shall pay all
expenses, including shelter, food and veterinary expenses, necessitated by the
seizure of any dog for the protection of the public, and such other expense as
may be required for the destruction of such dog.
   (K)   No Pit Bull Terrier, as it is defined in division (A) above, shall be
kept, stored, harbored, maintained, owned and/or housed within the city limits
unless all of the following conditions are met as approved by the City Safety
Director:
      (1)   Anyone owning, harboring or having the care or custody of a Pit
Bull Terrier shall have registered the dog or dogs with the County of Summit,
State of Ohio, no later than the effective date of Ord. 181-2007 and written
verification of the same is provided to police upon request and kept on file
with the city;
      (2)   The owner has never been convicted anywhere with keeping a
dangerous dog, or some other similar law and the dog has never been declared by
a court to be a dangerous dog;
      (3)   The owner has never been convicted more than twice for dog at large
and/or any other “leash law” type violation;
      (4)   The owner has never been convicted of cruelty to animals and/or any
similar offense;
      (5)   The pit bull or pit bulls have been spayed/neutered as of the
effective date of the ordinance and written verification of the same is
provided to police upon request and kept on file with the city;
      (6)   The dog owner does not currently owe the City of Barberton any
other outstanding fines or penalties;
      (7)   The dog owner has properly insured the dog per the requirements of
the within ordinance and has provided the city with proof of same pursuant to
this current ordinance governing pit bull ownership;
      (8)   The dog has had a scannable microchip implanted so as to permit
verifiable identification and/or tracking by city officials. Such microchip
implant must be obtained at the owner’s cost and verification that same has
been obtained must be kept on file with the city;
      (9)   The dog owner has complied with this section with respect to any
and all of its other provisions including, but not limited to, any requirements
regarding the proper enclosure and restraint of dogs;
   (L)   For purposes of division (K) above, the term OWNER is hereby defined
to include any individual and/or entity who is temporarily in custody and/or
possession of a pit bull.
   (M)   Divisions (K) and (L) above shall take effect on 2-1-2008.
(Ord. 113-1987, passed 4-13-1987; Ord 115-1989, passed 7-10-1989; Ord. 181-
2007, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 618.20 TEASING OR STRIKING POLICE DOG, POLICE HORSE OR HANDICAPPED ASSISTANCE
DOG.
   (A)   No person shall maliciously or willfully tease or strike a police dog,
police horse or handicapped assistance dog.
   (B)   No person shall purposely interfere with or meddle with any police
dog, police horse or handicapped assistance dog.
   (C)   A person violates division (A) above if he or she willfully and
maliciously taunts, torments, teases or strikes any police dog, police horse or
handicapped assistance dog. A person commits a violation of division (B) above
if he or she interferes with or meddles with any police dog, police horse or
handicapped assistance dog in the performance of their functions or duties.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 56-1996, passed 4-8-1996)
§ 618.21 ASSAULTING POLICE DOG OR HORSE OR ASSISTANCE DOG.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
a police dog or horse in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in
the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the physical harm
is caused or attempted; or
      (2)   The police dog or horse is not assisting a law enforcement officer
in the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the physical
harm is caused or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that the dog
or horse is a police dog or horse.
   (B)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment or strike a police dog or horse;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at a police dog or horse;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct a police dog or horse, or interfere with
or obstruct a law enforcement officer who is being assisted by a police dog or
horse, in a manner that does any of the following:
         (a)   Inhibits or restricts the law enforcement officer’s control of
the police dog or horse;
         (b)   Deprives the law enforcement officer of control of the police
dog or horse;
         (c)   Releases the police dog or horse from its area of control;
         (d)   Enters the area of control of the police dog or horse without
the consent of the law enforcement officer, including placing food or any other
object or substance into that area; and/or
         (e)   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the police dog or horse to
assist a law enforcement officer;
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to a police dog or horse.
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger a police dog or horse that at the time of the conduct, the
police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance
of the officer's duties or that the person knows is a police dog or horse.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
an assistance dog in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The dog, at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, is
assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment.
      (2)   The dog, at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, is
not assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment, but the offender has actual knowledge that
the dog is an assistance dog.
   (D)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment or strike an assistance dog;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at an assistance dog;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct an assistance dog, or interfere with or
obstruct a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a person with a
mobility impairment who is being assisted or served by an assistance dog, in a
manner that does any of the following:
         (a)   Inhibits or restricts the assisted or served person’s control of
the dog;
         (b)   Deprives the assisted or served person of control of the dog;
         (c)   Releases the dog from its area of control;
         (d)   Enters the area of control of the dog without the consent of the
assisted or served person, including placing food or any other object or
substance into that area; and/or
         (e)   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the dog to assist the
assisted or served person.
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to an assistance dog; and/or
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger an assistance dog that at the time of the conduct is
assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment or that the person knows is an assistance
dog.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of assaulting a
police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided in this division (E)(1),
assaulting a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse other than death
or serious physical harm, assaulting a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical harm to the
police dog or horse or results in its death, assaulting a police dog or horse
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of harassing a police
dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided this division (E)(2), harassing a
police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the violation
results in physical harm to the police dog or horse but does not result in its
death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing a police dog or horse is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in serous physical
harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death, harassing a police dog
or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (C) above is guilty of assaulting an
assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this division (E)(3),
assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog other than death or
serious physical harm, assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the violation results in serious physical harm to the
assistance dog or results in its death, assaulting an assistance dog is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (D) above is guilty of harassing an
assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this division (E)(4), harassing
an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the violation
results in physical harm to the assistance dog but does not result in the death
or in serious physical harm to it, harassing an assistance dog is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical harm to the
assistance dog or results in its death, harassing an assistance dog is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   In addition to any other sanctions or penalty imposed for the
offense under this section, Ohio R.C. Ch. 2929 or any other provision of the
Ohio Revised Code or this code, whoever violates divisions (A), (B), (C) or (D)
above is responsible for the payment of all of the following:
         (a)   Any veterinary bill or bill for medication incurred as a result
of the violation by the police department regarding a violation of division (A)
or (B) of this section or by the person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired
or the person with a mobility impairment assisted or served by the assistance
dog regarding a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section;
         (b)   The cost of any damaged equipment that results from the
violation;
         (c)   If the violation did not result in the death of the police dog
or horse or the assistance dog that was the subject of the violation and if, as
a result of that dog or horse being the subject of the violation, the dog or
horse needs further training or retraining to be able to continue in the
capacity of a police dog or horse or an assistance dog, the cost of any further
training or retraining of that dog or horse by a law enforcement officer or by
the person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or the person with a
mobility impairment assisted or served by the assistance dog;
         (d)   If the violation resulted in the death of the assistance dog
that was the subject of the violation or resulted in serious physical harm to
the police dog or horse or the assistance dog or horse that was the subject of
the violation to the extent that the dog or horse needs to be replaced on
either a temporary or a permanent basis, the cost of replacing that dog or
horse and of any further training of a new police dog or horse or a new
assistance dog by a law enforcement officer or by the person who is blind,
deaf, or hearing impaired or the person with a mobility impairment assisted or
served by the assistance dog, which replacement or training is required because
of the death of or the serious physical harm to the dog or horse that was the
subject of the violation.
   (F)   This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian whose conduct
is in accordance with Ohio R.C. Ch. 4741.
   (G)   This section only applies to an offender who knows or should know at
the time of the violation that the police dog or horse or assistance dog that
is the subject of a violation under this section is a police dog or horse or
assistance dog.
   (H)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ASSISTANCE DOG. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 955.011.
      BLIND. Had the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 955.011.
      PERSON WITH A MOBILITY IMPAIRMENT. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
955.011.
      PHYSICAL HARM. Any injury, illness or other psychological impairment,
regardless of its gravity or duration.
      POLICE DOG OR HORSE. A dog or horse that has been trained and may be used
to assist law enforcement officers in the performance of their official duties.
      SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM. Any of the following:
         (a)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death;
         (b)   Any physical harm that causes permanent maiming or that involves
some temporary, substantial maiming; or
         (c)   Any physical harm that causes acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering.
(ORC 2921.321)
§ 618.22 ANIMAL FEED NUISANCE PREVENTION.
   (A)   This section prohibits leaving animal feed and/or pet food outside in
open areas or in enclosed areas such as, but not limited to, open garages, car
ports, tool sheds, lean-tos or under open porches for pets, strays and wild
animals. However, food may be left out during daylight hours; provided that,
the feeding area must be removed and cleaned each day.
   (B)   Any matter which attracts animals and is capable of consumption by
either domestic and/or wild animals shall meet the definition of “food”, “pet
food” and/or “animal feed” as it is used in this section. Bird feeders and
squirrel feeders are exempt from this section.
   (C)   Only domestic animals kept in yard pens which enclose an area on all
sides shall be permitted to have food left unattended for more than eight
hours. In such instances, there shall be permitted to be only enough food to
feed the number of animals kept in the pen.
   (D)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave food unattended as
prohibited by this section. Any person who violates any provision of this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. For each violation of this section,
the offending party shall be fined $50. Each day on which a violation of any
provision of this section occurs is a separate and distinct offense and shall
be punishable as such notwithstanding the fact that the same food is at issue.
      (2)   Prior to prosecution for any offense under this section, the
offender shall be given a written warning for the first occasion where a
violation is reported and then observed by an enforcement officer. The written
warning shall be addressed to the owner of the property where the food is
found.
      (3)   A person may be found to have violated this section should that
individual be the registered owner of either the pet being kept at the
particular residence or the owner of the property the pet is found upon.
   (E)   This section is to be enforced by personnel of the Summit County
Health District and/or the Summit County Division of Animal Control and/or the
Barberton Police Department and/or the Barberton Building Department.
(Ord. 226-2012, passed 12-17-2012)
§ 618.23 RESTRICTIONS ON DOG OWNERSHIP FOR CERTAIN CONVICTED FELONS.
   (A)   No person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a felony offense of
violence committed on or after 5-22-2012 or a felony violation of any provision
of Ohio R.C. Ch. 959, Ch. 2923 or Ch. 2925 committed on or after 5-22-2012
shall knowingly own, possess, have custody of or reside in a residence with
either of the following for a period of three years commencing either upon the
date of release of the person from any period of incarceration imposed for the
offense or violation or, if the person is not incarcerated for the offense or
violation, upon the date of the person’s final release from the other sanctions
imposed for the offense or violation:
      (1)   An unspayed or unneutered dog older than 12 weeks of age; or
      (2)   Any dog that has been determined to be a dangerous dog under Ohio
R.C. Ch. 955 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (B)   A person described in division (A) above shall microchip for permanent
identification any dog owned, possessed by or in the custody of the person.
   (C)   (1)   Division (A) above does not apply to any person who is confined
in a correctional institution of the Department of Rehabilitation and
Correction.
      (2)   Division (A) above does not apply to any person with respect to any
dog that the person owned, possessed, had custody of or resided in a residence
with prior to 5-22-2012.
(ORC 955.54)
   (D)   Whoever violates divisions (A) or (B) above is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
(ORC 955.99(O))
§ 618.24 FEEDING OF WATERFOWL PROHIBITED.
   (A)   WATERFOWL is any bird that frequents the water, or lives about rivers,
lakes or other bodies of water; an aquatic fowl, including, but not limited to,
ducks, geese, swans, herons and egrets.
   (B)   Ohio Department of Natural Resources strongly recommends against
feeding waterfowl including, but limited to, Canadian geese due to the
following negative effects of feeding:
      (1)   Lack of balanced diet may cause wing deformity in goslings,
hindering the bird’s flight ability;
      (2)   Feeding causes overcrowding allowing diseases such as botulism and
cholera to spread easily and possibly result in massive waterfowl die-offs;
      (3)   Geese lose their fear of humans and become aggressive; and
      (4)   Feeding reduces the need for geese to migrate so they stay in an
area longer and create more problems.
   (C)   Based upon this recommendation the City Parks and Recreation
Commission will enact the following rules and regulations regarding feeding of
waterfowl on park land.
      (1)   No person shall purposely or knowingly, with intent to provide such
food, feed, bait or in any manner provide access to food to any waterfowl
within the corporate limits of the City of Barberton, on park land. This
section shall not apply to agents of the city feeding animals kept and managed
by the Barberton Parks and Recreation Commission and/or the city.
      (2)   No person shall purposely or knowingly leave or store any refuse,
garbage, food product, pet food, forage product or supplement, salt, seed,
birdseed, fruit or grain in a manner that would constitute an attractant to any
waterfowl on city park property.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the actions of any agent of
the State of Ohio lawfully engaged in a wildlife or waterfowl management
program.
      (4)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the actions of an agent of
the city authorized to implement an alternative control method set forth in any
approved community based goose management plan and possessing a special good
management permit issued by the Ohio Department of Natural Resources.
   (D)   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be liable for
a fine according to the following schedule:
      (1)   Effective 1-1-2016 through 12-31-2016. An informational citation
will be issued to a person violating this section which will site the reason of
the policy and the penalty for violating the policy beginning in 2017.
      (2)   Effective 1-1-2017. The penalty for violation of this section shall
be $75 for the first violation, $150 for the second infraction committed within
one calendar year and $300 for the third infraction committed within one
calendar year.
(Ord. 183-2015, passed 12-14-2015)
§ 618.25 SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH AN ANIMAL.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      ANIMAL. Means a nonhuman mammal, bird, reptile, or amphibian, either dead
or alive.
      OFFENSE. Means a violation of this section or an attempt, in violation of
R.C. § 2923.02, to violate this section.
      OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 959.132.
      SEXUAL CONDUCT. Means either of the following committed for the purpose
of sexual gratification:
         (a)   Any act done between a person and animal that involves contact
of the penis of one and the vulva of the other, the penis of one and the penis
of the other, the penis of one and the anus of the other, the mouth of one and
the penis of the other, the mouth of one and the anus of the other, the vulva
of one and the vulva of the other, the mouth of one and the vulva of the other,
any other contact between a reproductive organ of one and a reproductive organ
of the other, or any other insertion of a reproductive organ of one into an
orifice of the other;
         (b)   Without a bona fide veterinary or animal husbandry purpose to do
so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of a person's body or any
instrument, apparatus, or other object into the vaginal, anal, or reproductive
opening of an animal.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly engage in sexual conduct with an animal or
knowingly possess, sell, or purchase an animal with the intent that it be
subjected to sexual conduct.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly organize, promote, aid, or abet in the
conduct of an act involving any sexual conduct with an animal.
(R.C. § 959.21)
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
second degree. In addition, the court may order the offender to forfeit the
animal or livestock and may provide for its disposition including but not
limited to the sale of the animal or livestock. If an animal or livestock is
forfeited and sold pursuant to this division (D), the proceeds from the sale
first shall be applied to pay the expenses incurred with regard to the care of
the animal from the time it was taken from the custody of the former owner. The
balance of the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be paid to the former
owner of the animal.
(R.C. § 959.99(D))
      (2)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of this section suffers from a mental or
emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may impose as a
community control sanction or as a condition of probation a requirement that
the offender undergo psychological evaluation or counseling. The court shall
order the offender to pay the costs of the evaluation or counseling.
(R.C. § 959.99(E)(7))
CHAPTER 624: DRUGS
Section
624.01   Definitions.
624.02   Trafficking in controlled substances; gift of marihuana.
624.025   Cultivation of marihuana.
624.03   Drug possession offenses.   
624.04   Possession of drug abuse instruments.   
624.05   Permitting drug abuse.
624.06   Deception to obtain a dangerous drug. (Repealed)
624.07   Abusing harmful intoxicants.
624.073   Improperly dispensing or distributing nitrous oxide.
624.076   Possessing nitrous oxide in motor vehicles.
624.08   Illegal dispensing of drug samples.
624.09   Possession, sale and disposal of hypodermics.
624.10   Evidence.
624.11   Double jeopardy
624.12   Controlled substance schedules.
624.13   Controlled substance or prescription labels.
624.14   Use, possession or sale of paraphernalia.
624.15   Pseudoephedrine sales.
624.16   Counterfeit controlled substances.
624.17   Occupying drug premises.
624.18   Loitering for the purpose of engaging in drug related activities.
624.19   Illegal sale of “bath salts”.
624.20   Sale of dextromethorphan.
Cross-reference:
   Alcoholic beverages, see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 612
   D.A.R.E. Program Fund, see ADM.
234.08
   Disorderly conduct while voluntarily intoxicated, see GEN. OFF.
648.04
   Driving or physical control while under the influence, see TRAF.
333.01
   Drug Law Enforcement Fund, see ADM.
238.03
   Intoxicated pedestrians, see TRAF. 371.09
   Notice of contamination from illegal manufacture of methamphetamine, see
GEN. OFF.
660.07
   Placing harmful substance or objects in food or confection, see GEN. OFF.
636.15
   See section histories for similar state law
   Treatment of drug dependent persons in lieu of conviction, see Ohio R.C.
2951.041
   Using weapons while intoxicated, see GEN. OFF.
672.03
§ 624.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words,
terms and phrases and their derivatives used in this chapter which are not
defined in this section shall have the meanings given to them in the Ohio
Revised Code.
   ADMINISTER. The direct application of a drug, whether by injection,
inhalation, ingestion or any other means to a person or an animal.
   ADULTERATE. To cause a drug to be adulterated as described in Ohio R.C.
3715.63.
   ALCOHOL AND DRUG ADDICTION SERVICES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5119.01.
   BENZODIAZEPINE. A controlled substance that has United States Food and Drug
Administration approved labeling indicating that it is a benzodiazepine,
benzodiazepine derivative, triazolobenzodiazepine, or triazolobenzodiazepine
derivative, including the following drugs and their varying salt forms or
chemical congeners: alprazolam, chlordiazepoxide hydrochloride, clobazam,
clonazepam, clorazepate, diazepam, estazolam, flurazepam hydrochloride,
lorazepam, midazolam, oxazepam, quazepam, temazepam and triazolam.
   BULK AMOUNT. Of a controlled substance means any of the following:
      (1)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in
Schedule I, Schedule II or Schedule III, with the exception of any controlled
substance analog, marihuana, cocaine, L.S.D., heroin, any fentanyl-related
compound and hashish and, except as provided in divisions (2), (5) or (6) of
this definition, whichever of the following is applicable:
         (a)   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams or 25 unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a
Schedule I opiate or opium derivative;
         (b)   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams of a compound,
mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of raw or gum
opium;
         (c)   An amount equal to or exceeding 30 grams or ten unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a
Schedule I hallucinogen other than tetrahydrocannabinol or lysergic acid amide,
or a Schedule I stimulant or depressant;
         (d)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the
maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II opiate or opium
derivative;
         (e)   An amount equal to or exceeding five grams or ten unit doses of
a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of
phencyclidine;
         (f)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the
maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II stimulant that is in
a final dosage form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food,
Drug and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal
drug abuse control laws, as defined in this section, that is or contains any
amount of a Schedule II depressant substance or a Schedule II hallucinogenic
substance; and
         (g)   An amount equal to or exceeding three grams of a compound,
mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule
II stimulant, or any of its salts or isomers, that is not in a final dosage
form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic
Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal drug abuse control
laws;
      (2)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III or IV substance other than an anabolic
steroid or a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (3)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (4)   An amount equal to or exceeding 250 milliliters or 250 grams of a
compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a
Schedule V substance;
      (5)   An amount equal to or exceeding 200 solid dosage units, 16 grams,
or 16 milliliters of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III anabolic steroid;
      (6)   For any compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is a
combination of a fentanyl-related compound and any other compound, mixture,
preparation or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV or Schedule V,
if the defendant is charged with a violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.11 and the
sentencing provisions set forth in Ohio R.C. 2925.11(C)(10)(b) and (C)(11) will
not apply regarding the defendant and the violation, the bulk amount of the
controlled substance for purposes of the violation is the amount specified in
divisions (1), (2), (3) (4), or (5) of this definition for the other Schedule
III, Schedule IV or Schedule V controlled substance that is combined with the
fentanyl-related compound.
   CERTIFIED GRIEVANCE COMMITTEE. A duly constituted and organized committee of
the Ohio State Bar Association or of one or more local bar associations of the
state that complies with the criteria set forth in Rule V, § 6, of the Rules
for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   COCAINE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A cocaine salt, isomer or derivative, a salt of a cocaine isomer or
derivative, or the base form of cocaine;
      (2)   Coca leaves or a salt, compound, derivative or preparation of coca
leaves, including ecgonine, a salt, isomer or derivative of ecgonine, or a salt
of an isomer or derivative of ecgonine; and
      (3)   A salt, compound, derivative or preparation of a substance
identified in divisions (1) or (2) of this definition that is chemically
equivalent to or identical with any of those substances; except that, the
substances shall not include decocainized coca leaves or extraction of coca
leaves if the extractions do not contain cocaine or ecgonine.
   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A JUVENILE. An offense is “committed in the
vicinity of a juvenile” if the offender commits the offense within 100 feet of
a juvenile or within the view of a juvenile, regardless of whether the offender
knows the age of the juvenile, whether the offender knows the offense is being
committed within 100 feet of or within view of the juvenile, or whether the
juvenile actually views the commission of the offense.
   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL. An offense is “committed in the
vicinity of a school” if the offender commits the offense on school premises,
in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of any school
premises, regardless of whether the offender knows the offense is being
committed on school premises, in a school building or within 1,000 feet of the
boundaries of any school premises.
   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER OR A
RECOVERING ADDICT. An offense is “committed in the vicinity of a substance
addiction services provider or a recovering addict” if either of the following
apply:
      (1)   The offender commits the offense on the premises of a substance
addiction services provider’s facility, including a facility licensed prior to
June 29, 2019, under R.C. § 5119.391 to provide methadone treatment or an
opioid treatment program licensed on or after that date under R.C. § 5119.37,
or within 500 feet of the premises of a substance addiction services provider’s
facility and the offender knows or should know that the offense is being
committed within the vicinity of the substance addiction services provider’s
facility.
      (2)   The offender sells, offers to sell, delivers, or distributes the
controlled substance or controlled substance analog to a person who is
receiving treatment at the time of the commission of the offense, or received
treatment within 30 days prior to the commission of the offense, from a
substance addiction services provider and the offender knows that the person is
receiving or received that treatment.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. A drug, compound, mixture, preparation or substance
included in Schedule I, II, III, IV or V of Ohio R.C. 3719.41.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE ANALOG.
      (1)   The phrase means, except as provided in division (2) of this
definition, a substance to which both of the following apply:
         (a)   The chemical structure of the substance is substantially similar
to the structure of a controlled substance in Schedule I or II; and
         (b)   One of the following applies regarding the substance:
            1.   The substance has a stimulant, depressant or hallucinogenic
effect on the central nervous system that is substantially similar to or
greater than the stimulant, depressant or hallucinogenic effect on the central
nervous system of a controlled substance in Schedule I or II; or
            2.   With respect to a particular person, that person represents or
intends the substance to have a stimulant, depressant or hallucinogenic effect
on the central nervous system that is substantially similar to or greater than
the stimulant, depressant or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous
system of a controlled substance in Schedule I or II.
      (2)   The phrase does not include any of the following:
         (a)   A controlled substance;
         (b)   Any substance for which there is an approved new drug
application;
         (c)   With respect to a particular person, any substance if an
exemption is in effect for investigational use for that person pursuant to
federal law to the extent that conduct with respect to that substance is
pursuant to that exemption;
         (d)   Any substance to the extent it is not intended for human
consumption before the exemption described in division (2)(c) above of this
definition takes effect with respect to that substance.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. 2925.03 or 2925.11, a
“controlled substance analog”, to the extent intended for human consumption,
shall be treated for purposes of any provision of this Code or the Ohio Revised
Code as a controlled substance in Schedule I.
   COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any drug that bears, or whose container or label bears, a
trademark, trade name or other identifying mark used without authorization of
the owner of rights to the trademark, trade name or identifying mark;
      (2)   Any unmarked or unlabeled substance that is represented to be a
controlled substance manufactured, processed, packed or distributed by a person
other than the person that manufactured, processed, packed or distributed it;
      (3)   Any substance that is represented to be a controlled substance but
is not a controlled substance or is a different controlled substance; or
      (4)   Any substance other than a controlled substance that a reasonable
person would believe to be a controlled substance because of its similarity in
shape, size and color, or its markings, labeling, packaging, distribution or
the price for which it is sold or offered for sale.
   CULTIVATE. Includes planting, watering, fertilizing or tilling.
   DANGEROUS DRUG. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any drug to which either of the following applies:
         (a)   Under the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, is required to
bear a label containing the legend “Caution: Federal law prohibits dispensing
without a prescription” or “Caution: Federal law restricts this drug to use by
or on the order of a licensed veterinarian” or any similar restrictive
statement, or may be dispensed only upon a prescription; or
         (b)   Under R.C. Ch. 3715 or 3719, may be dispensed only upon a
prescription.
      (2)   Any drug that contains a Schedule V controlled substance and that
is exempt from Ohio R.C. Ch. 3719 or to which that chapter does not apply;
      (3)   Any drug intended for administration by injection into the human
body other than through a natural orifice of the human body; or
      (4)   Any drug that is a biological product, as defined in Ohio R.C.
3715.01.
   DECEPTION. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
   DISCIPLINARY COUNSEL. The disciplinary counsel appointed by the Board of
Commissioners on Grievances and Discipline of the Ohio Supreme Court under the
Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   DISPENSE. To sell, leave with, give away, dispose of or deliver.
   DISTRIBUTE. To deal in, ship, transport or deliver, but does not include
administering or dispensing a drug.
   DRUG. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any article recognized in the official United States pharmacopeia,
national formulary or any supplement intended for use in the diagnosis, cure,
mitigation, treatment or prevention of disease in humans or other animals;
      (2)   Any other article intended for use in the diagnosis, cure,
mitigation, treatment or prevention of disease in humans or other animals;
      (3)   Any article, other than food, intended to affect the structure or
any function of the body of humans or other animals; or
      (4)   Any article intended for use as a component of any article
specified in divisions (1), (2) or (3) above; but does not include devices or
their components, parts or accessories.
   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2913.02(A) that constitutes theft of
drugs, or any violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.02, 2925.03, 2925.04, 2925.041,
2925.05, 2925.06, 2925.11, 2925.12, 2925.13, 2925.22, 2925.23, 2925.24,
2925.31, 2925.32, 2925.36 or 2925.37;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former law of any municipality,
state, or of the United States, that is substantially equivalent to any section
listed in division (1) of this definition;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former law of any municipality,
state or of the United States, of which planting, cultivating, harvesting,
processing, making, manufacturing, producing, shipping, transporting,
delivering, acquiring, possessing, storing, distributing, dispensing, selling,
inducing another to use, administering to another, using or otherwise dealing
with a controlled substance is an element; or
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing or attempting to commit, any offense under divisions (1), (2) or (3)
of this definition.
   DRUG OF ABUSE. Any controlled substance, any harmful intoxicant, and any
dangerous drug, as defined in this section.
   EMERGENCY FACILITY. A hospital emergency department or any other facility
that provides emergency care.
   FEDERAL DRUG ABUSE CONTROL LAWS. The Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and
Control Act of 1970, 21 U.S.C. §§ 801 et seq., as amended.
   FELONY DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Any drug abuse offense that would constitute a
felony under the laws of the state, any other state or the United States.
   FENTANYL-RELATED COMPOUND. Any of the following:
      (1)   Fentanyl;
      (2)   Alpha-methylfentanyl (N-[1-(alpha-methyl-beta-phenyl)ethyl-4-
piperidyl] propionanilide; 1-(1- methyl-2-phenylethyl)-4-(N-propanilido)
piperidine);
      (3)   Alpha-methylthiofentanyl (N-[1-methyl-2-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-
piperidinyl]-N-phenylpropanamide);
      (4)   Beta-hydroxyfentanyl (N-[1-(2-hydroxy-2-phenethyl-4-piperidinyl]-N-
phenylpropanamide);
      (5)   Beta-hydroxy-3-methylfentanyl (other name: N-[1-(2-hydroxy-2-
phenethyl)-3-methyl-4- piperidinyl]-N-phenylpropanamide);
      (6)   3-methylfentanyl (N-[3-methyl-1-(2-phenylethyl)-4-piperidyl]-N-
phenylpropanamide);
      (7)   3-methylthiofentanyl (N-[3-methyl-1-[2-(thienyl)ethyl]-4-
piperidinyl]-N- phenylpropanamide);
      (8)   Para-fluorofentanyl (N-(4-fluorophenyl)-N-[1-(2-phenethyl)-4-
piperidinyl]propanamide;
      (9)   Thiofentanyl (N-phenyl-N-[1-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-piperidinyl]-
propanamide;
      (10)   Alfentanil;
      (11)   Carfentanil;
      (12)   Remifentanil;
      (13)   Sufentanil;
      (14)   Acetyl-alpha-methylfentanyl (N-[1-(1-methyl-2-phenethyl)-4-
piperidinyl]-N-phenylacetamide); and
      (15)   A Schedule I narcotic-opiate that meets the fentanyl pharmacophore
requirements specified in Ohio R.C. 3719.41(A)(56), including acetyl fentanyl,
furanylfentanyl, valerylfentanyl, butyrylfentanyl, isobutyrylfentanyl, 4-
methoxybutyrylfentanyl, para-fluorobutyrylfentanyl, acrylfentanyl and ortho-
fluorofentanyl.
   HARMFUL INTOXICANT. Does not include beer or intoxicating liquor, but means
any of the following:
      (1)   Any compound, mixture, preparation or substance the gas, fumes, or
vapor of which when inhaled can induce intoxication, excitement, giddiness,
irrational behavior, depression, stupefaction, paralysis, unconsciousness,
asphyxiation or other harmful physiological effects, and includes but is not
limited to any of the following:
         (a)   Any volatile organic solvent, plastic cement, model cement,
fingernail polish remover, lacquer thinner, cleaning fluid, gasoline or other
preparation containing a volatile organic solvent;
         (b)   Any aerosol propellant;
         (c)   Any fluorocarbon refrigerant; and
         (d)   Any anesthetic gas.
      (2)   Gamma Butyrolactone; and
      (3)   1,4 Butanediol.
   HASHISH.
      (1)   A resin or a preparation of a resin to which both of the following
apply:
         A.   It is contained in or derived from any part of the plant of the
genus cannabis, whether in solid form or in a liquid concentrate, liquid
extract, or liquid distillate form.
         B.   It has a delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol concentration of more than
0.3%.
      (2)   The term does not include a hemp byproduct in the possession of a
licensed hemp processor under R.C. Chapter 928, provided that the hemp
byproduct is being produced, stored, and disposed of in accordance with rules
adopted under R.C. § 928.03.
   HYPODERMIC. A hypodermic syringe or needle, or other instrument or device
for the injection of medication.
   JUVENILE. A person under 18 years of age.
   LABORATORY. A laboratory approved by the State Board of Pharmacy as proper
to be entrusted with the custody of controlled substances and the use of
controlled substances for scientific and clinical purposes and for purposes of
instruction.
   LAWFUL PRESCRIPTION. A prescription that is issued for a legitimate medical
purpose by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs, that
is not altered or forged, and that was not obtained by means of deception or by
the commission of any theft offense.
   LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS or PRESCRIBER. An
individual who is authorized by law to prescribe drugs or dangerous drugs or
drug therapy related devices in the course of the individual’s professional
practice, including only the following:
      (1)   A dentist licensed under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4715;
      (2)   A clinical nurse specialist, certified nurse-midwife or certified
nurse practitioner who holds a current, valid license to practice nursing as an
advanced practice registered nurse issued under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4723;
      (3)   An optometrist licensed under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4725 to practice
optometry under a therapeutic pharmaceutical agents certificate;
      (4)   A physician authorized under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4731 to practice
medicine and surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery or podiatric medicine
and surgery;
      (5)   A physician assistant who holds a license to practice as a
physician assistant issued under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4730, holds a valid prescriber
number issued by the Ohio Medical Board and has been granted physician-
delegated prescriptive authority; and
      (6)   A veterinarian licensed under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4741.
   L.S.D. Lysergic acid diethylamide.
   MAJOR DRUG OFFENDER. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2929.01.
   MANDATORY PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2929.01.
   MANUFACTURE. To plant, cultivate, harvest, process, make, prepare or
otherwise engage in any part of the production of a drug, by propagation,
extraction, chemical synthesis or compounding, or any combination of the same,
and includes packaging, repackaging, labeling and other activities incident to
production.
   MANUFACTURER. A person who manufactures a controlled substance, as
“manufacture” is defined by this section.
   MARIHUANA. All parts of a plant of the genus cannabis, whether growing or
not, the seeds of a plant of that type; the resin extracted from a part of a
plant of that type; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture
or preparation of a plant of that type or of its seeds or resin. MARIHUANA does
not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks,
oils or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture,
salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin
extracted from the mature stalks, fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of
the plant that is incapable of germination. MARIHUANA does not include
“hashish”.
   METHAMPHETAMINE. Methamphetamine, any salt, isomer or salt of an isomer of
methamphetamine, or any compound, mixture, preparation or substance containing
methamphetamine or any salt, isomer or salt of an isomer of methamphetamine.
   MINOR DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSE. Either of the following:
      (1)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.11 as it existed prior to 7-1-1996,
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance; or
      (2)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.11 as it exists on and after 7-1-
1996, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that is a misdemeanor
or a felony of the fifth degree.
   OFFICIAL WRITTEN ORDER. An order written on a form provided for that purpose
by the Director of the United States Drug Enforcement Administration, under any
laws of the United States making provision for the order, if the order forms
are authorized and required by federal law.
   OPIOID ANALGESIC. A controlled substance that has analgesic pharmacologic
activity at the opioid receptors of the central nervous system, including the
following drugs and their varying salt forms or chemical congeners:
buprenorphine, butorphanol, codeine (including acetaminophen and other
combination products), dihydrocodeine, fentanyl, hydrocodone (including
acetaminophen combination products), hydromorphone, meperidine, methadone,
morphine sulfate, oxycodone (including acetaminophen, aspirin and other
combination products), oxymorphone, tapentadol and tramadol.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, government, governmental subdivision or
agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association or other legal
entity.
   PERSON WITH A DRUG DEPENDENCY. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
3719.011.
   PHARMACIST. A person licensed under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4729 to engage in the
practice of pharmacy.
   PHARMACY. Except when used in a context that refers to the practice of
pharmacy, means any area, room, rooms, place of business, department or portion
of any of the foregoing, where the practice of pharmacy is conducted.
   POSSESS or POSSESSION. Having control over a thing or substance, but may not
be inferred solely from mere access to the thing or substance through ownership
or occupation of the premises upon which the thing or substance is found.
   PREMISES OF A SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER'S FACILITY. Means the
parcel of real property on which any substance addiction service provider’s
facility is situated.
   PRESCRIPTION. All of the following:
      (1)   A written, electronic or oral order for drugs or combination or
mixtures of drugs to be used by a particular individual or for treating a
particular animal, issued by a licensed health professional authorized to
prescribe drugs;
      (2)   For purposes of Ohio R.C. 2925.61, 4723.488, 4729.44, 4730.431 and
4731.94, a written, electronic or oral order for naloxone issued to and in the
name of a family member, friend or other individual in a position to assist an
individual who there is reason to believe is at risk of experiencing an opioid-
related overdose;
      (3)   For purposes of Ohio R.C. 4723.4810, 4729.282, 4730.432 and
4731.93, a written, electronic or oral order for a drug to treat chlamydia,
gonorrhea or trichomoniasis issued to and in the name of a patient who is not
the intended user of the drug, but is the sexual partner of the intended user;
      (4)   For purposes of Ohio R.C. 3313.7110, 3313.7111, 3314.143, 3326.28,
3328.29, 4723.483, 4729.88, 4730.433, 4731.96 and 5101.76, a written,
electronic or oral order for an epinephrine autoinjector issued to and in the
name of a school, school district or camp; and
      (5)   For purposes of Ohio R.C. Ch. 3728 and Ohio R.C. 4723.483, 4729.88,
4730.433 and 4731.96, a written, electronic or oral order for an epinephrine
autoinjector issued to and in the name of a qualified entity, as defined in
Ohio R.C. 3728.01.
   PRESUMPTION FOR A PRISON TERM or PRESUMPTION THAT A PRISON TERM SHALL BE
IMPOSED. A presumption as described in Ohio R.C. 2929.13(D) that a prison term
is a necessary sanction for a felony in order to comply with the purposes and
principles of sentencing under Ohio R.C. 2929.11.
   PROFESSIONAL LICENSE. Any license, permit, certificate, registration,
qualification, admission, temporary license, temporary permit, temporary
certificate or temporary registration that is described in Ohio R.C. 2925.01(W)
(1) to (36) and that qualifies a person as a professionally licensed person.
   PROFESSIONALLY LICENSED PERSON. Any of the following:
      (1)   A person who has obtained a license as a manufacturer of controlled
substances or a wholesaler of controlled substances under Ohio R.C. Ch. 3719;
      (2)   A person who has received a certificate or temporary certificate as
a certified public accountant or who has registered as a public accountant
under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4701 and who holds an Ohio permit issued under that
chapter;
      (3)   A person who holds a certificate of qualification to practice
architecture issued or renewed and registered under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4703;
      (4)   A person who is registered as a landscape architect under Ohio R.C.
Ch. 4703 or who holds a permit as a landscape architect issued under that
chapter;
      (5)   A person licensed under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4707;
      (6)   A person who has been issued a certificate of registration as a
registered barber under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4709;
      (7)   A person licensed and regulated to engage in the business of a debt
pooling company by a legislative authority, under authority of Ohio R.C. Ch.
4710;
      (8)   A person who has been issued a cosmetologist’s license, hair
designer’s license, manicurist’s license, esthetician’s license, natural hair
stylist’s license, advanced cosmetologist’s license, advanced hair designer’s
license, advanced manicurist’s license, advanced esthetician’s license,
advanced natural hair stylist’s license, cosmetology instructor’s license, hair
design instructor’s license, manicurist instructor’s license, esthetics
instructor’s license, natural hair style instructor’s license, independent
contractor’
      (9)   A person who has been issued a license to practice dentistry, a
general anesthesia permit, a conscious intravenous sedation permit, a limited
resident’s license, a limited teaching license, a dental hygienist’s license,
or a dental hygienist’s teacher’s certificate under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4715;
      (10)   A person who has been issued an embalmer’s license, a funeral
director’s license, a funeral home license or a crematory license, or who has
been registered for an embalmer’s or funeral director’s apprenticeship under
Ohio R.C. Ch. 4717;
      (11)   A person who has been licensed as a registered nurse or practical
nurse, or who has been issued a certificate for the practice of nurse-midwifery
under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4723;
      (12)   A person who has been licensed to practice optometry or to engage
in optical dispensing under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4725;
      (13)   A person licensed to act as a pawnbroker under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4727;
      (14)   A person licensed to act as a precious metals dealer under Ohio
R.C. Ch. 4728;
      (15)   A person licensed as a pharmacist, a pharmacy intern, a wholesale
distributor of dangerous drugs, or a terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4729;
      (16)   A person who is authorized to practice as a physician assistant
under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4730;
      (17)   A person who has been issued a license to practice medicine and
surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, or podiatric medicine and surgery
under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4731 or has been issued a certificate to practice a limited
branch of medicine under that chapter;
      (18)   A person licensed as a psychologist, independent school
psychologist, or school psychologist under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4732;
      (19)   A person registered to practice the profession of engineering or
surveying under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4733;
      (20)   A person who has been issued a license to practice chiropractic
under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4734;
      (21)   A person licensed to act as a real estate broker or real estate
salesperson under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4735;
      (22)   A person registered as a registered environmental health
specialist under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3776;
      (23)   A person licensed to operate or maintain a junkyard under Ohio
R.C. Ch. 4737;
      (24)   A person who has been issued a motor vehicle salvage dealer’s
license under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4738;
      (25)   A person who has been licensed to act as a steam engineer under
Ohio R.C. Ch. 4739;
      (26)   A person who has been issued a license or temporary permit to
practice veterinary medicine or any of its branches, or who is registered as a
graduate animal technician under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4741;
      (27)   A person who has been issued a hearing aid dealer’s or fitter’s
license or trainee permit under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4747;
      (28)   A person who has been issued a class A, class B or class C license
or who has been registered as an investigator or security guard employee under
Ohio R.C. Ch. 4749;
      (29)   A person licensed and registered to practice as a nursing home
administrator under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4751;
      (30)   A person licensed to practice as a speech-language pathologist or
audiologist under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4753;
      (31)   A person issued a license as an occupational therapist or physical
therapist under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4755;
      (32)   A person who is licensed as a licensed professional clinical
counselor, licensed professional counselor, social worker, independent social
worker, independent marriage and family therapist or marriage and family
therapist, or registered as a social work assistant under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4757;
      (33)   A person issued a license to practice dietetics under Ohio R.C.
Ch. 4759;
      (34)   A person who has been issued a license or limited permit to
practice respiratory therapy under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4761;
      (35)   A person who has been issued a real estate appraiser certificate
under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4763;
      (36)   A person who has been issued a home inspector license under Ohio
R.C. Ch. 4764; and
      (37)   A person who has been admitted to the bar by order of the Ohio
Supreme Court in compliance with its prescribed and published rules.
   PUBLIC PREMISES. Any hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall or other
place of public accommodation, business, amusement or resort.
   SALE. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3719.01.
   SAMPLE DRUG. A drug or pharmaceutical preparation that would be hazardous to
health or safety if used without the supervision of a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs, or a drug of abuse, and that, at
one time, had been placed in a container plainly marked as a sample by a
manufacturer.
   SCHEDULE I, II, III, IV OR V. Have the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3719.01.
   SCHOOL. Any school operated by a board of education, any community school
established under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3314, or any nonpublic school for which the
Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum standards under Ohio
R.C. 3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities or
training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a criminal
offense is committed.
   SCHOOL BUILDING. Any building in which any of the instruction,
extracurricular activities or training provided by a school is conducted,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities or training provided
by the school is being conducted in the school building at the time a criminal
offense is committed.
   SCHOOL PREMISES. Either of the following:
      (1)   The parcel of real property on which any school is situated,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities or training provided
by the school is being conducted on the premises at the time a criminal offense
is committed; or
      (2)   Any other parcel of real property that is owned or leased by a
board of education of a school, the governing authority of a community school
established under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3314, or the governing body of a nonpublic
school for which the Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum
standards under Ohio R.C. 3301.07 and on which some of the instruction,
extracurricular activities or training of the school is conducted, whether or
not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by the
school is being conducted on the parcel of real property at the time a criminal
offense is committed.
   STANDARD PHARMACEUTICAL REFERENCE MANUAL. The current edition, with
cumulative changes if any, of references that are approved by the State Board
of Pharmacy.
   SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Means an agency, association,
corporation or other legal entity, individual, or program that provides one or
more of the following at a facility:
      (1)   Either alcohol addiction services, or drug addiction services, or
both such services that are certified by the Ohio Director of Mental Health and
Addiction Services under R.C. § 5119.36;
      (2)   Recovery supports that are related to either alcohol addiction
services, or drug addiction services, or both such services and paid for with
federal, state, or local funds administered by the Ohio Department of Mental
Health and Addiction Services or a board of alcohol, drug addiction, and mental
health services.
   THEFT OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
   UNIT DOSE. An amount or unit or a compound, mixture or preparation
containing a controlled substance that is separately identifiable and in a form
that indicates that it is the amount or unit by which the controlled substance
is separately administered to or taken by an individual.
   WHOLESALER. A person who, on official written orders other than
prescriptions, supplies controlled substances that the person has not
manufactured, produced or prepared personally and includes “wholesale
distributor of dangerous drugs”, which means a person engaged in the sale of
dangerous drugs at wholesale and includes any agent or employee of that person
authorized by that person to engage in the sale of dangerous drugs at
wholesale.
(ORC 2925.01, 3719.01, 3719.011, 3719.013, 4729.01)
§ 624.02 TRAFFICKING IN CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES; GIFT OF MARIHUANA.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Sell or offer to sell a controlled substance or a controlled
substance analog; or
      (2)   Prepare for shipment, ship, transport, deliver, prepare for
distribution or distribute a controlled substance or a controlled substance
analog, when the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
controlled substance or a controlled substance analog, is intended for sale or
resale by the offender or another person.
   (B)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to
prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies and other persons whose
conduct is in accordance with Ohio R.C. Ch. 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731
and 4741;
      (2)   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person who is
conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of an
anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States Food and
Drug Administration; or
      (3)   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes, dispenses or
administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic steroid that is
expressly intended for administration through implants to livestock or other
non-human species and approved for that purpose under the Federal Food, Drug
and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended), and is sold, offered
for sale, prescribed, dispensed or administered for that purpose in accordance
with that Act.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of the following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2) below, trafficking
in controlled substances is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law;
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the offense
involves a gift of 20 grams or less of marihuana, trafficking in marihuana is a
minor misdemeanor upon a first offense and a misdemeanor of the third degree
upon a subsequent offense. If the offense involves a gift of 20 grams or less
of marihuana and if the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or in
the vicinity of a juvenile, trafficking in marihuana is a misdemeanor of the
third degree; and
      (3)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is a combination of a fentanyl-related compound
and marihuana, one of the following applies:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3)(b) below, the
offender is guilty of trafficking in marihuana and shall be punished under
division (C)(2) below. The offender is not guilty of trafficking in a fentanyl-
related compound and shall not be charged with, convicted of or punished under
Ohio R.C. 2925.03(C)(9) for trafficking in a fentanyl-related compound; and
         (b)   If the offender knows or has reason to know that the compound,
mixture, preparation or substance that is the drug involved contains a
fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of trafficking in a fentanyl-
related compound and shall be punished under Ohio R.C. 2925.03(C)(9).
(ORC 2925.03(A) - (C))
Statutory reference:
   Felony drug trafficking offenses, see R.C. § 2925.03(C)
§ 624.025 CULTIVATION OF MARIHUANA.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly cultivate marihuana.
   (B)   This section does not apply to any person listed in Ohio R.C. 2925.03
(B)(1), (2) or (3), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, to the
extent and under the circumstances described in that division.
   (C)   Whoever commits a violation of division (A) above is guilty of illegal
cultivation of marihuana.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in the following divisions, illegal
cultivation of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor or, if the offense was
committed in the vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 100 grams,
but is less than 200 grams, illegal cultivation of marihuana is a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree or, if the offense was committed in the vicinity of a
school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 200 grams,
illegal cultivation of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (D)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s
appearance as a witness.
(ORC 2925.04(A), (B), (C)(5), (G))
§ 624.03 DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly obtain, possess or use a controlled
substance or a controlled substance analog.
   (B)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to
prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies and other persons whose
conduct is in accordance with Ohio R.C. Ch. 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731
and 4741;
         (b)   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person who is
conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of an
anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States Food and
Drug Administration;
         (c)   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes, dispenses or
administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic steroid that is
expressly intended for administration through implants to livestock or other
nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the Federal Food, Drug and
Cosmetic Act, and is sold, offered for sale, prescribed, dispensed or
administered for that purpose in accordance with that Act; and
         (d)   Any person who obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
      (2)   (a)   As used in division (B)(2) of this section:
            COMMUNITY ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 5119.01.
            COMMUNITY CONTROL SANCTION. Has the same meanings as in Ohio R.C.
2929.01
            HEALTH CARE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2919.16.
            MINOR DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSE. A violation of this section or Ohio
R.C. 2925.11 that is a misdemeanor or a felony of the fifth degree.
            PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2935.01.
            POST-RELEASE CONTROL SANCTION. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2967.28.
            PUBLIC AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2930.01.
            QUALIFIED INDIVIDUAL. A person who is acting in good faith who
seeks or obtains medical assistance for another person who is experiencing a
drug overdose, a person who experiences a drug overdose and who seeks medical
assistance for that overdose, or a person who is the subject of another person
seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that overdose as described in
division (B)(2)(b) of this section.
            SEEK OR OBTAIN MEDICAL ASSISTANCE. Includes, but is not limited to,
making a 9-1-1 call, contacting in person or by telephone call an on-duty peace
officer or transporting or presenting a person to a health care facility.
         (b)   Subject to division (B)(2)(e) of this section, a qualified
individual shall not be arrested, charged, prosecuted, convicted, or penalized
pursuant to this chapter for a minor drug possession offense or a violation of
Ohio R.C. 2925.12, Ohio R.C. 2925.14(C)(1), or Ohio R.C. 2925.141 if all of the
following apply:
            1.   The evidence of the obtaining, possession, or use of the
controlled substance or controlled substance analog, drug abuse instruments, or
drug paraphernalia that would be the basis of the offense was obtained as a
result of the qualified individual seeking the medical assistance or
experiencing an overdose and needing medical assistance.
            2.   Subject to division (B)(2)(f) of this section, within 30 days
after seeking or obtaining the medical assistance, the qualified individual
seeks and obtains a screening and receives a referral for treatment from a
community addiction services provider or a properly credentialed addiction
treatment professional.
            3.   Subject to division (B)(2)(f) of this section, the qualified
individual who obtains a screening and receives a referral for treatment under
division (B)(2)(b)2. of this section, upon the request of any prosecuting
attorney, submits documentation to the prosecuting attorney that verifies that
the qualified individual satisfied the requirements of that division. The
documentation shall be limited to the date and time of the screening obtained
and referral received.
         (c)   If a person who is serving a community control sanction or is
under a sanction on post-release control acts pursuant to division (B)(2)(b) of
this section, then Ohio R.C. 2929.141(B), Ohio R.C. 2929.15(B)(2), Ohio R.C.
2929.25(D)(3), or Ohio R.C. 2967.28(F)(3) applies to the person with respect to
any violation of the sanction or post-release control sanction based on a minor
drug possession offense, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2925.11, or a violation of
Ohio R.C. 2925.12, Ohio R.C. 2925.14(C)(1), or Ohio R.C. 2925.141.
         (d)   Nothing in division (b)(2)B. of this section shall be construed
to do any of the following:
            1.   Limit the admissibility of any evidence in connection with the
investigation or prosecution of a crime with regards to a defendant who does
not qualify for the protections of division (B)(2)(b) of this section or with
regards to any crime other than a minor drug possession offense or a violation
of Ohio R.C. 2925.12, Ohio R.C. 2925.14(C)(1), or Ohio R.C. 2925.141 committed
by a person who qualifies for protection pursuant to division (B)(2)(b) of this
section;
            2.   Limit any seizure of evidence or contraband otherwise
permitted by law;
            3.   Limit or abridge the authority of a peace officer to detain or
take into custody a person in the course of an investigation or to effectuate
an arrest for any offense except as provided in that division;
            4.   Limit, modify, or remove any immunity from liability available
pursuant to law in effect prior to September 13, 2016 to any public agency or
to an employee of any public agency.
         (e)   Division (B)(2)(b) of this section does not apply to any person
who twice previously has been granted an immunity under division (B)(2)(b) of
this section. No person shall be granted an immunity under division (B)(2)(b)
of this section more than two times.
         (f)   Nothing in this section shall compel any qualified individual to
disclose protected health information in a way that conflicts with the
requirements of the "Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of
1996", 104 Pub. L. No. 191, 110 Stat. 2021, 42 U.S.C. §§ 1320d et seq., as
amended, and regulations promulgated by the United States Department of Health
and Human Services to implement the act or the requirements of 42 C.F.R. Part
2.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of one of the following:
      (1)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II, with the
exception of marihuana or hashish, whoever violates division (A) above is
guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV or Schedule V,
whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of possession of drugs. The
penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2)(b) above,
possession of drugs is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law; and
         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds the bulk
amount, possession of drugs is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(ORC 2925.11(A) - (C)(2))
      (3)   If the drug involved in the violation is marihuana or a compound,
mixture, preparation or substance containing marihuana other than hashish,
whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of possession of marihuana. The
penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   If the amount of the drug involved does not exceed 200 grams,
possession of marihuana is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; and
         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 200 grams,
possession of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (4)   If the drug involved in the violation is hashish or a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance containing hashish, whoever violates
division (A) above is guilty of possession of hashish. The penalty for the
offense shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (C)(4)(b) or (C)(4)(c)
below, possession of hashish is a minor misdemeanor;
         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds five grams,
but is less than ten grams, of hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds one
gram, but is less than two grams of hashish in a liquid concentrate, liquid
extract or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree; and
         (c)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds ten grams
of hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds two grams of hashish in a
liquid concentrate, liquid extract or liquid distillate form, possession of
hashish is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation or substance that is a combination of a fentanyl-related compound
and marihuana, one of the following applies:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(5)(b) below, the
offender is guilty of possession of marihuana and shall be punished as provided
in division (C)(3) above. Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(5)(b)
below, the offender is not guilty of possession of a fentanyl-related compound
under Ohio R.C. 2925.11(C)(11) and shall not be charged with, convicted of or
punished under Ohio R.C. 2925.11(C)(11) for possession of a fentanyl-related
compound; and
         (b)   If the offender knows or has reason to know that the compound,
mixture, preparation or substance that is the drug involved contains a
fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of possession of a fentanyl-
related compound and shall be punished under Ohio R.C. 2925.11(C)(11).
      (6)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation or substance that is a combination of a fentanyl-related compound
and any Schedule III, Schedule IV or Schedule V controlled substance that is
not a fentanyl-related compound, one of the following applies:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(6)(b) below, the
offender is guilty of possession of drugs and shall be punished as provided in
division (C)(2) above. Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(6)(b)
below, the offender is not guilty of possession of a fentanyl-related compound
under Ohio R.C. 2925.11(C)(11) and shall not be charged with, convicted of or
punished under Ohio R.C. 2925.11(C)(11) for possession of a fentanyl-related
compound; and
         (b)   If the offender knows or has reason to know that the compound,
mixture, preparation or substance that is the drug involved contains a
fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of possession of a fentanyl-
related compound and shall be punished under Ohio R.C. 2925.11(C)(11).
   (D)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s
appearance as a witness.
   (E)   (1)   In addition to any prison term or jail term authorized or
required by division (C) above and Ohio R.C. 2929.13, 2929.14, 2929.22, 2929.24
and 2929.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and in
addition to any other sanction that is imposed for the offense under this
section or Ohio R.C. 2929.11 through 2929.18, or Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court that sentences
an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (A)
above may suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit for not more than five years. However, if the offender pleaded guilty to
or was convicted of a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or a substantially similar
municipal ordinance or the law of another state or the United States arising
out of the same set of circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit for not more
than five years.
      (2)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to
any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with Ohio R.C. 2925.38.
   (F)   (1)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to 9-13-2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court requesting the
termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded guilty to or
was convicted of a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or a substantially similar
municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States that arose out
of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the offender’s
license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file such a
motion.
      (2)   Upon the filing of a motion under this division (F), the sentencing
court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(ORC 2925.11(C)(7) - (E), (I))
(Ord. 138-2001, passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 218-2009, passed 12-14-2009)
Statutory reference:
   Felony drug possession offenses, see Ohio R.C. 2925.11(C)
§ 624.04 POSSESSION OF DRUG ABUSE INSTRUMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make, obtain, possess or use any instrument,
article or thing the customary and primary purpose of which is for the
administration or use of a dangerous drug, other than marihuana, when the
instrument involved is a hypodermic or syringe, whether or not of crude or
extemporized manufacture or assembly, and the instrument, article or thing
involved has been used by the offender to unlawfully administer or use a
dangerous drug, other than marihuana or to prepare a dangerous drug, other than
marihuana, for unlawful administration or use.
   (B)   (1)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies
and other persons whose conduct was in accordance with Ohio R.C. Ch. 3719,
4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731 and 4741.
      (2)   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of this section when a person seeks or obtains medical assistance for
another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a person experiences a drug
overdose and seeks medical assistance for that overdose, or a person is the
subject of another person seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that
overdose.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing drug abuse
instruments, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a drug abuse offense, violation of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (D)   (1)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a
violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five years
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit. However, if
the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of Ohio R.C.
4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or the law of another
state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the
violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. If the offender is a
professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a
violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with Ohio R.C.
2925.38.
      (2)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to 9-13-2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court requesting the
termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded guilty to or
was convicted of a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or a substantially similar
municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States that arose out
of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the offender’s
license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file such a
motion.
         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under this division (D)(2), the
sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(ORC 2925.12)
§ 624.05 PERMITTING DRUG ABUSE.
   (A)   No person who is the owner, operator or person in charge of a
locomotive, watercraft, aircraft or other vehicle, as defined in Ohio R.C.
4501.01, shall knowingly permit the vehicle to be used for the commission of a
felony drug abuse offense.
   (B)   No person, who is the owner, lessee or occupant, or who has custody,
control or supervision of premises, or real estate, including vacant land,
shall knowingly permit his or her premises, or real estate, including vacant
land, to be used for the commission of a felony drug abuse offense by another
person.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting drug abuse.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) below, permitting drug abuse
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Permitting drug abuse is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the felony drug abuse offense in question is a
violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.02, 2925.03 or 2925.04, or if the felony drug abuse
offense in question is a violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.041 and the offender had
actual knowledge, at the time the offender permitted the vehicle, premises or
real estate to be used as described in divisions (A) or (B) above, that the
person who assembled or possessed the chemicals in question in violation of
Ohio R.C. 2925.041 had assembled or possessed them with the intent to
manufacture a controlled substance in Schedule I or Schedule II in violation of
Ohio R.C. 2925.04.
   (D)   Any premises or real estate that is permitted to be used in violation
of division (B) above constitutes a nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to
Ohio R.C. Ch. 3767.
(ORC 2925.13(A) - (C), (F))
§ 624.06 DECEPTION TO OBTAIN A DANGEROUS DRUG. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 624.06 was repealed as part of the 1992 updating and revision of
this code of ordinances because a violation of substantially equivalent state
law (Ohio R.C. 2925.22) was made a felony by the Ohio General Assembly by Am.
Sub. H.B. No. 615, effective 3-27-1991.
§ 624.07 ABUSING HARMFUL INTOXICANTS.
   (A)   Except for lawful research, clinical, medical, dental or veterinary
purposes, no person, with purpose to induce intoxication or similar
physiological effects, shall obtain, possess or use a harmful intoxicant.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of abusing harmful
intoxicants, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a drug abuse offense, abusing harmful intoxicants is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
   (C)   (1)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a
violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five years
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit. However, if
the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of Ohio R.C.
4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or the law of another
state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the
violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. If the offender is a
professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a
violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with Ohio R.C.
2925.38.
      (2)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to the 9-13-2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court requesting
the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded guilty to
or was convicted of a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or a substantially similar
municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States that arose out
of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the offender’s
license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file such a
motion.
         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under this division (C)(2), the
sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(ORC 2925.31)
§ 624.073 IMPROPERLY DISPENSING OR DISTRIBUTING NITROUS OXIDE.
   (A)   No person who dispenses or distributes nitrous oxide in cartridges
shall fail to comply with either of the following:
      (1)   The record-keeping requirements established under division (C)
below; or
      (2)   The labeling and transaction identification requirements
established under division (D) below.
   (B)   Whoever violates divisions (A)(1) or (A)(2) above is guilty of
improperly dispensing or distributing nitrous oxide, a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (C)   Beginning 7-1-2001, a person who dispenses or distributes nitrous
oxide shall record each transaction involving the dispensing or distribution of
the nitrous oxide on a separate card. The person shall require the purchaser to
sign the card and provide a complete residence address. The person dispensing
or distributing the nitrous oxide shall sign and date the card. The person
shall retain the card recording a transaction for one year from the date of the
transaction. The person shall maintain the cards at the person’s business
address and make them available during normal business hours for inspection and
copying by officers or employees of the State Board of Pharmacy or of other law
enforcement agencies that are authorized to investigate violations of this
code, Ohio R.C. Ch. 2925, 3719 or 4729 or federal drug abuse control laws. The
cards used to record each transaction shall inform the purchaser of the
following:
      (1)   That nitrous oxide cartridges are to be used only for purposes of
preparing food;
      (2)   That inhalation of nitrous oxide can have dangerous health effects;
and
      (3)   That it is a violation of state law to distribute or dispense
cartridges of nitrous oxide to any person under age 21, punishable as a felony
of the fifth degree.
   (D)   (1)   Each cartridge of nitrous oxide dispensed or distributed in the
municipality shall bear the following printed warning: “Nitrous oxide
cartridges are to be used only for purposes of preparing food. Nitrous oxide
cartridges may not be sold to persons under age 21. Do not inhale contents.
Misuse can be dangerous to your health.”
      (2)   Each time a person dispenses or distributes one or more cartridges
of nitrous oxide, the person shall mark the packaging containing the cartridges
with a label or other device that identifies the person who dispensed or
distributed the nitrous oxide and the person’s business address.
(ORC 2925.32(B)(4), (D)(2), (F), (G))
Statutory reference:
   Trafficking in harmful intoxicants, felony offenses, see Ohio R.C. 2925.32
§ 624.076 POSSESSING NITROUS OXIDE IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   As used in this section, “motor vehicle”, “street” and “highway” have
the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
   (B)   Unless authorized by this code of ordinances or by state law, no
person shall possess an open cartridge of nitrous oxide in either of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   While operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on a
street, highway or other public or private property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking; or
      (2)   While being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on a street,
highway or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular traffic or parking.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing nitrous oxide in
a motor vehicle, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (D)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for
possessing nitrous oxide in a motor vehicle, the court may suspend for not more
than five years the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit.
(ORC 2925.33)
§ 624.08 ILLEGAL DISPENSING OF DRUG SAMPLES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly furnish a sample drug to another person.
   (B)   Division (A) above does not apply to manufacturers, wholesalers,
pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, licensed health professionals authorized to
prescribe drugs, and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with R.C. Ch.
3719, 4715, 4723, 4725, 4729, 4730, 4731 and 4741.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal dispensing of
drug samples.
      (2)   If the drug involved in the offense is a compound, mixture,
preparation or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II, with the
exception of marihuana, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the offense is a dangerous drug or a
compound, mixture, preparation or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule
IV or Schedule V, or is marihuana, the penalty for the offense shall be
determined as follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in the following division (C)(3)
(b), illegal dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
         (b)   If the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or in
the vicinity of a juvenile, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
(ORC 2925.36(A) - (C))
Statutory reference:
   Felony offenses, see R.C. § 2925.36(C)(2)
§ 624.09 POSSESSION, SALE AND DISPOSAL OF HYPODERMICS.
   (A)   Possession of a hypodermic is authorized for the following:
      (1)   A manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in hypodermics, or
medication packaged in hypodermics, and any authorized agent of employee of
that manufacturer, distributor or dealer, in the regular course of business;
      (2)   A terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, in the regular course of
business;
      (3)   A person authorized to administer injections, in the regular course
of the person’s profession or employment;
      (4)   A person, when the hypodermic in his or her possession was lawfully
obtained and is kept and used for the purpose of self-administration of insulin
or other drug prescribed for the treatment of disease by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs;
      (5)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for legal research, clinical,
educational or medicinal purposes;
      (6)   A farmer, for the lawful administration of a drug to an animal; and
      (7)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for lawful professional,
mechanical, trade or craft purposes.
   (B)   No manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in, hypodermics or
medication packaged in hypodermics, or their authorized agents or employees,
and no terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, shall display any hypodermic
for sale. No person authorized to possess a hypodermic pursuant to division (A)
above shall negligently fail to take reasonable precautions to prevent any
hypodermic in the person’s possession from theft or acquisition by any
unauthorized person.
(ORC 3719.172(A), (B))
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
division (B) above, Ohio R.C. 3719.05, 3719.06, 3719.13, 3719.172(B) or
3719.31, or a drug abuse offense, a violation of division (B) above is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 3719.99(E))
Statutory reference:
   Felony offenses, see Ohio R.C. 3719.172(C), (D)
§ 624.10 EVIDENCE.
   (A)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of this chapter or
Ohio R.C. Ch. 2925 or 3719, a laboratory report from the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation or a laboratory operated by another law
enforcement agency, or a laboratory established by or under the authority of an
institution of higher education that has its main campus in the state and that
is accredited by the Association of American Universities or the North Central
Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, primarily for the purpose of
providing scientific service to law enforcement agencies, and signed by the
person performing the analysis, stating that the substance that is the basis of
the alleged offense has been weighed and analyzed and stating the findings as
to the content, weight and identity of the substance and that it contains any
amount of a controlled substance and the number and description of unit
dosages, is prima facie evidence of the content, identity and weight or the
existence and number of unit dosages of the substance. In any criminal
prosecution for a violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.041 or a violation of this
chapter, Ohio R.C. Ch. 2925 or Ohio R.C. Ch. 3719 that is based on the
possession of chemicals sufficient to produce a compound, mixture, preparation
or substance included in Schedule I, II, III, IV or V, a laboratory report from
the Bureau or from any laboratory that is operated or established as described
in this division (A)(1) that is signed by the person performing the analysis,
stating that the substances that are the basis of the alleged offense have been
weighed and analyzed and stating the findings as to the content, weight and
identity of each of the substances, is prima facie evidence of the content,
identity and weight of the substances.
      (2)   Attached to that report shall be a copy of a notarized statement by
the signer of the report giving the name of the signer and stating that the
signer is an employee of the laboratory issuing the report and that performing
the analysis is a part of the signer’s regular duties, and giving an outline of
the signer’s education, training and experience for performing an analysis of
materials included under this section. The signer shall attest that
scientifically accepted tests were performed with due caution, and that the
evidence was handled in accordance with established and accepted procedures
while in the custody of the laboratory.
   (B)   The prosecuting attorney shall serve a copy of the report on the
attorney of record for the accused, or on the accused if the accused has no
attorney, prior to any proceeding in which the report is to be used against the
accused other than at a preliminary hearing or grand jury proceeding where the
report may be used without having been previously served upon the accused.
   (C)   The report shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity
and weight or the existence and number of unit dosages of the substance if the
accused or the accused’s attorney demands the testimony of the person signing
the report, by serving the demand upon the prosecuting attorney, within seven
days from the accused or the accused’s attorney’s receipt of the report. The
time may be extended by a trial judge in the interests of justice.
   (D)   Any report issued for use under this section shall contain notice of
the right of the accused to demand, and the manner in which the accused shall
demand, the testimony of the person signing the report.
   (E)   Any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or Ohio R.C.
Ch. 2925 or 3719 is entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting
attorney, to have a portion of the substance that is, or of each of the
substances that are, the basis of the alleged violation preserved for the
benefit of independent analysis performed by a laboratory analyst employed by
the accused person, or, if the accused is indigent, by a qualified laboratory
analyst appointed by the court. Such portion shall be a representative sample
of the entire substance that is, or of each of the substances that are, the
basis of the alleged violation and shall be of sufficient size, in the opinion
of the court, to permit the accused’s analyst to make a thorough scientific
analysis concerning the identity of the substance or substances. The
prosecuting attorney shall provide the accused’s analyst with the sample
portion at least 14 days prior to trial, unless the trial is to be held in a
court not of record or unless the accused person is charged with a minor
misdemeanor, in which case the prosecuting attorney shall provide the accused’s
analyst with the sample portion at least three days prior to trial. If the
prosecuting attorney determines that such a sample portion cannot be preserved
and given to the accused’s analyst, the prosecuting attorney shall so inform
the accused person, or the accused’s attorney. In such a circumstance, the
accused person is entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting
attorney, to have the accused’s privately employed or court appointed analyst
present at an analysis of the substance that is, or the substances that are,
the basis of the alleged violation, and, upon further written request, to
receive copies of all recorded scientific data that result from the analysis
and that can be used by an analyst in arriving at conclusions, findings or
opinions concerning the identity of the substance or substances subject to the
analysis.
   (F)   In addition to the rights provided under division (E) above, any
person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Ch. 2925 or
3719 that involves a bulk amount of a controlled substance, or any multiple
thereof, or who is accused of a violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.11 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, other than a minor misdemeanor
violation, that involves marihuana, is entitled, upon written request made to
the prosecuting attorney, to have a laboratory analyst of the accused’s choice
or, if the accused is indigent, a qualified laboratory analyst appointed by the
court, present at a measurement or weighing of the substance that is the basis
of the alleged violation. Also, the accused person is entitled, upon further
written request, to receive copies of all recorded scientific data that result
from the measurement or weighing and that can be used by an analyst in arriving
at conclusions, findings or opinions concerning the weight, volume or number of
unit doses of the substance subject to the measurement or weighing.
(ORC 2925.51)
   (G)   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required under
Ohio R.C. 2929.18 and 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required
under any provision of law, the court imposing sentence upon an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a drug abuse offense may order the offender to
pay to the state, municipal or county law enforcement agencies that handled the
investigation and prosecution all of the costs that the state, municipal
corporation, or county reasonably incurred in having tests performed under this
section or Ohio R.C. 2925.51 or in any other manner on any substance that was
the basis of, or involved in, the offense to determine whether the substance
contained any amount of a controlled substance if the results of the tests
indicate that the substance tested contained any controlled substance. No court
shall order an offender under this section to pay the costs of tests performed
on a substance if the results of the tests do not indicate that the substance
tested contained any controlled substance. The court shall hold a hearing to
determine the amount of costs to be imposed under this section. The court may
hold the hearing as part of the sentencing hearing for the offender.
(ORC 2925.511)
§ 624.11 DOUBLE JEOPARDY.
   No person shall be prosecuted for a violation of this chapter if the person
has been acquitted or convicted under the federal drug abuse control laws of
the same act or omission which, it is alleged, constitutes a violation of this
chapter.
(ORC 2925.50, 3719.19)
§ 624.12 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE SCHEDULES.
   Controlled Substance Schedules I, II, III, IV and V, as established in Ohio
R.C. 3719.41 and amended by Ohio R.C. 3719.43 and 3719.44, are hereby adopted
by reference, and shall be treated as if set forth in full herein.
Schedule I
(a) Narcotics - opiates
(b) Narcotics - opium derivatives
(c) Hallucinogens
(d) Depressants
(e) Stimulants
Schedule II
(a) Narcotics - opium and opium derivatives
(b) Narcotics - opiates
(c) Stimulants
(d) Depressants
(e) Hallucinogenic substances
(f) Immediate precursors
Schedule III
(a) Stimulants
(b) Depressants
(c) Narcotic antidotes
(d) Narcotics - narcotic preparations
(e) Anabolic steroids
(f) Hallucinogenic substances
Schedule IV
(a) Narcotic drugs
(b) Depressants
(c) Fenfluramine
(d) Stimulants
(e) Other substances
Schedule V
(a) Narcotic drugs
(b) Narcotics - narcotic preparations
(c) Stimulants
 
Statutory reference:
   For comprehensive lists of drugs identified under each of the following
Schedules, see Ohio R.C. 3719.41, as amended by Ohio R.C. 3719.43 and 3719.44:
§ 624.13 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE OR PRESCRIPTION LABELS.
   (A)   Whenever a manufacturer sells a controlled substance, and whenever a
wholesaler, repackager or outsourcing facility sells a controlled substance in
a package the wholesaler, repackager or outsourcing facility has prepared, the
manufacturer or the wholesaler, repackager or outsourcing facility, as the case
may be, shall securely affix to each package in which the controlled substance
is contained a label showing in legible English the name and address of the
vendor and the quantity, kind and form of controlled substance contained
therein. No person, except a pharmacist for the purpose of dispensing a
controlled substance upon a prescription shall alter, deface or remove any
label so affixed. As used in this division (A), REPACKAGER and OUTSOURCING
FACILITY have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
   (B)   No person shall alter, deface or remove any label affixed pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 3719.08 as long as any of the original contents remain.
(ORC 3719.08(A), (E))
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, or Ohio R.C. 3719.07 or 3719.08, or a drug abuse offense, a violation
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If
the violation involves the sale, offer to sell or possession of a Schedule I or
II controlled substance, with the exception of marihuana, and if the offender,
as a result of the violation, is a major drug offender, then Ohio R.C. 3719.99
(D) applies.
(ORC 3719.99(C))
§ 624.14 USE, POSSESSION OR SALE OF PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   As used in this section, DRUG PARAPHERNALIA means any equipment,
product or material of any kind that is used by the offender, intended by the
offender for use, or designed for use, in propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introduced into the
human body, a controlled substance in violation of this chapter. DRUG
PARAPHERNALIA includes, but is not limited to, any of the following equipment,
products or materials that are used by the offender, intended by the offender
for use or designed by the offender for use, in any of the following manners:
      (1)   A kit for propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting any
species of a plant that is a controlled substance or from which a controlled
substance can be derived;
      (2)   A kit for manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing or preparing a controlled substance;
      (3)   Any object, instrument or device for manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing or preparing methamphetamine;
      (4)   An isomerization device for increasing the potency of any species
of a plant that is a controlled substance;
      (5)   Testing equipment for identifying, or analyzing the strength,
effectiveness, or purity of, a controlled substance, except for those exempted
in division (D)(4) of this section;
      (6)   A scale or balance for weighing or measuring a controlled
substance;
      (7)   A diluent or adulterant, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose or lactose, for cutting a controlled substance;
      (8)   A separation gin or sifter for removing twigs and seeds from, or
otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana;
      (9)   A blender, bowl, container, spoon or mixing device for compounding
a controlled substance;
      (10)   A capsule, balloon, envelope or container for packaging small
quantities of a controlled substance;
      (11)   A container or device for storing or concealing a controlled
substance;
      (12)   A hypodermic syringe, needle or instrument for parenterally
injecting a controlled substance into the human body; and/or
      (13)   An object, instrument or device for ingesting, inhaling or
otherwise introducing into the human body, marihuana, cocaine, hashish or
hashish oil, such as a metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or
ceramic pipe, with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head or
punctured metal bowl; water pipe; carburetion tube or device; smoking or
carburetion mask; roach clip or similar object used to hold burning material,
such as a marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be
held in the hand; miniature cocaine spoon, or cocaine vial; chamber pipe;
carburetor pipe; electric pipe; air driver pipe; chillum; bong; or ice pipe or
chiller.
   (B)   In determining if any equipment, product or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition
to other relevant factors, the following:
      (1)   Any statement by the owner or by anyone in control of the
equipment, product or material, concerning its use;
      (2)   The proximity in time or space of the equipment, product or
material, or of the act relating to the equipment, product or material, to a
violation of any provision of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2925;
      (3)   The proximity of the equipment, product or material to any
controlled substance;
      (4)   The existence of any residue of a controlled substance on the
equipment, product or material;
      (5)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the owner, or of
anyone in control, of the equipment, product or material, to deliver it to any
person whom he or she knows intends to use the equipment, product or material
to facilitate a violation of any provision of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Ch.
2925. A finding that the owner or anyone in control of the equipment, product,
or material is not guilty of a violation of any other provision of this chapter
or Ohio R.C. Ch. 2925 does not prevent a finding that the equipment, product or
material was intended or designed by the offender for use as drug
paraphernalia;
      (6)   Any oral or written instruction provided with the equipment,
product or material concerning its use;
      (7)   Any descriptive material accompanying the equipment, product or
material and explaining or depicting its use;
      (8)   National or local advertising concerning the use of the equipment,
product or material;
      (9)   The manner and circumstances in which the equipment, product or
material is displayed for sale;
      (10)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of the sales of the
equipment, product or material to the total sales of the business enterprise;
      (11)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses of the equipment,
product or material in the community; and
      (12)   Expert testimony concerning the use of the equipment, product or
material.
   (C)   (1)   Subject to divisions (D)(2), (D)(3), and (D)(4) of this section,
no person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, drug
paraphernalia.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly sell, or possess or manufacture with
purpose to sell, drug paraphernalia, if he or she knows or reasonably should
know that the equipment, product or material will be used as drug
paraphernalia.
      (3)   No person shall place an advertisement in any newspaper, magazine,
handbill or other publication that is published and printed and circulates
primarily within the state, if he or she knows that the purpose of the
advertisement is to promote the illegal sale in the municipality or in the
state of the equipment, product or material that the offender intended or
designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
   (D)   (1)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies
and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with Ohio R.C. Ch. 3719, 4715,
4723, 4729, 4730, 4731 and 4741. This section shall not be construed to
prohibit the possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by Ohio R.C.
3719.172.
      (2)   Division (C)(1) above does not apply to a person’s use, or
possession with purpose to use, any drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a
product or material of any kind that is used by the person, intended by the
person for use or designed for use in storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body
marihuana.
      (3)   Division (B)(2) of Ohio R.C. 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of division (C)(1) of this section when a person seeks or obtains
medical assistance for another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a
person experiences a drug overdose and seeks medical assistance for that
overdose, or a person is the subject of another person seeking or obtaining
medical assistance for that overdose.
      (4)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to a person's use,
or possession with purpose to use, any drug testing strips to determine the
presence of fentanyl or a fentanyl-related compound.
   (E)   Notwithstanding Ohio R.C. Ch. 2981, any drug paraphernalia that was
used, possessed, sold or manufactured in violation of this section shall be
seized, after a conviction for that violation, shall be forfeited and, upon
forfeiture, shall be disposed of pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2981.12(B).
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (C)(1) above is guilty of illegal use
or possession of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (F)(3) below, whoever violates
division (C)(2) above is guilty of dealing in drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor
of the second degree.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (C)(2) above by selling drug
paraphernalia to a juvenile is guilty of selling drug paraphernalia to
juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (C)(3) above is guilty of illegal
advertising of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (G)   (1)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a
violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five years
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit. However, if
the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of Ohio R.C.
4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or the law of another
state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the
violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. If the offender is a
professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a
violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with Ohio R.C.
2925.38.
      (2)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to 9-13-2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court requesting the
termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded guilty to or
was convicted of a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or a substantially similar
municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States that arose out
of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the offender’s
license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file such a
motion.
         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (G)(2) above, the
sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(ORC 2925.14)
   (H)   (1)   As used in this division (H), DRUG PARAPHERNALIA has the same
meaning as in division (A) above.
      (2)   In determining if any equipment, product or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition
to other relevant factors, all factors identified in division (B) above.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, any
drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a product or material of any kind that is
used by the person, intended by the person for use, or designed for use in
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing into the human body marihuana.
      (4)   This division (H) does not apply to any person identified in
division (D)(1) above, and it shall not be construed to prohibit the possession
or use of a hypodermic as authorized by Ohio R.C. 3719.172.
      (5)   (a)   Division (E) above applies with respect to any drug
paraphernalia that was used or possessed in violation of division (H) of this
section.
         (b)   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of this division (h) when a person seeks or obtains medical
assistance for another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a person
experiences a drug overdose and seeks medical assistance for that overdose, or
a person is the subject of another person seeking or obtaining medical
assistance for that overdose.
      (6)   (a)   Whoever violates division (H)(3) above is guilty of illegal
use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia, a minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   Arrest or conviction for a violation of division (H)(3) of this
section does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the
person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person's
criminal record, including any inquiries contained in any application for
employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with
the person's appearance as a witness.
      (7)   (a)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender
for a violation of division (H) of this section, the court shall do the
following, if applicable:
            1.   If the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a
violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance
or the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of
circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender's driver's
or commercial driver's license or permit for not more than five years.
            2.   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, the court
immediately shall comply with Ohio R.C. 2925.38.
         (b)   1.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this
division (H) prior to 9-13-2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or a
substantially similar municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United
States that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for
which the offender’s license or permit was suspended under this division (H)
shall not file such a motion.
            2.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (H)(7)(b)1. above,
the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(ORC 2925.141)
§ 624.15 PSEUDOEPHEDRINE SALES.
   (A)   Unlawful purchases.
      (1)   As used in divisions (A), (B), (C) and (D) below:
         CONSUMER PRODUCT. Any food or drink that is consumed or used by humans
and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only pursuant to a
prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by humans.
         EPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture or preparation that
contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers or salts
of optical isomers.
         EPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains ephedrine.
         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture or preparation that
contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers or
salts of optical isomers.
         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product consisting that contains
pseudoephedrine.
         RETAILER. A place of business that offers consumer products for sale
to the general public.
         SINGLE-INGREDIENT PREPARATION. A compound, mixture, preparation or
substance that contains a single active ingredient.
         TERMINAL DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS. Has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
      (2)   (a)   1.   No individual shall knowingly purchase, receive, or
otherwise acquire an amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
that is greater than either of the following unless the pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product is dispensed by a pharmacist pursuant to a valid
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist and the licensed health professional
authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance with Ohio R.C. Ch. 3719, 4715,
4723, 4729, 4730, 4731 or 4741:
               a.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single day;
and/or
               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
            2.   The limits specified in divisions (A)(2)(a)1.a. and (A)(2)
(a)1.b. above apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine or base
ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, respectively.
The limits do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
         (b)   It is not a violation of division (B)(1) below for an individual
to receive or accept more than an amount of pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product specified in divisions (A)(2)(a)1.a. or (A)(2)(a)1.b. above
if the individual is an employee of a retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs, and the employee receives or accepts from the retailer or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product in a sealed container in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading or unloading of the product.
      (3)   (a)   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly purchase,
receive or otherwise acquire a pseudoephedrine product, or ephedrine product
unless the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product is dispensed by a
pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist
and the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in
accordance with Ohio R.C. Ch. 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731 or 4741.
         (b)   Division (A)(3)(a) above does not apply to an individual under
18 years of age who purchases, receives or otherwise acquires a pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product from any of the following:
            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs
or pharmacist who dispenses, sells or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to that individual and whose conduct is in
accordance with Ohio R.C. Ch. 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731 or 4741;
            2.   A parent or guardian of that individual who provides the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            3.   A person, as authorized by that individual’s parent or
guardian, who dispenses, sells or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to the individual; and
            4.   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs who
provides the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to that individual if
the individual is an employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs and the individual receives or accepts from the retailer or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product in a sealed container in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading or unloading of the product.
      (4)   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly show or give
false information concerning the individual’s name, age or other identification
for the purpose of purchasing, receiving or otherwise acquiring a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
      (5)   No individual shall knowingly fail to comply with the requirements
of Ohio R.C. 3715.051(B).
      (6)   Whoever violates division (A)(2)(a) above is guilty of unlawful
purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (A)(3)(a) above is guilty of underage
purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a delinquent act
that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if it could be committed by an
adult.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) above is guilty of using false
information to purchase a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the first degree if it could be
committed by an adult.
      (9)   Whoever violates division (A)(5) above is guilty of improper
purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
(ORC 2925.55)
   (B)   Unlawful retail sales.
      (1)   (a)   1.   Except as provided in division (B)(1)(b) below, no
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee of a
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall knowingly sell, offer
to sell, hold for sale, deliver or otherwise provide to any individual an
amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is greater than
either of the following:
               a.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single day;
or
               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
            2.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions (B)(1)(a)1.a. and
(B)(1)(a)1.b. above apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine or base
ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, respectively.
The maximum amounts do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
         (b)   1.   Division (B)(1)(a) above does not apply to any quantity of
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product dispensed by a pharmacist pursuant
to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to
prescribe drugs if the conduct of the pharmacist and the licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance with Ohio R.C. Ch.
3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731 or 4741.
            2.   It is not a violation of division (B)(1)(a) above for a
retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or employee of either to
provide to an individual more than an amount of pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product specified in divisions (B)(1)(a)1.a. or (B)(1)(a)1.b. above
under either of the following circumstances:
               a.   The individual is an employee of the retailer or terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs, and the employee receives or accepts from the
retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or employee the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product in a sealed container in
connection with manufacturing, warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging,
loading or unloading of the product;
               b.   A stop-sale alert is generated after the submission of
information to the national precursor log exchange under the conditions
described in Ohio R.C. 3715.052(A)(2).
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(2)(b) below, no retailer
or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee of a retailer or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall sell, offer to sell, hold for
sale, deliver or otherwise provide a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product to an individual who is under 18 years of age.
         (b)   Division (B)(2)(a) above does not apply to any of the following:
            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs
or pharmacist who dispenses, sells or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years of age and whose
conduct is in accordance with Ohio R.C. Ch. 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731
or 4741;
            2.   A parent or guardian of an individual under 18 years of age
who provides a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            3.   A person who, as authorized by the individual’s parent or
guardian, dispenses, sells or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years of age; or
            4.   The provision by a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs or employee of either of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
in a sealed container to an employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs who is under 18 years of age in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading or unloading of the product.
      (3)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail
to comply with the requirements of Ohio R.C. 3715.051(A) or 3715.052(A)(2).
      (4)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail
to comply with the requirements of Ohio R.C. 3715.052(A)(1).
      (5)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(a) above is guilty of unlawfully
selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (B)(2)(a) above is guilty of unlawfully
selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to a minor, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (B)(3) above is guilty of improper sale
of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (B)(4) above is guilty of failing to
submit information to the national precursor log exchange, a misdemeanor for
which the offender shall be fined not more than $1,000 per violation.
(ORC 2925.56)
   (C)   Transaction scans.
      (1)   As used in this division (C) and division (D) below:
         CARD HOLDER. Any person who presents a driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent or employee of a
seller, to purchase or receive any pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
from the seller, agent or employee.
         IDENTIFICATION CARD and TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE. Have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2927.021.
         SELLER. A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs.
         TRANSACTION SCAN. The process by which a seller or an agent or
employee of a seller checks by means of a transaction scan device the validity
of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card that is
presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving any pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product.
      (2)   (a)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a
card holder as a condition for selling, giving away or otherwise distributing
to the card holder a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
         (b)   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (C)(2)(a) above fails to match the information printed on the
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the
card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information so
printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee of
the seller shall sell, give away or otherwise distribute any pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to the card holder.
         (c)   Division (C)(2)(a) above does not preclude a seller or an agent
or employee of a seller as a condition for selling, giving away or otherwise
distributing a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the person
presenting the document from using a transaction scan device to check the
validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
an identification card if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip
that may be scanned by the device.
      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under Ohio R.C.
4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this
division (C) and division (D) below.
      (4)   (a)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except the following:
            1.   The name, address and date of birth of the person listed on
the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by
a card holder; and
            2.   The expiration date, identification number and issuing agency
of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by a card holder.
         (b)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the
information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be
recorded and maintained under division (C)(4)(a) above, except for purposes of
division (D) below, Ohio R.C. 2925.58, or Ohio R.C. 3715.052(A)(1).
         (c)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a
transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified in
division (C)(2)(a) above.
         (d)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or
otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including, but not limited to, selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising, or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by division (d) of this section
or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (C) or division (D) below relieves a
seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any responsibility to comply with
any other applicable state or federal laws or rules governing the sale, giving
away or other distribution of pseudoephedrine products or ephedrine products.
      (6)   Whoever violates divisions (C)(2)(b) or (C)(4) above is guilty of
engaging in an illegal pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product transaction
scan, and the court may impose upon the offender a civil penalty of up to
$1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court shall pay each collected
civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into the County Treasury.
(ORC 2925.57)
   (D)   Affirmative defenses.
      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found
guilty of a charge of a violation of division (B) above in which the age of the
purchaser or other recipient of a pseudoephedrine product is an element of the
alleged violation if the seller, agent or employee raises and proves as an
affirmative defense that all of the following occurred:
         (a)   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive a
pseudoephedrine product presented a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
an identification card;
         (b)   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that
the license or card was valid; and
         (c)   The pseudoephedrine product was sold, given away or otherwise
distributed to the card holder in reasonable reliance upon the identification
presented and the completed transaction scan.
      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller
has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (D)(1) above, the trier
of fact in the action for the alleged violation of division (B) above shall
consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and implemented and
that is intended to prevent violations of division (B) above. For purposes of
division (D)(1)(c) above, the trier of fact shall consider that reasonable
reliance upon the identification presented and the completed transaction scan
may require a seller or an agent or employee of a seller to exercise reasonable
diligence to determine, and that the use of a transaction scan device does not
excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a seller from exercising reasonable
diligence to determine, the following:
         (a)   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a
seller sells, gives away or otherwise distributes a pseudoephedrine product is
18 years of age or older; and
         (b)   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by
division (D)(1) above is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a deputy
registrar who issued an identification card under Ohio R.C. 4507.50 through
4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of that
issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with the
Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.
(ORC 2925.58)
   (E)   Retailer’s duties.
      (1)   As used in divisions (E) and (F) of this section:
         CONSUMER PRODUCT. Any food or drink that is consumed or used by humans
and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only pursuant to a
prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by humans.
         DRUG. Has the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
         EPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture or preparation that
contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers or salts
of optical isomers.
         EPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains ephedrine.
         LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. An officer or employee of any agency or
authority of the United States, a state, a territory, a political subdivision
of a state or territory or an Indian tribe, who is empowered by the law to
investigate or conduct an official inquiry into a potential violation of law or
prosecute or otherwise conduct a criminal, civil or administrative proceeding
arising from an alleged violation of law.
         LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS. Has the
same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
         NATIONAL PRECURSOR LOG EXCHANGE or EXCHANGE. The electronic system for
tracking sales of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products on a national
basis that is administered by the National Association of Drug Diversion
Investigators or a successor organization.
         PHARMACIST. A person licensed under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4729 to engage in
the practice of pharmacy.
         PHARMACY. Has the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
         PRESCRIBER. Has the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
         PRESCRIPTION. Has the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
         PROOF OF AGE. A driver’s license, a commercial driver’s license, a
military identification card, a passport or an identification card issued under
Ohio R.C. 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows a person is 18 years of age or older.
         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture or preparation that
contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers or
salts of optical isomers.
         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains
pseudoephedrine.
         RETAILER. A place of business that offers consumer products for sale
to the general public.
         SINGLE-INGREDIENT PREPARATION. A compound, mixture, preparation or
substance that contains a single active ingredient.
         STOP-SALE ALERT. A notification sent from the national precursor log
exchange to a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs indicating
that the completion of a sale of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
would result in a violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.56(A)(1) or federal law.
         TERMINAL DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS. Has the same meanings as in
Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
         WHOLESALER. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3719.01.
      (2)   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs that sells,
offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers or otherwise provides a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the public shall do all of the
following:
         (a)   Segregate pseudoephedrine products or ephedrine products from
other merchandise so that no member of the public may procure or purchase such
products without the direct assistance of a pharmacist or other authorized
employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs;
         (b)   With regard to each time a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product is sold or otherwise provided without a valid prescription:
            1.   Determine, by examination of a valid proof of age, that the
purchaser or recipient is at least 18 years of age;
            2.   a.   Using any information available, including information
from the national precursor log exchange if the information is accessible, make
a reasonable attempt to ensure that no individual purchases or receives an
amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is greater than
either of the following:
                  i.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single
day; or
                  ii.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
               b.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions (E)(2)(b)2.a.i.
and (E)(2)(b)2.a.ii. above apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine or
base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product,
respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
         (c)   Maintain a log book of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product purchases, in accordance with Ohio R.C. 3715.051; and
         (d)   If required to comply with Ohio R.C. 3715.052, submit the
information specified in divisions (A)(1)(a) to (A)(1)(d) of that section to
the national precursor log exchange.
      (3)   Prescriptions, orders and records maintained pursuant to this
section and stocks of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products shall be
open for inspection to federal, state, county, and municipal officers, and
employees of the State Board of Pharmacy whose duty it is to enforce the laws
of this state or of the United States relating to controlled substances. Such
prescriptions, orders, records, and stocks shall be open for inspection by the
State Medical Board and its employees for purposes of enforcing Ohio R.C. Ch.
4731.
(ORC 3715.05)
   (F)   Theft or loss; reporting requirements.
      (1)   Each retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy,
prescriber or wholesaler that sells, offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers
or otherwise provides any pseudoephedrine product and that discovers the theft
or loss of any pseudoephedrine product in an amount of more than nine grams per
incident of theft or loss shall notify all of the following upon discovery of
the theft or loss:
         (a)   The State Board of Pharmacy, by telephone immediately upon
discovery of the theft or loss; and
         (b)   Law enforcement authorities. If the incident is a theft and the
theft constitutes a felony, the retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, pharmacy, prescriber or wholesaler shall report the theft to the law
enforcement authorities in accordance with Ohio R.C. 2921.22.
      (2)   Within 30 days after making a report by telephone to the State
Board of Pharmacy pursuant to division (F)(1)(a) above, a retailer, terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy, prescriber or wholesaler shall send a
written report to the State Board of Pharmacy.
      (3)   The reports required under this section shall identify the product
that was stolen or lost, the amount of the product stolen or lost, and the date
and time of discovery of the theft or loss.
(ORC 3715.06)
§ 624.16 COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly possess any counterfeit controlled
substance.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) above shall be guilty of possession of
counterfeit controlled substances, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2925.37(A), (G))
Statutory reference:
   Trafficking, other felony counterfeit controlled substance offenses, see
Ohio R.C. 2925.37(H) - (M)
§ 624.17 OCCUPYING DRUG PREMISES.
   (A)   No person shall occupy, loiter or remain in any building, apartment,
store, automobile or other place of any description whatsoever where controlled
substances, hypodermic syringes, needles or other instruments or implements are
sold, dispensed, furnished, given away, stored or kept illegally, with the
intent to unlawfully use or possess such substances, implements or instruments.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of occupying drug premises, a
minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. 254-1989, passed 12-11-1989)
§ 624.18 LOITERING FOR THE PURPOSE OF ENGAGING IN DRUG-RELATED ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   No person shall loiter in or near any thoroughfare, place open to the
public, or any public or private place, in a manner and under circumstances
manifesting a purpose to engage in drug-related activity contrary to any of the
provisions of Ohio R.C. Ch. 2925 or of this chapter.
   (B)   The circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such
purpose, as described in division (A) above, is manifested are as follows:
      (1)   Such person is a known unlawful drug user, possessor or seller. For
purposes of this section, a KNOWN UNLAWFUL DRUG USER, POSSESSOR OR SELLER means
a person who has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted
in any court within the state for any violation involving the use, possession
or sale of any controlled substance, as defined in Ohio R.C. Ch. 2925 or §
624.01 of this chapter; or a person who has been convicted of any violation of
any of the provisions of Ohio R.C. Ch. 2925 or substantially equivalent laws of
any political subdivision of the state or of any other state; or a person who
displays physical characteristics of drug intoxication or usage, such as
“needle tracks”, burned or calloused thumbs and index finders, weight loss and
nervous and excited behavior;
      (2)   Such person is currently subject to a court order prohibiting his
or her presence in a high drug activity geographic area;
      (3)   Such person behaves in such a manner as to raise a reasonable
suspicion that he or she is about to engage in or is then engaged in an
unlawful drug-related activity, including, by way of example only, such person
acting as a “lookout” or hailing or stopping cars;
      (4)   Such person is physically identified by the officer as a member of
a “gang” or association which has as its purpose illegal drug activity;
      (5)   Such person transfers small objects or packages in a furtive
fashion;
      (6)   Such person takes flight or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself
or herself upon the appearance of a police officer;
      (7)   Such person manifestly endeavors to conceal any object which
reasonably could be involved in an unlawful drug-related activity;
      (8)   Such person possesses any instrument, article or thing whose
customary or primary purpose is for sale, administration or use of controlled
substances, such as, but not limited to, crack pipes, push wires, chore boys,
hand scales, hypodermic needles, razor blades or other cutting tools;
      (9)   The area involved is by public repute known to be an area of
unlawful drug use and trafficking;
      (10)   The premises involved are known to the defendants to have been
reported to law enforcement as a place of drug activity pursuant to Ohio R.C.
Ch. 2925; and
      (11)   Any vehicle involved is registered to a known unlawful drug user,
possessor, or seller, or a person for whom there is an outstanding warrant for
a crime involving drug-related activity.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of loitering for the purpose
of engaging in drug-related activity, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Ord. 255-1989, passed 12-11-1989)
§ 624.19 ILLEGAL SALE OF “BATH SALTS”.
   (A)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases when used in this
section shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the
plural number include the singular number; words in the singular shall include
the plural; and words in the masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
      BATH SALTS.
         (a)   Products containing synthetic derivatives of cathinone which
include the following, all commonly referred to as “bath salts”. Compounds or
psychoactive drugs with stimulant properties which act as a norepinephrine-
dopamine reuptake inhibitor (NOR) or that work on the same receptors as the
chemical compounds in methamphetamines and/or any derivatives used for human
consumption or ingestion thereof, including, but not limited to, the following
street or brand names: Vanilla Sky; Ivory Wave; White Rush; White Lightning;
Hurricane Charlie; Bliss; Zoom2; Cloud Nine and Cloud Nine derivatives; Aura;
Bounce; Plant Food; Meph; Mad Cow; Shake ‘N’Vac; Drone; Bubbles; Meow Meow;
MCAT; and 4MMC (hereinafter at all times collectively referred to as “MDPV”):
            1.   MDPV(3,4-Methylenedioxyprovalerone);
   2.   Methylone (3,4-methylenedioxymethcathinone);
            3.   Mephedrone (4-methylmethcathinone);
            4.   4-methoxymethcathinone;
            5.   4-fluoromethcathinone; and
            6.   3-fluoromethcathinone.
         (b)   Also considered to be BATH SALTS are products containing the
cathinone-substitute, Pentedrone, and/or any of its derivatives, and the
chemical process used to produce this substance including:
            1.   Cathinone;
            2.   Methcathinone;
            3.   Ethcathinone;
            4.   Buphedrone;
            5.   NEB;
            6.   NEP;
            7.   Pentedrone;
            8.   Dimethylcathinone;
            9.   Diethylpropion;
            10.   Bupropion;
            11.   Mephedrone;
            12.   3-MMC;
            13.   4-EMC;
            14.   4-EEC;
            15.   Benzedrone;
            16.   4-MEC;
            17.   (N,N-DMMC);
            18.   (N,N-DEMC;
            19.   (3,4-DMMC);
            20.   Methedrone;
            21.   Ethedrone;
            22.   2-FMC;
            23.   3-FMC;
            24.   Flephedrone;
            25.   Brephedrone;
            26.   FMMC;
            27.   bk-MDA;
            28.   Methylone;
            29.   Ethylone;
            30.   BMDP;
            31.   bk-IMP;
            32.   4-Fluorobuphedrone;
            33.   4-Methylbuphedrone;
            34.   4-Methoxybuphedrone;
            35.   Butylone;
            36.   Eutylone;
            37.   BMDB;
            38.   bk-DMBDB;
            39.   5-Methymethylone;
            40.   2-Methylbutylone;
            41.   5-Methylbutylone;
            42.   Pentylone;
            43.   MEP;
            44.   bk-Methiopropamine;
            45.   a-Phthalimidopropiophenone;
            46.   a-PPP;
            47.   a-PBP;
            48.   4-Et-a-PBP;
            49.   4-MeO-a-PBP;
            50.   a-PVP (0-2387);
            51.   MPPP;
            52.   MOPPP;
            53.   MPBP;
            54.   Pyrovalerone;
            55.   MPHP;
            57.   MDPBP;
            58.   MDPV;
            59.   O-2390;
            60.   0-2494;
            61.   Naphyrone (0-2482);
            62.   a-PVT; and
            63.   Any compound structurally derived from 2-aminopropan-l-one by
substitution at the 1-position with any monocyclic, or fused-polycyclic ring
system (not being a phenyl ring or alkylenedioxyphenyl ring system), whether or
not the compound is further modified in any of the following ways, that is to
say:
               a.   By substitution in the ring system to any extent with
alkyl, alkoxy, haloalkyl or halide substituents, whether or not further
substituted in the ring system by one or more other univalent substituents;
               b.   By substitution at the 3-position with an alkyl
substituent; and
               c.   By substitution at the 2-amino nitrogen atom with alkyl or
dialkyl groups, or by inclusion of the 2-amino nitrogen atom in a cyclic
structure.
      KNOWLEDGE. A person acts knowingly with respect to a material element of
the section, regardless of his or her purpose, when he or she is aware that his
or her conduct will probably cause a certain result or will probably be of a
certain nature. A person has KNOWLEDGE of circumstances when he or she is aware
that such circumstances probably exist.
   (B)   Illegal sales.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly:
         (a)   Sell, exchange, deliver, give, distribute or otherwise provide
to any person any product containing MDPV and/ or “bath salts” and/or its
derivatives; and
         (b)   Display for sale or possess with intent to distribute any
product containing MDPV and/ or “bath salts” and/or its derivatives.
      (2)   All products containing any synthetic derivatives of cathinone, as
defined herein as “bath salts”, and/or packaged as such, shall be considered an
illegal bath salt for the purpose of this section and shall not be sold within
the city limits.
   (C)   Violations.
      (1)   Whoever violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates any provision of this section by providing bath
salts to a juvenile shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
(Ord. 75-2011, passed 6-13-2011; Ord. 148-2011, passed 10-24-2011)
§ 624.20 SALE OF DEXTROMETHORPHAN.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      DEXTROMETHORPHAN. Means the dextrorotatory isomer of 3-methoxy-N-
methylmorphinan, including its salts, but not including its racemic or
levorotatory forms.
      EVIDENCE OF MAJORITY AND IDENTITY. Means a document issued by the federal
government or a state, county, or municipal government, or a subdivision or
agency of any of the foregoing, including a driver’s or commercial driver’s
license, an identification card issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52, a
military identification card, or any other form of identification that bears
the name, date of birth, description, and picture of the person identified.
      RETAILER. Means a place of business that offers consumer products for
sale to the general public, including a terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
that is licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 and operated as a pharmacy.
   (B)   No retailer or employee of a retailer shall knowingly supply, deliver,
give, or otherwise provide a drug, material, compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance containing any quantity of dextromethorphan through the sale of any
product to a person under 18 years of age, unless the person has been issued a
prescription for the product being purchased.
   (C)   For purposes of division (B) of this section, the person making the
sale of a product containing dextromethorphan shall require and obtain evidence
of majority and identity from the purchaser, unless from the purchaser’s
outward appearance the person making the sale would reasonably presume the
purchaser to be 25 years of age or older. Proof that the person making the sale
demanded, was shown, and acted in reasonable reliance on the purchaser’s
evidence of majority and identity is a defense to any charge of a violation of
division (B) of this section.
   (D)   A retailer or employee of a retailer is not liable for damages in a
civil action for injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly
arises from an act or omission associated with a failure to prevent the sale of
a product containing dextromethorphan to a person under 18 years of age, unless
the act or omission constitutes willful or wanton misconduct.
   (E)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of illegally
selling dextromethorphan, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2925.62)
CHAPTER 630: GAMBLING
Section
630.01   Definitions.
630.02   Gambling in general.
630.03   Operating a gambling house.
630.04   Public gaming.
630.05   Cheating.
630.06   Responsibility of charitable organization conducting bingo game.
630.07   Maintenance of records by charitable organizations.
630.08   Qualifications of bingo game operator.
630.09   Exemption for bingo games conducted for amusement.
630.10   Prohibitions where instant bingo game is conducted.
630.11   Raffle drawings.
630.12   Instant bingo other than at bingo sessions.
630.13   Restrictions on owner or lessor of location at instant bingo.
630.14   Skill-based amusement machines; prohibited conduct.
630.15   Electronic instant bingo; prohibited conduct.
Editor’s note:
   As part of the 1983 updating and revision of this code of ordinances, this
chapter - previously numbered Ch. 624 - was renumbered as Ch. 630.
Cross-reference:
   Definitions generally, see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police, see GEN. OFF.
606.24
   Power to destroy devices, see Ohio R.C. 715.51
   Power to prohibit gambling, see Ohio R.C. 715.49
   See section histories for similar state law
§ 630.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BET. The hazarding of anything of value upon the result of an event,
undertaking or contingency, but does not include a bona fide business risk.
   BINGO. Either of the following:
      (1)   A game with all of the following characteristics:
         (a)   The participants use bingo cards or sheets, including paper
formats and electronic representation or image formats, that are divided into
25 spaces arranged in five horizontal and five vertical rows of spaces, with
each space, except the central space, being designated by a combination of a
letter and a number and with the central space being designated as a free
space;
         (b)   The participants cover the spaces on the bingo cards or sheets
that correspond to combinations of letters and numbers that are announced by a
bingo game operator;
         (c)   A bingo game operator announces combinations of letters and
numbers that appear on objects that a bingo game operator selects by chance,
either manually or mechanically, from a receptacle that contains 75 objects at
the beginning of each game, each object marked by a different combination of a
letter and a number that corresponds to one of the 75 possible combinations of
a letter and a number that can appear on the bingo cards or sheets;
         (d)   The winner of the bingo game includes any participant who
properly announces during the interval between the announcements of letters and
numbers, as described in division (1)(c) of this definition, that a
predetermined and pre-announced pattern of spaces has been covered on a bingo
card or sheet being used by the participant.
      (2)   Instant bingo, electronic instant bingo, and raffles.
   BINGO GAME OPERATOR. Any person, except security personnel, who performs
work or labor at the site of bingo including but not limited to collecting
money from participants, handing out bingo cards or sheets or objects to cover
spaces on bingo cards or sheets, selecting from a receptacle the objects that
contain the combination of letters and numbers that appear on bingo cards or
sheets, calling out the combinations of letters and numbers, distributing
prizes, selling or redeeming instant bingo tickets or cards, selling or
redeeming electronic instant bingo tickets, credits, or vouchers, accessing an
electronic instant bingo system other than as a participant, supervising the
operation of a punch board, selling raffle tickets, selecting raffle tickets
from a receptacle and announcing the winning numbers in a raffle, and
preparing, selling, and serving food or beverages. “Bingo game operator” does
not include a person who is installing, maintaining, updating, or repairing an
electronic instant bingo system.
   BINGO SESSION. A period that includes both of the following:
      (1)   Not to exceed five continuous hours for the conduct of one or more
games described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in this section,
instant bingo, and electronic instant bingo;
      (2)   A period for the conduct of instant bingo and electronic instant
bingo for not more than two hours before and not more than two hours after the
period described in division (1) of this definition.
   BINGO SUPPLIES. Bingo cards or sheets; instant bingo tickets or cards;
electronic bingo aids; raffle tickets; punch boards; seal cards; instant bingo
ticket dispensers; electronic instant bingo systems; and devices for selecting
or displaying the combination of bingo letters and numbers or raffle tickets.
Items that are “bingo supplies” are not gambling devices if sold or otherwise
provided, and used, in accordance with this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915. For
purposes of this chapter, “bingo supplies” are not to be considered equipment
used to conduct a bingo game.
   BOOKMAKING. The business of receiving or paying off bets.
   CHAMBER OF COMMERCE. Any organization of individuals, professionals and
businesses that has the purpose to advance the commercial, financial,
industrial and civic interests of the community and that is, and has received
from the Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that currently is in
effect stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation
under I.R.C. § 501(a) and described in I.R.C. § 501(c)(6).
   CHARITABLE BINGO GAME. Any bingo game described in divisions (1) or (2) of
the definition of “bingo” in this section that is conducted by a charitable
organization that has obtained a license pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.08 and the
proceeds of which are used for a charitable purpose.
   CHARITABLE INSTANT BINGO ORGANIZATION. An organization that is exempt from
federal income taxation under I.R.C. § 501(a) and described in I.R.C. § 501(c)
(3) and is a charitable organization, as defined in this section. A CHARITABLE
INSTANT BINGO ORGANIZATION does not include a charitable organization that is
exempt from federal income taxation under I.R.C. § 501(a) and described in
I.R.C. § 501(c)(3) and that is created by a veteran’s organization, a fraternal
organization or a sporting organization in regards to bingo conducted or
assisted by a veteran’s organization, a fraternal organization or a sporting
organization pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.13, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, CHARITABLE
ORGANIZATION means either of the following:
         (a)   An organization that is exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
         (b)   A volunteer rescue service organization, volunteer firefighter’s
organization, veteran’s organization, fraternal organization or sporting
organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under I.R.C. §§ 501(c)
(4), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or 501(c)(19).
      (2)   To qualify as a charitable organization, an organization shall have
been in continuous existence as such in the state for a period of two years
immediately preceding either the making of an application for a bingo license
under Ohio R.C. 2915.08 or the conducting of any game of chance as provided in
Ohio R.C. 2915.02(D), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   CHARITABLE PURPOSE. Means that the net profit of bingo, other than instant
bingo or electronic instant bingo, is used by, or is given, donated, or
otherwise transferred to, any of the following:
      (1)   Any organization that is described in I.R.C. §§ 509(a)(1), 509(a)
(2) or 509(a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization that is
tax exempt under I.R.C. § 501(a) and described in I.R.C. § 501(c)(3);
      (2)   A veteran’s organization that is a post, chapter or organization of
veterans, or an auxiliary unit or society of, or a trust or foundation for, any
such post, chapter or organization organized in the United States or any of its
possessions, at least 75% of the members of which are veterans and
substantially all of the other members of which are individuals who are
spouses, widows or widowers of veterans, or such individuals; provided that, no
part of the net earnings of such post, chapter or organization inures to the
benefit of any private shareholder or individual; and, further provided that,
the net profit is used by the post, chapter or organization for the charitable
purposes set forth in Ohio R.C. 5739.02(B)(12), is used for awarding
scholarships to or for attendance at an institution mentioned in that division
of the Revised Code, is donated to a governmental agency, or is used for
nonprofit youth activities, the purchase of United States or Ohio flags that
are donated to schools, youth groups or other bona fide nonprofit
organizations, promotion of patriotism or disaster relief;
      (3)   A fraternal organization that has been in continuous existence in
the state for 15 years and that uses the net profit exclusively for religious,
charitable, scientific, literary or educational purposes, or for the prevention
of cruelty to children or animals, if contributions for such use would qualify
as a deductible charitable contribution under I.R.C. § 170;
      (4)   A volunteer firefighter’s organization that uses the net profit for
the purposes set forth in the definition of “volunteer firefighter’s
organization” in this section.
   COMMUNITY ACTION AGENCY. The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 122.66.
   CONDUCT. To back, promote, organize, manage, carry on, sponsor or prepare
for the operation of bingo or a game of chance, a scheme of chance or a
sweepstakes.
   DEAL. A single game of instant bingo tickets, or a single game of electronic
instant bingo tickets, all with the same serial number.
   DISTRIBUTOR. Any person who purchases or obtains bingo supplies and who does
either of the following:
      (1)   Sells, offers for sale or otherwise provides or offers to provide
the bingo supplies to another person for use in the state; or
      (2)   Modifies, converts, adds to or removes parts from the bingo
supplies to further their promotion or sale for use in the state.
   ELECTRONIC BINGO AID.
      (1)   ELECTRONIC BINGO AID means an electronic device used by a
participant to monitor bingo cards or sheets purchased at the time and place of
a bingo session and that does all of the following:
         (a)   It provides a means for a participant to input numbers and
letters announced by a bingo caller;
         (b)   It compares the numbers and letters entered by the participant
to the bingo faces previously stored in the memory of the device; and
         (c)   It identifies a winning bingo pattern.
      (2)   ELECTRONIC BINGO AID does not include any device into which a coin,
currency, token or an equivalent is inserted to activate play.
   ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO.
      (1)   A form of bingo that consists of an electronic or digital
representation of instant bingo in which a participant wins a prize if the
participant’s electronic instant bingo ticket contains a combination of numbers
or symbols that was designated in advance as a winning combination, and to
which all of the following apply:
         (a)   Each deal has a predetermined, finite number of winning and
losing tickets and a predetermined prize amount and deal structure, provided
that there may be multiple winning combinations in each deal and multiple
winning tickets.
         (b)   Each electronic instant bingo ticket within a deal has a unique
serial number that is not regenerated.
         (c)   Each electronic instant bingo ticket within a deal is sold for
the same price.
         (d)   After a participant purchases an electronic instant bingo
ticket, the combination of numbers or symbols on the ticket is revealed to the
participant.
         (e)   The reveal of numbers or symbols on the ticket may incorporate
an entertainment or bonus theme, provided that the reveal does not include
spinning reels that resemble a slot machine.
         (f)   The reveal theme, if any, does not require additional
consideration or award any prize other than any predetermined prize associated
with the electronic instant bingo ticket.
      (2)   The term shall not include any of the following:
         (a)   Any game, entertainment, or bonus theme that replicates or
simulates any of the following:
            1.   The gambling games of keno, blackjack, roulette, poker, craps,
other casino-style table games;
            2.   Horse racing;
            3.   Gambling games offered in this state on slot machines or video
lottery terminals. As used in this division, “video lottery terminal” has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 3770.21.
         (b)   Any device operated by dropping one or more coins or tokens into
a slot and pulling a handle or pushing a button or touchpoint on a touchscreen
to activate one to three or more rotating reels marked into horizontal segments
by varying symbols, where the predetermined prize amount depends on how and how
many of the symbols line up when the rotating reels come to a rest;
         (c)   Any device that includes a coin or token slot, tray, or hopper
and the ability to dispense coins, cash, tokens, or anything of value other
than a credit ticket voucher.
   ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO SYSTEM. Means both of the following:
      (1)   A mechanical, electronic, digital, or video device and associated
software to which all of the following apply:
         (a)   It is used by not more than one player at a time to play
electronic instant bingo on a single screen that is physically connected to the
device;
         (b)   It is located on the premises of the principal place of business
of a veteran’s or fraternal organization that holds a type II or type III bingo
license to conduct electronic instant bingo at that location issued under R.C.
§ 2915.08.
      (2)   Any associated equipment or software used to manage, monitor, or
document any aspect of electronic instant bingo.
   EXPENSES. The reasonable amount of gross profit actually expended for all of
the following:
      (1)   The purchase or lease of bingo supplies;
      (2)   The annual license fee required under Ohio R.C. 2915.08;
      (3)   Bank fees and service charges for a bingo session or game account
described in Ohio R.C. 2915.10;
      (4)   Audits and accounting services;
      (5)   Safes;
      (6)   Cash registers;
      (7)   Hiring security personnel;
      (8)   Advertising bingo;
      (9)   Renting premises in which to conduct a bingo session;
      (10)   Tables and chairs;
      (11)   Expenses for maintaining and operating a charitable organization’s
facilities, including, but not limited to, a post home, club house, lounge,
tavern or canteen and any grounds attached to the post home, club house,
lounge, tavern or canteen;
      (12)   Payment of real property taxes and assessments that are levied on
a premises on which bingo is conducted; and
      (13)   Any other product or service directly related to the conduct of
bingo that is authorized in rules adopted by the Attorney General under R.C. §
2915.08(F)(1).
   FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. Any society, order, state headquarters or
association within the state, except a college or high school fraternity, that
is not organized for profit, that is a branch, lodge or chapter of a national
or state organization, that exists exclusively for the common business or
sodality of its members.
   GAMBLING DEVICE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A book, totalizer or other equipment used for recording bets;
      (2)   A ticket, token or other device representing a chance, share or
interest in a scheme of chance or evidencing a bet;
      (3)   A deck of cards, dice, gaming table, roulette wheel, slot machine
or other apparatus designed for use in connection with a game of chance;
      (4)   Any equipment, device, apparatus or paraphernalia specially
designed for gambling purposes; and
      (5)   Bingo supplies sold or otherwise provided, or used, in violation of
this chapter or Ohio R.C. Ch. 2915.
   GAMBLING OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. Chapter 2915;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 or a violation of R.C. § 2915.06
as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or of the United States, of which gambling is an
element; and
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under divisions (1), (2) or (3) of this definition.
   GAME FLARE. The board or placard, or electronic representation of a board or
placard, that accompanies each deal of instant bingo or electronic instant
bingo tickets and that includes the following information for the game:
      (1)   The name of the game;
      (2)   The manufacturer’s name or distinctive logo;
      (3)   The form number;
      (4)   The ticket count;
      (5)   The prize structure, including the number of winning tickets by
denomination and the respective winning symbol or number combinations for the
winning tickets;
      (6)   The cost per play; and
      (7)   The serial number of the game.
   GAME OF CHANCE. Poker, craps, roulette or other game in which a player gives
anything of value in the hope of gain, the outcome of which is determined
largely by chance, but does not include bingo.
   GAME OF CHANCE CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. Any game of chance designed to produce
income for the person who conducts or operates the game of chance, but does not
include bingo.
   GROSS ANNUAL REVENUES. The annual gross receipts derived from the conduct of
bingo described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in this section,
plus the annual net profit derived from the conduct of bingo described in
division (2) of the definition of “bingo” in this section.
   GROSS PROFIT. Gross receipts minus the amount actually expended for the
payment of prize awards.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. All money or assets, including admission fees, that a person
receives from bingo without the deduction of any amounts for prizes paid out or
for the expenses of conducting bingo. GROSS RECEIPTS does not include any money
directly taken in from the sale of food or beverages by a charitable
organization conducting bingo, or by a bona fide auxiliary unit or society of a
charitable organization conducting bingo; provided, all of the following apply:
      (1)   The auxiliary unit or society has been in existence as a bona fide
auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization for at least two years
prior to conducting bingo;
      (2)   The person who purchases the food or beverage receives nothing of
value, except the food or beverage and items customarily received with the
purchase of that food or beverage; and
      (3)   The food and beverages are sold at customary and reasonable prices.
   HISTORIC RAILROAD. All or a portion of the tracks and right-of-way of a
railroad that was owned and operated by a for profit common carrier in the
state at any time prior to 1-1-1950.
   INSTANT BINGO. A form of bingo that shall use folded or banded tickets or
paper cards with perforated break-open tabs, a face of which is covered or
otherwise hidden from view to conceal a number, letter, or symbol, or set of
numbers, letters, or symbols, some of which have been designated in advance as
prize winners, and may also include games in which some winners are determined
by the random selection of one or more bingo numbers by the use of a seal card
or bingo blower. “Instant bingo” also includes a punch board game. In all
“instant bingo” the prize amount and structure shall be predetermined. The term
does not include electronic instant bingo or any device that is activated by
the insertion of a coin, currency, token, or an equivalent, and that contains
as one of its components a video display monitor that is capable of displaying
numbers, letters, symbols, or characters in winning or losing combinations.
   INSTANT BINGO TICKET DISPENSER. A mechanical device that dispenses an
instant bingo ticket or card as the sole item of value dispensed and that has
the following characteristics:
      (1)   It is activated upon the insertion of United States currency;
      (2)   It performs no gaming functions;
      (3)   It does not contain a video display monitor or generate noise;
      (4)   It is not capable of displaying any numbers, letters, symbols or
characters in winning or losing combinations;
      (5)   It does not simulate or display rolling or spinning reels;
      (6)   It is incapable of determining whether a dispensed bingo ticket or
card is a winning or non-winning ticket or card and requires a winning ticket
or card to be paid by a bingo game operator;
      (7)   It may provide accounting and security features to aid in
accounting for the instant bingo tickets or cards it dispenses; and
      (8)   It is not part of an electronic network and is not interactive.
   I.R.C. or INTERNAL REVENUE CODE. The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 100
Stat. 2085, 26 U.S.C. §§ 1 et seq., as now or hereafter amended.
   MANUFACTURER. Any person who assembles completed bingo supplies from raw
materials, other items or subparts or who modifies, converts, adds to or
removes parts from bingo supplies to further their promotion or sale.
   MERCHANDISE PRIZE. Any item of value, but shall not include any of the
following:
      (1)   Cash, gift cards, or any equivalent thereof;
      (2)   Plays on games of chance, state lottery tickets, or bingo;
      (3)   Firearms, tobacco or alcoholic beverages; or
      (4)   A redeemable voucher that is redeemable for any of the items listed
in divisions (1), (2) or (3) of this definition.
   NET PROFIT. Gross profit minus expenses.
   NET PROFIT FROM THE PROCEEDS OF THE SALE OF INSTANT BINGO OR ELECTRONIC
INSTANT BINGO. Gross profit minus the ordinary, necessary, and reasonable
expense expended for the purchase of bingo supplies for the purpose of
conducting instant bingo or electronic instant bingo, and, in the case of
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conducted by a veteran’s, fraternal,
or sporting organization, minus the payment by that organization of real
property taxes and assessments levied on a premises on which instant bingo or
electronic instant bingo is conducted.
   PARTICIPANT. Any person who plays bingo.
   PERSON. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1.59 and includes any firm or
any other legal entity, however organized.
   POOL NOT CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. A scheme in which a participant gives a
valuable consideration for a chance to win a prize and the total amount of
consideration wagered is distributed to a participant or participants.
   PUNCH BOARD. A form of instant bingo that uses a board containing a number
of holes or receptacles of uniform size in which are placed, mechanically and
randomly, serially numbered slips of paper that may be punched or drawn from
the hole or receptacle. A player may punch or draw the numbered slips of paper
from the holes or receptacles and obtain the prize established for the game if
the number drawn corresponds to a winning number or, if the punch board
includes the use of a seal card, a potential winning number.
   RAFFLE. A form of bingo in which the one or more prizes are won by one or
more persons who have purchased a raffle ticket. The one or more winners of the
raffle are determined by drawing a ticket stub or other detachable section from
a receptacle containing ticket stubs or detachable sections corresponding to
all tickets sold for the RAFFLE. The term does not include the drawing of a
ticket stub or other detachable section of a ticket purchased to attend a
professional sporting event if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The ticket stub or other detachable section is used to select the
winner of a free prize given away at the professional sporting event; and
      (2)   The cost of the ticket is the same as the cost of a ticket to the
professional sporting event on days when no free prize is given away.
   REDEEMABLE VOUCHER. Any ticket, token, coupon, receipt or other noncash
representation of value.
   RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION. Any church, body of communicants, or group that is
not organized or operated for profit and that gathers in common membership for
regular worship and religious observances.
   REVOKE. To void permanently all rights and privileges of the holder of a
license issued under Ohio R.C. 2915.08, 2915.081 or 2915.082 or a charitable
gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   SCHEME OF CHANCE.
      (1)   A slot machine unless authorized under Ohio R.C. Ch. 3772, lottery
unless authorized under Ohio R.C. Ch. 3770, numbers game, pool conducted for
profit or other scheme in which a participant gives a valuable consideration
for a chance to win a prize, but does not include bingo, a skill-based
amusement machine, or a pool not conducted for profit. SCHEME OF CHANCE
includes the use of an electronic device to reveal the results of a game entry
if valuable consideration is paid, directly or indirectly, for a chance to win
a prize. Valuable consideration is deemed to be paid for a chance to win a
prize in the following instances:
         (a)   Less than 50% of the goods or services sold by a scheme of
chance operator in exchange for game entries are used or redeemed by
participants at any one location;
         (b)   Less than 50% of participants who purchase goods or services at
any one location do not accept, use, or redeem the goods or services sold or
purportedly sold;
         (c)   More than 50% of prizes at any one location are revealed to
participants through an electronic device simulating a game of chance or a
“casino game” as defined in Ohio R.C. 3772.01;
         (d)   The good or service sold by a scheme of chance operator in
exchange for a game entry cannot be used or redeemed in the manner advertised;
         (e)   A participant pays more than fair market value for goods or
services offered by a scheme of chance operator in order to receive one or more
game entries;
         (f)   A participant may use the electronic device to purchase
additional game entries;
         (g)   A participant may purchase additional game entries by using
points or credits won as prizes while using the electronic device;
         (h)   A scheme of chance operator pays out in prize money more than
20% of the gross revenue received at one location; or
         (i)   A participant makes a purchase or exchange in order to obtain
any good or service that may be used to facilitate play on the electronic
device.
      (2)   As used in this division, “electronic device” means a mechanical,
video, digital or electronic machine or device that is capable of displaying
information on a screen or other mechanism and that is owned, leased or
otherwise possessed by any person conducting a scheme of chance, or by that
person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries or contractors. "Electronic device"
does not include an electronic instant bingo system.
   SEAL CARD. A form of instant bingo that uses instant bingo tickets in
conjunction with a board or placard that contains one or more seals that, when
removed or opened, reveal predesignated winning numbers, letters or symbols.
   SECURITY PERSONNEL. Includes any person who either is a sheriff, deputy
sheriff, marshal, deputy marshal, township constable or member of an organized
police department of a municipal corporation or has successfully completed a
peace officer’s training course pursuant to Ohio R.C. 109.71 to 109.79 and who
is hired to provide security for the premises on which bingo is conducted.
   SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINE.
      (1)   (a)   A mechanical, video, digital or electronic device that
rewards the player or players, if at all, only with merchandise prizes or with
redeemable vouchers redeemable only for merchandise prizes; provided that, with
respect to rewards for playing the game all of the following apply:
            1.   The wholesale value of a merchandise prize awarded as a result
of the single play of a machine does not exceed $10;
            2.   Redeemable vouchers awarded for any single play of a machine
are not redeemable for a merchandise prize with a wholesale value of more than
$10;
            3.   Redeemable vouchers are not redeemable for a merchandise prize
that has a wholesale value of more than $10 times the fewest number of single
plays necessary to accrue the redeemable vouchers required to obtain that
prize; and
            4.   Any redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes are distributed
at the site of the skill- based amusement machine at the time of play.
         (b)   A card for the purchase of gasoline is a redeemable voucher for
purposes of division (1) of this definition even if the skill-based amusement
machine for the play of which the card is awarded is located at a place where
gasoline may not be legally distributed to the public or the card is not
redeemable at the location of, or at the time of playing, the skill-based
amusement machine.
      (2)   A device shall not be considered a skill-based amusement machine
and shall be considered a slot machine if it pays cash or one or more of the
following apply:
         (a)   The ability of a player to succeed at the game is impacted by
the number or ratio of prior wins to prior losses of players playing the game;
         (b)   Any reward of redeemable vouchers is not based solely on the
player achieving the object of the game or the players score;
         (c)   The outcome of the game, or the value of the redeemable voucher
or merchandise prize awarded for winning the game, can be controlled by a
source other than any player playing the game;
         (d)   The success of any player is or may be determined by a chance
event that cannot be altered by player actions;
         (e)   The ability of any player to succeed at the game is determined
by game features not visible or known to the player; and/or
         (f)   The ability of the player to succeed at the game is impacted by
the exercise of a skill that no reasonable player could exercise.
      (3)   All of the following apply to any machine that is operated as
described in division (1) of this definition:
         (a)   As used in this definition of “skill-based amusement machine”,
“game” and “play” mean one event from the initial activation of the machine
until the results of play are determined without payment of additional
consideration. An individual utilizing a machine that involves a single game,
play, contest, competition or tournament may be awarded redeemable vouchers or
merchandise prizes based on the results of play.
         (b)   Advance play for a single game, play, contest, competition or
tournament participation may be purchased. The cost of the contest, competition
or tournament participation may be greater than a single non-contest,
competition or tournament play.
         (c)   To the extent that the machine is used in a contest, competition
or tournament, that contest, competition or tournament has a defined starting
and ending date and is open to participants in competition for scoring and
ranking results toward the awarding of redeemable vouchers or merchandise
prizes that are stated prior to the start of the contest, competition or
tournament.
      (4)   For purposes of division (1) of this definition, the mere presence
of a device, such as a pin- setting, ball-releasing or scoring mechanism, that
does not contribute to or affect the outcome of the play of the game does not
make the device a skill-based amusement machine.
   SLOT MACHINE.
      (1)   Means either of the following:
         (a)   Any mechanical, electronic, video or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player who gives the thing of value in the hope of gain; or
         (b)   Any mechanical, electronic, video or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player to conduct bingo or a scheme or game of chance.
      (2)   SLOT MACHINE does not include a skill-based amusement machine, an
instant bingo ticket dispenser, or an electronic instant bingo system.
   SPORTING ORGANIZATION. A hunting, fishing, or trapping organization, other
than a college or high school fraternity or sorority, that is not organized for
profit, that is affiliated with a state or national sporting organization,
including but not limited to, the Ohio League of Sportsmen and that has been in
continuous existence in the state for a period of three years.
   SUSPEND. To interrupt temporarily all rights and privileges of the holder of
a license issued under Ohio R.C. 2915.08, 2915.081 or 2915.082 or a charitable
gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   SWEEPSTAKES. Any game, contest, advertising scheme or plan or other
promotion where consideration is not required for a person to enter to win or
become eligible to receive any prize, the determination of which is based upon
chance. SWEEPSTAKES does not include bingo as authorized under Ohio R.C. Ch.
2915, pari- mutuel wagering as authorized by Ohio R.C. Ch. 3769, lotteries
conducted by the State Lottery Commission as authorized by Ohio R.C. Ch. 3770
and casino gaming as authorized by Ohio R.C. Ch. 3772.
   SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL DEVICE.
      (1)   A mechanical, video, digital or electronic machine or device that
is owned, leased or otherwise possessed by any person conducting a sweepstakes,
or by that person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries or contractors, that is
intended to be used by a sweepstakes participant, and that is capable of
displaying information on a screen or other mechanism. A device is a
SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL DEVICE if any of the following apply:
         (a)   The device uses a simulated game terminal as a representation of
the prizes associated with the results of the sweepstakes entries;
         (b)   The device utilizes software such that the simulated game
influences or determines the winning of or value of the prize;
         (c)   The device selects prizes from a predetermined finite pool of
entries;
         (d)   The device utilizes a mechanism that reveals the content of a
predetermined sweepstakes entry;
         (e)   The device predetermines the prize results and stores those
results for delivery at the time the sweepstakes entry results are revealed;
         (f)   The device utilizes software to create a game result;
         (g)   The device reveals the prize incrementally, even though the
device does not influence the awarding of the prize or the value of any prize
awarded; and
         (h)   The device determines and associates the prize with an entry or
entries at the time the sweepstakes is entered.
      (2)   As used in this definition and in §
630.02 of this chapter:
         (a)   ENTER. The act by which a person becomes eligible to receive any
prize offered in a sweepstakes.
         (b)   ENTRY. One event from the initial activation of the sweepstakes
terminal device until all the sweepstakes prize results from that activation
are revealed.
         (c)   PRIZE. Any gift, award, gratuity, good, service, credit, reward
or any other thing of value that may be transferred to a person, whether
possession of the prize is actually transferred, or placed on an account or
other record as evidence of the intent to transfer the prize.
         (d)   SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL DEVICE FACILITY. Any location in this state
where a sweepstakes terminal device is provided to a sweepstakes participant,
except as provided in §
630.02(G) of this chapter and Ohio R.C. 2915.02(G).
   VETERAN’S ORGANIZATION.
      (1)   Any individual post or state headquarters of a national veteran’s
association or an auxiliary unit of any individual post of a national veteran’s
association, which post, state headquarters or auxiliary unit is incorporated
as a nonprofit corporation and either has received a letter from the state
headquarters of the national veteran’s association indicating that the
individual post or auxiliary unit is in good standing with the national
veteran’s association or has received a letter from the national veteran’s
association indicating that the state headquarters is in good standing with the
national veteran’s association.
      (2)   As used in this division, “national veteran’s association” means
any veteran’s association that has been in continuous existence as such for a
period of at least five years and either is incorporated by an act of the
United States Congress or has a national dues-paying membership of at least
5,000 persons.
   VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER’S ORGANIZATION. Any organization of volunteer
firefighters, as defined in Ohio R.C. 146.01, that is organized and operated
exclusively to provide financial support for a volunteer fire department or a
volunteer fire company and that is recognized or ratified by a county,
municipal corporation or township.
   VOLUNTEER RESCUE SERVICE ORGANIZATION. Any organization of volunteers
organized to function as an emergency medical service organization, as defined
in Ohio R.C. 4765.01.
   YOUTH ATHLETIC ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized for profit,
that is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial support to, or
to operate, athletic activities for persons who are 21 years of age or younger
by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating or contributing to the support of
an athletic team, club, league or association.
   YOUTH ATHLETIC PARK ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized for
profit, that satisfies both of the following:
      (1)   It owns, operates and maintains playing fields that satisfy both of
the following:
         (a)   The playing fields are used for athletic activities by one or
more organizations, not organized for profit, each of which is organized and
operated exclusively to provide financial support to, or to operate, athletic
activities for persons who are 18 years of age or younger by means of
sponsoring, organizing, operating, or contributing to the support of an
athletic team, club, league, or association.
         (b)   The playing fields are not used for any profit-making activity
at any time during the year.
      (2)   It uses the proceeds of bingo it conducts exclusively for the
operation, maintenance and improvement of its playing fields of the type
described in division (1) of this definition.
(ORC 2915.01)
§ 630.02 GAMBLING IN GENERAL.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Engage in bookmaking, or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates bookmaking;
      (2)   Establish, promote or operate or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance;
      (3)   Knowingly procure, transmit, exchange or engage in conduct that
facilitates the procurement, transmission or exchange of information for use in
establishing odds or determining winners in connection with bookmaking or with
any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance;
      (4)   Engage in betting or in playing any scheme or game of chance as a
substantial source of income or livelihood;
      (5)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the
use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility
and either:
         (a)   Give to another person any item described in Ohio R.C. 2915.01
(VV)(1), (VV)(2), (VV)(3) or (VV)(4) as a prize for playing or participating in
a sweepstakes; or
         (b)   Give to another person any merchandise prize, or a redeemable
voucher for a merchandise prize, the wholesale value of which is in excess of
$10 and which is awarded as a single entry for playing or participating in a
sweepstakes. Redeemable vouchers shall not be redeemable for a merchandise
prize that has a wholesale value of more than $10.
      (6)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the
use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility
without first obtaining a current annual “certificate of registration” from the
Attorney General as required by Ohio R.C. 2915.02(F); or
      (7)   With purpose to violate divisions (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4),
(A)(5) or (A)(6) above, acquire, possess, control or operate any gambling
device.
   (B)   For purposes of division (A)(1) above, a person facilitates bookmaking
if the person in any way knowingly aids an illegal bookmaking operation,
including, without limitation, placing a bet with a person engaged in or
facilitating illegal bookmaking. For purposes of division (A)(2) above, a
person facilitates a game of chance conducted for profit or a scheme of chance
if the person in any way knowingly aids in the conduct or operation of any such
game or scheme, including, without limitation, playing any such game or scheme.
   (C)   This section does not prohibit conduct in connection with gambling
expressly permitted by law.
   (D)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Games of chance, if all of the following apply:
         (a)   The games of chance are not craps for money or roulette for
money;
         (b)   The games of chance are conducted by a charitable organization
that is and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination
letter that is currently in effect, stating that the organization is exempt
from federal income taxation under I.R.C. § 501(a) and described in I.R.C. §
501(c)(3);
         (c)   The games of chance are conducted at festivals of the charitable
organization that are conducted not more than a total of five days a calendar
year, and are conducted on premises owned by the charitable organization for a
period of no less than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the
games of chance, on premises leased from a governmental unit, or on premises
that are leased from a veteran’s or fraternal organization and that have been
owned by the lessor veteran’s or fraternal organization for a period of no less
than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the games of chance. A
charitable organization shall not lease premises from a veteran’s or fraternal
organization to conduct a festival described in this division, if the veteran’s
or fraternal organization already has leased the premises 12 times during the
preceding year to charitable organizations for that purpose. If a charitable
organization leases premises from a veteran’s or fraternal organization to
conduct a festival described in this division (D)(1)(c), the charitable
organization shall not pay a rental rate for the premises per day of the
festival that exceeds the rental rate per bingo session that a charitable
organization may pay under Ohio R.C. 2915.09(B)(1) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance when it leases premises from another charitable
organization to conduct bingo games;
         (d)   All of the money or assets received from the games of chance
after deduction only of prizes paid out during the conduct of the games of
chance are used by, given, donated or otherwise transferred to any organization
that is described in I.R.C. § 509(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that is tax exempt under I.R.C. § 501(a)
and described in I.R.C. § 501(c)(3); and
         (e)   The games of chance are not conducted during or within ten hours
of a bingo game conducted for amusement purposes only pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2915.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. No person shall
receive any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or other
form of compensation, directly or indirectly, for operating or assisting in the
operation of any game of chance.
      (2)   Any tag fishing tournament, as defined in Ohio R.C. 1531.01,
operated under a permit issued under Ohio R.C. 1533.92; and
      (3)   Bingo conducted by a charitable organization that holds a license
issued under Ohio R.C. 2915.08.
   (E)   Division (D) above shall not be construed to authorize the sale, lease
or other temporary or permanent transfer of the right to conduct games of
chance, as granted by that division (D), by any charitable organization that is
granted that right.
   (F)   (1)   Any person desiring to conduct, or participate in the conduct
of, a sweepstakes with the use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a
sweepstakes terminal device facility shall first register with the Office of
the Attorney General and obtain an annual certificate of registration by
providing a filing fee of $200 and all information as required by rule adopted
under Ohio R.C. 2915.02(H). Not later than the tenth day of each month, each
sweepstakes terminal device operator shall file a sweepstakes terminal device
monthly report with the Attorney General and provide a filing fee of $50 and
all information required by rule adopted under Ohio R.C. 2915.02(H).
      (2)   All information provided to the Attorney General under this
division (F) shall be available to law enforcement upon request.
   (G)   (1)   A person may apply to the Attorney General, on a form prescribed
by the Attorney General, for a certificate of compliance that the person is not
operating a sweepstakes terminal device facility. The form shall require the
person to include the address of the business location where sweepstakes
terminal devices will be used and to make the following certifications:
         (a)   That the person will not use more than two sweepstakes terminal
devices at the business location;
         (b)   That the retail value of sweepstakes prizes to be awarded at the
business location using sweepstakes terminal devices during a reporting period
will be less than 3% of the gross revenue received at the business location
during the reporting period;
         (c)   That no other form of gaming, except lottery ticket sales as
authorized under Ohio R.C. Ch. 3770 will be conducted at the business location
or in an adjoining area of the business location;
         (d)   That any sweepstakes terminal device at the business location
will not allow any deposit of any money, coin or token, or the use of any
credit card, debit card, prepaid card, or any other method of similar payment
to be used, directly or indirectly, to participate in a sweepstakes;
         (e)   That notification of any prize will not take place on the same
day as a participant’s sweepstakes entry; and
         (f)   That the person consents to provide any other information to the
Attorney General as required by rule adopted under Ohio R.C. 2915.02(H).
      (2)   The filing fee for a certificate of compliance is $250. The
Attorney General may charge up to an additional $250 for reasonable expenses
resulting from any investigation related to an application for a certificate of
compliance.
      (3)   A certificate of compliance is effective for one year. The
certificate holder may reapply for a certificate of compliance. A person issued
a certificate of compliance shall file semiannual reports with the Attorney
General stating the number of sweepstakes terminal devices at the business
location and that the retail value of prizes awarded at the business location
using sweepstakes terminal devices is less than 3% of the gross revenue
received at the business location.
   (H)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of gambling, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling
offense, gambling is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
Notwithstanding this division, failing to file a sweepstakes terminal device
monthly report as required by division (F) above or the semiannual report
required by division (G) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2915.02(A) - (G), (K))
§ 630.03 OPERATING A GAMBLING HOUSE.
   (A)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control or
supervision of premises, shall:
      (1)   Use or occupy the premises for gambling in violation of Ohio R.C.
2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance; and
      (2)   Recklessly permit the premises to be used or occupied for gambling
in violation of Ohio R.C. 2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of operating a gambling
house, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a gambling offense, operating a gambling house is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (C)   Premises used or occupied in violation of this section constitute a
nuisance subject to abatement under Ohio R.C. Ch. 3767.
(ORC 2915.03)
§ 630.04 PUBLIC GAMING.
   (A)   No person, while at a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall or
other place of public accommodation, business, amusement or resort shall make a
bet or play any game of chance or scheme of chance.
   (B)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control or
supervision of a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall or other place
of public accommodation, business, amusement or resort shall recklessly permit
those premises to be used or occupied in violation of division (A) above.
   (C)   Divisions (A) and (B) above do not prohibit conduct in connection with
gambling expressly permitted by law.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public gaming. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, public gaming is a minor misdemeanor. If
the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling offense, public
gaming is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (E)   Premises used or occupied in violation of division (B) above
constitute a nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Ch. 3767.
(ORC 2915.04)
§ 630.05 CHEATING.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome
of any of the following:
      (1)   The subject of a bet;
      (2)   A contest of knowledge, skill or endurance that is not an athletic
or sporting event;
      (3)   A scheme or game of chance; and
      (4)   Bingo.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Offer, give, solicit or accept anything of value to corrupt the
outcome of an athletic or sporting event; and
      (2)   Engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome of an athletic or
sporting event.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of cheating.
Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), cheating is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the potential gain from the cheating is $1,000 or more or
if the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling offense or of any
theft offense as defined in Ohio R.C. 2913.01, cheating is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of corrupting sports.
Corrupting sports is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2915.05)
§ 630.06 RESPONSIBILITY OF CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION CONDUCTING BINGO GAME.
   (A)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo shall fail to do any of
the following:
      (1)   Own all of the equipment used to conduct bingo or lease that
equipment from a charitable organization that is licensed to conduct bingo, or
from the landlord of a premises where bingo is conducted, for a rental rate
that is not more than is customary and reasonable for that equipment;
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(3) below, use all of
the gross receipts from bingo for paying prizes, for reimbursement of expenses
for or for renting premises in which to conduct bingo, for purchasing or
leasing bingo supplies used in conducting bingo, for reimbursement of expenses
for or for hiring security personnel, for reimbursement of expenses for or for
advertising bingo or for reimbursement of other expenses or for other expenses
listed in the definition for “expenses” in Ohio R.C. 2915.01; provided that,
the amount of the receipts so spent is not more than is customary and
reasonable for a similar purchase, lease, hiring, advertising or expense. If
the building in which bingo is conducted is owned by the charitable
organization conducting bingo and the bingo conducted includes a form of bingo
described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in Ohio R.C. 2915.01,
the charitable organization may deduct from the total amount of the gross
receipts from each session a sum equal to the lesser of $600 or 45% of the
gross receipts from the bingo described in that division as consideration for
the use of the premises; and
      (3)   Use, or give, donate, or otherwise transfer, all of the net profit
derived from bingo described in R.C. § 2915.01(O)(1) for a charitable purpose
listed in its license application and described in R.C. § 2915.01(V), or
distribute all of the net profit from the proceeds of the sale of instant bingo
or electronic instant bingo as stated in its license application and in
accordance with R.C. § 2915.101, as applicable.
   (B)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in Ohio R.C. 2915.01 shall fail to do
any of the following:
      (1)   Conduct the bingo game on premises that are owned by the charitable
organization, on premises that are owned by another charitable organization and
leased from that charitable organization for a rental rate not in excess of the
lesser of $650 per bingo session or 45% of the gross receipts of the bingo
session, on premises that are leased from a person other than a charitable
organization for a rental rate that is not more than is customary and
reasonable for premises that are similar in location, size and quality but not
in excess of $450 per bingo session, or on premises that are owned by a person
other than a charitable organization, that are leased from that person by
another charitable organization, and that are subleased from that other
charitable organization by the charitable organization for a rental rate not in
excess of $450 per bingo session. No charitable organization is required to pay
property taxes or assessments on premises that the charitable organization
leases from another person to conduct bingo sessions. If the charitable
organization leases from a person other than a charitable organization the
premises on which it conducts bingo sessions, the lessor of the premises shall
provide only the premises to the organization and shall not provide the
organization with bingo game operators, security personnel, concessions or
concession operators, bingo supplies or any other type of service. A charitable
organization shall not lease or sublease premises that it owns or leases to
more than three other charitable organizations per calendar week for the
purpose of conducting bingo sessions on the premises. A person that is not a
charitable organization shall not lease premises that it owns, leases or
otherwise is empowered to lease to more than three charitable organizations per
calendar week for conducting bingo sessions on the premises. In no case shall
more than nine bingo sessions be conducted on any premises in any calendar
week;
      (2)   Display its license conspicuously at the premises where the bingo
session is conducted; and
      (3)   Conduct the bingo session in accordance with division (1) of the
definition of “bingo” in Ohio R.C. 2915.01.
   (C)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in Ohio R.C. 2915.01 shall not do any
of the following:
      (1)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for operating a bingo
session that is conducted by the charitable organization or for preparing,
selling, or serving food or beverages at the site of the bingo session, permit
any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to pay
compensation to any bingo game operator who prepares, sells or serves food or
beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable organization, or
permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to prepare,
sell or serve food or beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable
organization, if the auxiliary unit or society pays any compensation to the
bingo game operators who prepare, sell or serve the food or beverages;
      (2)   Pay consulting fees to any person for any services performed in
relation to the bingo session;
      (3)   Pay concession fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in the bingo session;
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(4), conduct more
than three bingo sessions in any seven-day period. A volunteer firefighter’s
organization or a volunteer rescue service organization that conducts not more
than five bingo sessions in a calendar year may conduct more than three bingo
sessions in a seven-day period after notifying the Attorney General when it
will conduct the sessions;
      (5)   Pay out more than $6,000 in prizes during any bingo session that is
conducted by the charitable organization;
      (6)   Conduct a bingo session at any time during the eight-hour period
between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., at any time during, or within ten hours of, a
bingo game conducted for amusement only pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.12 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, at any premises not specified on
its license, or on any day of the week or during any time period not specified
on its license. This division does not prohibit the sale of instant bingo
tickets beginning at 9:00 a.m. for a bingo session that begins at 10:00 a.m. If
circumstances make it impractical for the charitable organization to conduct a
bingo session at the premises, or on the day of the week or at the time
specified on its license or if a charitable organization wants to conduct bingo
sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than the day or time specified
on its license, the charitable organization may apply in writing to the
Attorney General for an amended license pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08(J). A
charitable organization may apply twice in each calendar year for an amended
license to conduct bingo sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than
the day or time specified on its license. If the amended license is granted,
the organization may conduct bingo sessions at the premises, on the day of the
week, and at the time specified on its amended license;
      (7)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, is under the age of 18 to work as a bingo game operator;
      (8)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any
jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator;
      (9)   Permit the lessor of the premises on which the bingo session is
conducted, if the lessor is not a charitable organization, to provide the
charitable organization with bingo game operators, security personnel,
concessions, bingo supplies or any other type of service;
      (10)   Purchase or lease bingo supplies from any person, except a
distributor issued a license under Ohio R.C. 2915.081;
      (11)   (a)   Use or permit the use of electronic bingo aids, except under
the following circumstances:
            1.   For any single participant, not more than 90 bingo faces can
be played using an electronic bingo aid or aids;
            2.   The charitable organization shall provide a participant using
an electronic bingo aid with corresponding paper bingo cards or sheets;
            3.   The total price of bingo faces played with an electronic bingo
aid shall be equal to the total price of the same number of bingo faces played
with a paper bingo card or sheet sold at the same bingo session but without an
electronic bingo aid;
            4.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be part of an electronic
network other than a network that includes only bingo aids and devices that are
located on the premises at which the bingo is being conducted or be interactive
with any device not located on the premises at which the bingo is being
conducted;
            5.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to participate in bingo
that is conducted at a location other than the location at which the bingo
session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used; and
            6.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to provide for the
input of numbers and letters announced by a bingo caller other than the bingo
caller who physically calls the numbers and letters at the location at which
the bingo session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
         (b)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with Ohio
R.C. Ch. 119 that govern the use of electronic bingo aids. The rules may
include a requirement that an electronic bingo aid be capable of being audited
by the Attorney General to verify the number of bingo cards or sheets played
during each bingo session.
      (12)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, to be under 18 years of age to play bingo described in division (1)
of the definition of “bingo” in Ohio R.C. 2915.01.
   (D)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of this section,
no charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator, and no bingo
game operator shall receive or accept, any commission, wage, salary, reward,
tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly,
regardless of the source, for conducting bingo or providing other work or labor
at the site of bingo during a bingo session.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of this section, no
charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator any commission,
wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation,
directly or indirectly regardless of the source, for conducting instant bingo,
electronic instant bingo, or both other than at a bingo session at the site of
instant bingo, electronic instant bingo, or both other than at a bingo session.
      (3)   Nothing in this division (D) of this section prohibits an employee
of a fraternal organization, veteran’s organization, or sporting organization
from selling instant bingo tickets or cards to the organization’s members or
invited guests, as long as no portion of the employee’s compensation is paid
from any receipts of bingo.
   (E)   Notwithstanding division (B)(1) above, a charitable organization that,
prior to 12-6-1977, has entered into written agreements for the lease of
premises it owns to another charitable organization or other charitable
organizations for the conducting of bingo sessions so that more than two bingo
sessions are conducted per calendar week on the premises, and a person that is
not a charitable organization and that, prior to 12-6-1977, has entered into
written agreements for the lease of premises it owns to charitable
organizations for the conducting of more than two bingo sessions per calendar
week on the premises, may continue to lease the premises to those charitable
organizations; provided that, no more than four sessions are conducted per
calendar week, that the lessor organization or person has notified the Attorney
General in writing of the organizations that will conduct the sessions and the
days of the week and the times of the day on which the sessions will be
conducted, that the initial lease entered into with each organization that will
conduct the sessions was filed with the Attorney General prior to 12-6-1977,
and that each organization that will conduct the sessions was issued a license
to conduct bingo games by the Attorney General prior to 12-6-1977.
   (F)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) above is guilty of illegally
conducting a bingo game, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
Except as otherwise provided in this division (F), whoever violates divisions
(A)(1), (A)(3), (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), (C)(1) to (C)(11) or (D) above is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been convicted of
a violation of divisions (A)(1), (A)(3), (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), (C)(1) to (C)
(11) or (D) above, a violation of divisions (A)(1), (A)(3), (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)
(3), (C)(1) to (C)(11) or (D) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
Whoever violates division (C)(12) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
division (C)(12) above, a violation of division (C)(12) above is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2915.09)
§ 630.07 MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS BY CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS.
   (A)    No charitable organization that conducts bingo or a game of chance
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.02(D), or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, shall fail to maintain the following records for at least three
years from the date on which the bingo or game of chance is conducted:
      (1)   An itemized list of the gross receipts of each bingo session, each
game of instant bingo by serial number, each electronic instant bingo game by
serial number, each raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance, and
an itemized list of the gross profits of each game of instant bingo by serial
number and each electronic instant bingo game by serial number;
      (2)   An itemized list of all expenses, other than prizes, that are
incurred in conducting bingo, the name of each person to whom the expenses are
paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses;
      (3)   A list of all prizes awarded during each bingo session, each
raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance conducted by the
charitable organization, the total prizes awarded from each game of instant
bingo by serial number and each electronic instant bingo game by serial number,
and the name, address, and social security number of all persons who are
winners of prizes of $600 or more in value;
      (4)   An itemized list of the recipients of the net profit of bingo or
game of chance, including the name and address of each recipient to whom the
money is distributed, and if the organization uses the net profit of bingo, or
the money or assets received from a game of chance, for any charitable or other
purpose set forth in Ohio R.C. 2915.01(V), Ohio R.C. 2915.02(D) or Ohio R.C.
2915.101, a list of each purpose and an itemized list of each expenditure for
each purpose;
      (5)   The number of persons who participate in any bingo session or game
of chance that is conducted by the charitable organization;
      (6)   A list of receipts from the sale of food and beverages by the
charitable organization or one of its auxiliary units or societies, if the
receipts were excluded from “gross receipts” under Ohio R.C. 2915.01(T); and
      (7)   An itemized list of all expenses incurred at each bingo session,
each raffle, each punch board game, or each game of instant bingo or electronic
instant bingo conducted by the charitable organization in the sale of food and
beverages by the charitable organization or by an auxiliary unit or society of
the charitable organization, the name of each person to whom the expenses are
paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses.
   (B)   A charitable organization shall keep the records that it is required
to maintain pursuant to division (A) above at its principal place of business
in the state or at its headquarters in this State and shall notify the Attorney
General of the location at which those records are kept.
   (C)   The gross profit from each bingo session or game described in
divisions (1) or (2) of the definition of “bingo” in Ohio R.C. 2915.01 shall be
deposited into a checking account devoted exclusively to the bingo session or
game. Payments for allowable expenses incurred in conducting the bingo session
or game and payments to recipients of some or all of the net profit of the
bingo session or game shall be made only by checks or electronic fund transfers
drawn on the bingo session or game account.
   (D)   Each charitable organization shall conduct and record an inventory of
all of its bingo supplies as of November 1 of each year.
   (E)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with Ohio R.C. Ch.
119 that establish standards of accounting, record keeping and reporting to
ensure that gross receipts from bingo or games of chance are properly accounted
for.
   (F)   A distributor shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing to another person bingo supplies for use in the state.
The record shall include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name of the manufacturer from which the distributor purchased
the bingo supplies and the date of the purchase;
      (2)   The name and address of the charitable organization or other
distributor to which the bingo supplies were sold or otherwise provided;
      (3)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies; and
      (4)   Invoices that include the non-repeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each charitable organization.
   (G)   A manufacturer shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing bingo supplies for use in the state. The record shall
include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name and address of the distributor to whom the bingo supplies
were sold or otherwise provided;
      (2)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies, including
serial numbers; and
      (3)   Invoices that include the non-repeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each distributor.
   (H)   (1)   The Attorney General or any law enforcement agency may do all of
the following:
         (a)   Investigate any charitable organization, distributor, or
manufacturer or any officer, agent, trustee, member, or employee of the
organization, distributor, or manufacturer;
         (b)   Examine the accounts and records of the charitable organization,
distributor, or manufacturer or of any officer, agent, trustee, member, or
employee of the organization, distributor, or manufacturer;
         (c)   Conduct inspections, audits, and observations of bingo or games
of chance;
         (d)   Conduct inspections of the premises where bingo or games of
chance are conducted or where bingo supplies are manufactured or distributed;
         (e)   Take any other necessary and reasonable action to determine if a
violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 has occurred
and to determine whether R.C. § 2915.11, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, has been complied with.
      (2)   If any law enforcement agency has reasonable grounds to believe
that a charitable organization, distributor, or manufacturer or an officer,
agent, trustee, member, or employee of the organization, distributor, or
manufacturer has violated any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915,
the law enforcement agency may proceed by action in the proper court to enforce
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, provided that the law enforcement agency
shall give written notice to the Attorney General when commencing an action as
described in this division.
   (I)   No person shall destroy, alter, conceal, withhold, or deny access to
any accounts or records of a charitable organization, distributor, or
manufacturer that have been requested for examination, or obstruct, impede, or
interfere with any inspection, audit, or observation of bingo or a game of
chance, of premises where bingo or a game of chance is conducted, or of
premises where bingo supplies are manufactured or distributed, or refuse to
comply with any reasonable request of, or obstruct, impede, or interfere with
any other reasonable action undertaken by, the Attorney General or a law
enforcement agency pursuant to division (H) of this section.
   (J)   Whoever violates divisions (A) or (I) above is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
(ORC 2915.10)
§ 630.08 QUALIFICATIONS OF BINGO GAME OPERATOR.
   (A)   No person shall be a bingo game operator unless the person is 18 years
of age or older.
   (B)   No person who has been convicted of a felony or a gambling offense in
any jurisdiction shall be a bingo game operator.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
third degree. Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
(ORC 2915.11)
§ 630.09 EXEMPTION FOR BINGO GAMES CONDUCTED FOR AMUSEMENT.
   (A)    Sections
630.06 to
630.13 and
630.15 do not apply to bingo games that are conducted for the purpose of
amusement only. A bingo game is conducted for the purpose of amusement only if
it complies with all of the requirements specified in either division (A)(1) or
(A)(2) of this section.
      (1)   (a)   The participants do not pay any money or any other thing of
value, including an admission fee or any fee, for bingo cards or sheets,
objects to cover the spaces or other devices used in playing bingo, for the
privilege of participating in the bingo game, or to defray any costs of the
game, or pay tips or make donations during or immediately before or after the
bingo game.
         (b)   All prizes awarded during the course of the game are non-
monetary, and in the form of merchandise, goods or entitlement to goods or
services only, and the total value of all prizes awarded during the game is
less than $100.
         (c)   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or
other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         (d)   The bingo game is not conducted either during or within ten
hours of any of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.07 through 2915.11 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance; and
            2.   A scheme or game of chance, or bingo described in Ohio R.C.
2915.01(O)(2).
         (e)   The number of players participating in the bingo game does not
exceed 50.
      (2)   (a)   The participants do not pay money or any other thing of value
as an admission fee, and no participant is charged more than $0.25 to purchase
a bingo card or sheet, objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in
playing bingo.
         (b)   The total amount of money paid by all of the participants for
bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover the spaces or other devices used in
playing bingo does not exceed $100.
         (c)   All of the money paid for bingo cards or sheets, objects to
cover spaces or other devices used in playing bingo is used only to pay winners
monetary and non-monetary prizes and to provide refreshments.
         (d)   The total value of all prizes awarded during the game does not
exceed $100.
         (e)   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or
other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         (f)   The bingo game is not conducted during or within ten hours of
either of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to R.C. §§ 2915.07 through 2915.15 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance;
            2.   A scheme of chance or a game of chance, or bingo described in
Ohio R.C. 2915.01(O)(2).
         (g)   All of the participants reside at the premises where the bingo
game is conducted.
         (h)   The bingo games are conducted on different days of the week and
not more than twice in a calendar week.
   (B)   The Attorney General or any local law enforcement agency may
investigate the conduct of a bingo game that purportedly is conducted for
purposes of amusement only if there is reason to believe that the purported
amusement bingo game does not comply with the requirements of either divisions
(A)(1) or (A)(2) above. A local law enforcement agency may proceed by action in
the proper court to enforce this section if the local law enforcement agency
gives written notice to the Attorney General when commencing the action.
(ORC 2915.12)
§ 630.10 PROHIBITIONS WHERE INSTANT BINGO GAME IS CONDUCTED.
   (A)   No charitable organization that conducts instant bingo shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with the requirements of Ohio R.C. 2915.09(A)(1),
(A)(2) and (A)(3), or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (2)   Conduct instant bingo unless either of the following applies:
         (a)   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under I.R.C. § 501(a), is
described in I.R.C. § 501(c)(3), is a charitable organization as defined in
Ohio R.C. 2915.01, is in good standing in the state pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2915.08, and is in compliance with Ohio R.C. Ch. 1716;
         (b)   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under I.R.C. § 501(a), is
described in I.R.C. § 501(c)(7), (c)(8), (c)(10) or (c)(19), or is a veteran’s
organization described in I.R.C. § 501(c)(4), and conducts instant bingo under
Ohio R.C. 2915.13.
      (3)   Conduct instant bingo on any day, at any time or at any premises
not specified on the organization’s license issued pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2915.08;
      (4)   Permit any person whom the organization knows or should have known
has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction to be a
bingo game operator in the conduct of instant bingo;
      (5)   Purchase or lease supplies used to conduct instant bingo or punch
board games from any person except a distributor licensed under Ohio R.C.
2915.081;
      (6)   Sell or provide any instant bingo ticket or card for a price
different from the price printed on it by the manufacturer on either the
instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare;
      (7)   Sell an instant bingo ticket or card to a person under 18 years of
age;
      (8)   Fail to keep unsold instant bingo tickets or cards for less than
three years;
      (9)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for conducting
instant bingo that is conducted by the organization or for preparing, selling
or serving food or beverages at the site of the instant bingo game, permit any
auxiliary unit or society of the organization to pay compensation to any bingo
game operator who prepares, sells or serves food or beverages at an instant
bingo game conducted by the organization, or permit any auxiliary unit or
society of the organization to prepare, sell or serve food or beverages at an
instant bingo game conducted by the organization, if the auxiliary unit or
society pays any compensation to the bingo game operators who prepare, sell or
serve the food or beverages;
      (10)   Pay fees to any person for any services performed in relation to
an instant bingo game, except as provided in Ohio R.C. 2915.093(D);
      (11)   Pay fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in an instant bingo game;
      (12)   (a)   Allow instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold to bingo
game operators at a premises at which the organization sells instant bingo
tickets or cards or to be sold to employees of a D permit holder who are
working at a premises at which instant bingo tickets or cards are sold;
         (b)   Division (A)(12)(a) above does not prohibit a licensed
charitable organization or a bingo game operator from giving any person an
instant bingo ticket as a prize in place of a cash prize won by a participant
in an instant bingo game. In no case shall an instant bingo ticket or card be
sold or provided for a price different from the price printed on it by the
manufacturer on either the instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare.
      (13)   Fail to display its bingo license, and the serial numbers of the
deal of instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold, conspicuously at each
premises at which it sells instant bingo tickets or cards;
      (14)   Possess a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards that was not
purchased from a distributor licensed under Ohio R.C. 2915.081 as reflected on
an invoice issued by the distributor that contains all of the information
required by Ohio R.C. 2915.10(E);
      (15)   Fail, once it opens a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards, to
continue to sell the tickets or cards in that deal until the tickets or cards
with the top two highest tiers of prizes in that deal are sold;
      (16)   Possess bingo supplies that were not obtained in accordance with
Ohio R.C. Ch. 2915.
   (B)   A charitable organization may purchase, lease or use instant bingo
ticket dispensers to sell instant bingo tickets or cards.
   (C)   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.091(C), the Attorney General may adopt
rules in accordance with Ohio R.C. Ch. 119 that govern the conduct of instant
bingo by charitable organizations.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) above or a rule adopted under division
(C) above is guilty of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise
provided in this division (D), illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a
violation of division (A) above or of such a rule adopted under division (C)
above, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(ORC 2915.091)
§ 630.11 RAFFLE DRAWINGS.
   (A)   (1)   Subject to division (A)(2) of this section, a person or entity
may conduct a raffle to raise money for the person or entity and does not need
a license to conduct bingo in order to conduct a raffle drawing that is not for
profit if the person or entity is any of the following:
         (a)   Exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
         (b)   A school district, community school established under R.C.
Chapter 3314, STEM school established under R.C. Chapter 3326, college-
preparatory boarding school established under R.C. Chapter 3328, or chartered
nonpublic school;
         (c)   Exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(4), 501(c)(6), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or
501(c)(19).
      (2)   If a person or entity that is described in division (a)(1)C. of
this section conducts a raffle, the person or entity shall distribute at least
50% of the net profit from the raffle to a charitable purpose described in Ohio
R.C. 2915.01(V) or to a department or agency of the federal government, the
state, or any political subdivision.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (A) of this section, no person shall
conduct a raffle drawing that is for profit or a raffle drawing that is not for
profit.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of illegal
conduct of a raffle. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal
conduct of a raffle is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (B) of this section,
illegal conduct of a raffle is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(ORC 2915.092)
§ 630.12 INSTANT BINGO OTHER THAN AT BINGO SESSIONS.
   (A)   As used in this section, RETAIL INCOME FROM ALL COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY
means the income that a person receives from the provision of goods, services
or activities that are provided at the location where instant bingo other than
at a bingo session is conducted, including the sale of instant bingo tickets. A
religious organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under I.R.C.
§ 501(a) and described in I.R.C. § 501(c)(3), at not more than one location at
which it conducts its charitable programs, may include donations from its
members and guests as retail income.
   (B)   (1)   If a charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant
bingo other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued under R.C.
§ 2915.08, the charitable instant bingo organization shall enter into a written
contract with the owner or lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is
conducted to allow the owner or lessor to assist in the conduct of instant
bingo other than at a bingo session, identify each location where the instant
bingo other than at a bingo session is being conducted, and identify the owner
or lessor of each location.
      (2)   A charitable instant bingo organization that conducts instant bingo
other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued under R.C. §
2915.08 is not required to enter into a written contract with the owner or
lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is conducted provided that
the owner or lessor is not assisting in the conduct of the instant bingo other
than at a bingo session and provided that the conduct of the instant bingo
other than at a bingo session at that location is not more than five days per
calendar year and not more than ten hours per day.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (F) below, no charitable instant bingo
organization shall conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo session at a
location where the primary source of retail income from all commercial activity
at that location is the sale of instant bingo tickets.
   (D)   (1)   The owner or lessor of a location that enters into a contract
pursuant to division (B) below shall pay the full gross profit to the
charitable instant bingo organization, in return for the deal of instant bingo
tickets. The owner or lessor may retain the money that the owner or lessor
receives for selling the instant bingo tickets; provided, however, that, after
the deal has been sold, the owner or lessor shall pay to the charitable instant
bingo organization the value of any unredeemed instant bingo prizes remaining
in the deal of instant bingo tickets. As used in this division (D), FULL GROSS
PROFIT means the amount by which the total receipts of all instant bingo
tickets, if the deal has been sold in full, exceeds the amount that would be
paid out if all prizes were redeemed.
      (2)   The charitable instant bingo organization shall pay 6% of the total
gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets for the purpose of
reimbursing the owner or lessor for expenses described in this division (D).
      (3)   As used in this division (D), EXPENSES means those items provided
for in Ohio R.C. 2915.01(GG)(4), (GG)(5), (GG)(6), (GG)(7), (GG)(8), (GG)(12)
and (GG)(13) and that percentage of the owner’s or lessor’s rent for the
location where instant bingo is conducted. Expenses, in the aggregate, shall
not exceed 6% of the total gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets.
   (E)   A charitable instant bingo organization shall provide the Attorney
General with all of the following information:
      (1)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has terminated a
contract entered into pursuant to division (B) above with an owner or lessor of
a location;
      (2)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has entered into a
written contract pursuant to division (b) of this section with a new owner or
lessor of a location; and
      (3)   That the charitable instant bingo organization is aware of conduct
by the owner or lessor of a location at which instant bingo is conducted that
is in violation of Ohio R.C. Ch. 2915.
   (F)   Division (C) above does not apply to a volunteer firefighter’s
organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under I.R.C. § 501(a)
and described in I.R.C. § 501(C)(3), that conducts instant bingo other than at
a bingo session on the premises where the organization conducts firefighter
training, that has conducted instant bingo continuously for at least five years
prior to 7-1-2003, and that, during each of those five years, had gross
receipts of at least $1,500,000.
(ORC 2915.093)
   (G)   (1)   Subject to the requirements of R.C. §§ 2915.14 and 2915.15
concerning electronic instant bingo, a veteran’s organization, a fraternal
organization, or a sporting organization authorized to conduct a bingo session
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2915 may conduct instant bingo, electronic instant
bingo, or both other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued
under R.C. § 2915.08 if all of the following apply:
         (a)   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to 12
hours during any day, provided that the sale does not begin earlier than 10:00
a.m. and ends not later than 2:00 a.m.
         (b)   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to
its own premises and to its own members and invited guests.
         (c)   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization is raising money for an organization that is described in IRC §
509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an
organization that maintains its principal place of business in this state, that
is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC
§ 501(c)(3), and that is in good standing in this state and executes a written
contract with that organization as required in division (G)(2) of this section.
      (2)   If a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization authorized to conduct instant bingo or electronic instant bingo
pursuant to division (G)(1) of this section is raising money for another
organization that is described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is
either a governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal
place of business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c), and that is in good standing
in this state, the veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization shall execute a written contract with the organization that is
described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a governmental
unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of business in this
state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c), and that is in good standing in this state in order
to conduct instant bingo or electronic instant bingo. That contract shall
include a statement of the percentage of the net proceeds that the veteran’s,
fraternal, or sporting organization will be distributing to the organization
that is described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of
business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC §
501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3), and that is in good standing in this
state.
      (3)   (a)   If a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or
sporting organization authorized to conduct instant bingo or electronic instant
bingo pursuant to division (G)(1) of this section has been issued a liquor
permit under R.C. Chapter 4303, that permit may be subject to suspension,
revocation, or cancellation if the veteran’s organization, fraternal
organization, or sporting organization violates a provision of this chapter or
R.C. Chapter 2915.
         (b)   No veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization that enters into a written contract pursuant to division (G)(2) of
this section shall violate any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915,
or permit, aid, or abet any other person in violating any provision of this
chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
      (4)   A veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization shall give all required proceeds earned from the conduct of
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to the organization with which the
veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting organization has
entered into a written contract.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (G) of this section is guilty of illegal
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided
in this division, illegal instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conduct is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (G) of this section, illegal instant bingo
or electronic instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.13)
§ 630.13 RESTRICTIONS ON OWNER OR LESSOR OF LOCATION AT INSTANT BINGO.
   (A)   No owner or lessor of a location shall assist a charitable instant
bingo organization in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session at that location unless the owner or lessor has entered into a written
contract, as described in Ohio R.C. 2915.093, with the charitable instant bingo
organization to assist in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session.
   (B)   The location of the lessor or owner shall be designated as a location
where the charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant bingo other
than at a bingo session.
   (C)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in division (A) above shall violate any provision of this chapter
or Ohio R.C. Ch. 2915, or permit, aid or abet any other person in violating any
provision of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Ch. 2915.
   (D)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in division (A) above shall violate the terms of the contract.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates divisions (C) or (D) above is guilty of illegal
instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this division (E),
illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of a violation of divisions (C) or (D)
above, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   If an owner or lessor of a location knowingly, intentionally or
recklessly violates divisions (C) or (D) above, any license that the owner or
lessor holds for the retail sale of any goods on the owner’s or lessor’s
premises that is issued by the state or a political subdivision is subject to
suspension, revocation or payment of a monetary penalty at the request of the
Attorney General.
(ORC 2915.094)
§ 630.14 SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINES; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   No person shall give to another person any item described in §
630.01 of this chapter in exchange for a noncash prize, toy or novelty received
as a reward for playing or operating a skill-based amusement machine or for a
free or reduced-price game won on a skill-based amusement machine.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of skill-based amusement
machine prohibited conduct. A violation of division (A) above is a misdemeanor
of the first degree for each redemption of a prize that is involved in the
violation. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
division (A) above, a violation of that division is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2915.06)
§ 630.15 ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   No charitable organization shall conduct electronic instant bingo
unless all of the following are true:
      (1)   The organization is a veteran’s organization described in R.C. §
2915.01(J), or is a fraternal organization described in R.C. § 2915.01(L), and
the organization qualified as a veteran’s organization or fraternal
organization, as applicable, on or before June 30, 2021.
      (2)   The organization is a veteran’s organization described in IRC § 501
(c)(4) or is, and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a
determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the organization
is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a), and is described in
IRC § 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or 501(c)(19).
      (3)   The organization has not conducted a raffle in violation of R.C. §
2915.092(B) using an electronic raffle machine, as described in Ohio Veterans
and Fraternal Charitable Coalition v. DeWine, Case No. 13-CV-13610 (C.P.
Franklin Co. February 23, 2018), at any time on or after January 1, 2022.
   (B)   No charitable organization that conducts electronic instant bingo
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Possess an electronic instant bingo system that was not obtained in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 2915 or with any rule adopted under R.C. Chapter
2915;
      (2)   Conduct electronic instant bingo on any day, at any time, or on any
premises not specified on the organization’s type II or type III license issued
under R.C. § 2915.08;
      (3)   Hold more than one valid license to conduct electronic instant
bingo at any one time;
      (4)   Conduct electronic instant bingo on more than one premises or on
any premises other than the charitable organization’s principal place of
business;
      (5)   Operate more than ten electronic bingo systems at the premises on
which the charitable organization conducts electronic instant bingo under its
license;
      (6)   Fail to display both of the following conspicuously at the premises
on which the charitable organization conducts electronic instant bingo:
         (a)   The charitable organization’s bingo license;
         (b)   The serial number of each deal of electronic instant bingo
tickets being sold.
      (7)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should have
known, to be under 18 years of age to play electronic instant bingo;
      (8)   Sell or provide to any person an electronic instant bingo ticket
for a price different from the price displayed on the game flare for that deal,
except that the charitable organization may give a participant who wins an
electronic instant bingo game an electronic instant bingo ticket as a prize in
place of a cash prize;
      (9)   Fail, once an electronic instant bingo deal is begun, to continue
to sell tickets in that deal until all prizes have been awarded;
      (10)   Permit any person whom the organization knows, or should have
known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction
to be a bingo game operator in the conduct of electronic instant bingo;
      (11)   Permit a bingo game operator to play electronic instant bingo;
      (12)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(12)(b) of this
section, pay compensation to a bingo game operator for conducting electronic
instant bingo.
         (b)   Division (B)(12)(a) of this section does not prohibit an
employee of a veteran’s organization or fraternal organization from redeeming
electronic instant bingo tickets or vouchers for the organization’s members or
invited guests, so long as no portion of the employee’s compensation is paid
from any bingo receipts.
      (13)   Pay consulting fees to any person in relation to electronic
instant bingo.
   (C)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or otherwise provide or offer to
provide an electronic instant bingo system to any person for use in this
municipality unless the electronic instant bingo system has been approved under
R.C. § 2915.15.
   (D)   Whoever knowingly violates division (A), (B), or (C) of this section
or a rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.14(D) is guilty of illegal electronic
instant bingo conduct. Illegal electronic instant bingo conduct is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, except that if the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or state law, or of a rule adopted
under R.C. § 2915.14(D), illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.14)
CHAPTER 632: JUNK CARS
Section
632.01   Purpose.
632.02   Storage on private property.
632.03   Removal required.
632.04   Notice to remove.
632.05   Removal by city.
632.06   Right of entry.
Editor’s note:
   As part of the 1983 updating and revision of this code of ordinances, this
chapter - previously numbered Ch. 626 - was renumbered as Ch. 632.
Cross-reference:
   Filthy accumulations, see GEN. OFF.
660.04
   Impounding of motor vehicles, see TRAF.
303.08
   Parking, see TRAF. TITLE SEVEN
   Willfully leaving vehicles on private or public property, see TRAF.
303.09
§ 632.01 PURPOSE.
   In enacting this chapter, Council finds and declares that the accumulation
and storage of abandoned, wrecked, junked, partially dismantled or inoperative
motor vehicles, on private property, which motor vehicles are in the nature of
rubbish and unsightly debris, violates, in many instances, the zoning
regulations of the city and constitutes a nuisance detrimental to the health,
safety and welfare of the community in that such conditions tend to interfere
with the enjoyment of and reduce the value of private property, invite
plundering, create fire hazards and other safety and health hazards to minors
as well as adults, interfere with the comfort and well being of the public and
create, extend and aggravate urban blight, and that the public health, safety
and general welfare require that such conditions be regulated, abated and
prohibited.
(Ord. 96-1966, passed 5-16-1966)
§ 632.02 STORAGE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall park, store or leave, or permit the parking or storing
of any unlicensed motor vehicle or any vehicle in a rusted, wrecked, junk,
partially dismantled, inoperative or abandoned condition, whether attended or
not, for a period in excess of 24 hours, upon any private property within the
city, unless the same is completely enclosed within a building, or unless it is
in connection with a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner
and licensed as such, when necessary to the operation of such business
enterprise.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 4-1973, passed 1-2-1973; Ord. 96-1966, passed 5-16-1966)
§ 632.03 REMOVAL REQUIRED.
   The accumulation and storage of one or more such motor vehicles in violation
of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute rubbish and unsightly
debris, and shall constitute a nuisance, detrimental to the health, safety and
general welfare of the inhabitants of the city. It shall be the duty of the
registered owner of such motor vehicle, and it shall be the duty of the person
in charge or control of the private property upon which such motor vehicle is
located, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, to remove the
same to a place of lawful storage, or to have the motor vehicle housed within a
building where it will not be visible from the street.
(Ord. 96-1966, passed 5-16-1966)
§ 632.04 NOTICE TO REMOVE.
   Whenever there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of the
provisions of this chapter exists, the Building Commissioner and/or the Chief
of Police shall give, or cause to be given, written notice to the registered
owner of any motor vehicle which is in violation of this chapter, or to the
owner or person in lawful possession or control of the private property upon
which such motor vehicle is located, or to both the registered owner and the
owner or person in lawful possession or control of such private property, that
such motor vehicle violates the provisions of this chapter and that within 72
hours the motor vehicle is to be removed to a place of lawful storage or to be
housed in a building where it will not be visible from the street.
(Ord. 96-1966, passed 5-16-1966)
§ 632.05 REMOVAL BY CITY.
   In addition to and not in lieu of any other procedure or penalty prescribed
in this chapter or in the Traffic Code for removal of abandoned motor vehicles
from private property, if the registered owner of any motor vehicle which is in
violation of this chapter, or the owner or person in lawful possession or
control of the private property upon which the same is located, fails, neglects
or refuses to remove or house such abandoned, wrecked, junked, partially
dismantled or inoperative motor vehicle in accordance with the notice given
pursuant to the provisions of §
632.04 of this chapter, the Building Commissioner and/or the Chief of Police
may remove and dispose of such motor vehicle.
(Ord. 96-1966, passed 5-16-1966)
§ 632.06 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Building Commissioner and/or the Chief of Police, any contracting agent
of the city, and employee of such contracting agent, and authorized officer,
employee and agent of the city, and each of them, are hereby expressly
authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose of enforcing the
provisions of this chapter. No person shall interfere, hinder or refuse to
allow them to enter upon private property for such purpose and to remove any
motor vehicle in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Any person to
whom notice was given pursuant to §
632.04 of this chapter shall have the right to remove or house such motor
vehicle in accordance with such notice at his or her own expense at any time
prior to the arrival of the Building Commissioner and/or the Chief of Police or
his or her authorized representatives for the purpose of removal.
(Ord. 96-1966, passed 5-16-1966)
CHAPTER 634: MINORS
Section
634.01   Endangering children.
634.02   Interference with custody.
634.03   Contributing to the unruliness or delinquency of a child.
634.04   Curfew.
634.045   Compulsory school attendance; parental duty.
634.047   Minors suspended or expelled from school; parental duty.
634.05   Child molesting or attempt.
634.06   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products or
alternative nicotine products; transaction scans.
Cross-reference:
   Child stealing, see GEN. OFF.
636.07
   Criminal child enticement, see GEN. OFF.
636.075
   Definitions generally, see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   False report of child abuse or neglect, see GEN. OFF.
606.105
   Importuning, see GEN. OFF.
666.04
   Improperly furnishing firearms to a minor, see GEN. OFF.
672.10
   Juvenile Court, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 2151
   “Juvenile” defined, see GEN. OFF.
666.01
   Materials or performances harmful to juveniles, see GEN. OFF.
666.01,
666.11 et seq.
   Non-support of dependents, see GEN. OFF.
636.10
   Parents’ liability for destructive acts of their children, see Ohio R.C.
3109.09
   Posting liquor age warning signs, see GEN. OFF.
612.06
   Sales of alcoholic beverages to underage persons; prohibitions and
misrepresentations, see
    GEN. OFF.
612.02,
612.10
   See section histories for similar state law
   Sexual imposition, see GEN. OFF.
666.03
   Unlawful sexual conduct with a minor, see GEN. OFF.
666.02
§ 634.01 ENDANGERING CHILDREN.
   (A)   No person, who is the parent, guardian, custodian, person having
custody or control, or person in loco parentis of a child under 18 years of age
or a child with a mental or physical disability under 21 years of age, shall
create a substantial risk to the health or safety of the child by violating a
duty of care, protection, or support. It is not a violation of a duty of care,
protection, or support under this division when the parent, guardian,
custodian, or person having custody or control of a child treats the physical
or mental illness or disability of the child by spiritual means through prayer
alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious body.
   (B)   No person shall do any of the following to a child under 18 years of
age or a child with a mental or physical disability under 21 years of age:
      (1)   Abuse the child;
      (2)   Torture or cruelly abuse the child;
      (3)   Administer corporal punishment or other physical disciplinary
measure, or physically restrain the child in a cruel manner or for a prolonged
period, which punishment, discipline or restraint is excessive under the
circumstances and creates a substantial risk of serious physical harm to the
child;
      (4)   Repeatedly administer unwarranted disciplinary measures to a child
when there is a substantial risk that such conduct, if continued, will
seriously impair or retard the child’s mental health or development;
      (5)   Entice, coerce, permit, encourage, compel, hire, employ, use or
allow the child to act, model or in any other way participate in, or be
photographed for, the production, presentation, dissemination or advertisement
of any material or performance that the offender knows or reasonably should
know is obscene, is sexually oriented matter or is nudity-oriented matter; and/
or
      (6)   Allow the child to be on the same parcel of real property and
within 100 feet of, or, in the case of more than one housing unit on the same
parcel of real property, in the same housing unit and within 100 feet of, any
act in violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.04 or 2925.041 when the person knows that
the act is occurring, whether or not any person is prosecuted for or convicted
of the violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.04 or 2925.041 that is the basis of the
violation of this division (B).
   (C)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle, as defined by Ohio R.C.
4511.01, within the municipality and in violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, when one or more children under
18 years of age are in the vehicle. Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
a person may be convicted at the same trial or proceeding of a violation of
this division and a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that constitutes the basis of the charge of the
violation of this division (C). For purposes of Ohio R.C. 4511.191 to 4511.197
and all related provisions of law, a person arrested for a violation of this
division (C) shall be considered to be under arrest for operating a vehicle
while under the influence of alcohol, a controlled substance or a metabolite of
a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or
urine.
      (2)   For the purpose of division (C)(1), the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3719.01.
         VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
   (D)   (1)   Division (B)(5) above does not apply to any material or
performance that is produced, presented or disseminated for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, religious, governmental, judicial or other
proper purpose, by or to a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist,
teacher, person pursing bona fide studies for research, librarian, member of
the clergy, prosecutor, judge or other person having a proper interest in the
material or performance.
      (2)   Mistake of age is not a defense to a charge under division (B)(5)
above.
      (3)   In a prosecution under division (B)(5) above, the trier of fact may
infer that an actor, model or participant in the material or performance
involved is a juvenile if the material or performance, through its title, text,
visual representation or otherwise, represents or depicts the actor, model or
participant as a juvenile.
      (4)   As used in this division (D) and division (B)(5) above:
         MATERIAL, PERFORMANCE, OBSCENE and SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2907.01.
         NUDITY-ORIENTED MATTER. Any material or performance that shows a minor
in a state of nudity and that, taken as a whole by the average person applying
contemporary community standards, appeals to the prurient interest.
         SEXUALLY ORIENTED MATTER. Any material or performance that shows a
minor participating or engaging in sexual activity, masturbation or bestiality.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of endangering children.
      (1)   If the offender violates divisions (A) or (B)(1) above, endangering
children is one of the following:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (E)(1)(b), (E)(1)(c)
or (E)(1)(d) below, a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of an offense
under this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, or of any offense involving neglect, abandonment, or contributing to
the delinquency of or physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided
in divisions (E)(1)(c) or (E)(1)(d) below, endangering children is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law;
         (c)   If the violation is a violation of division (A) above and
results in serious physical harm to the child involved, endangering children is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law; and
         (d)   If the violation is a violation of division (B)(1) above and
results in serious physical harm to the child involved, endangering children is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the offender violates divisions (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(5)
or (B)(6) above, endangering children is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the offender violates division (C) above, the offender shall be
punished as follows:
         (a)   Except as provided in divisions (E)(3)(b) or (E)(3)(c) below,
endangering children in violation of division (C) above is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
         (b)   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child
or if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any
offense involving neglect, abandonment or contributing to the delinquency of or
physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided in division (E)(3)(c)
below, endangering children in violation of division (C) above is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (c)   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child
and if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, Ohio R.C. 2903.06, 2903.08, 2919.22(C) or former Ohio R.C. 2903.07 as
it existed prior to 3-23-2000, or Ohio R.C. 2903.04, in a case in which the
offender was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that
section, endangering children in violation of division (C) above is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (d)   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine or other sentence,
penalty or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to divisions (E)(3)
(a), (E)(3)(b) or (E)(3)(c) above or pursuant to any other provision of law and
in addition to any suspension of the offender’s driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license or permit or non-resident operating privilege under Ohio R.C.
Ch. 4506, 4509, 4510 or 4511, or any other provision of law, the court also may
impose upon the offender a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from
the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(7).
         (e)   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine or other sentence,
penalty or sanction imposed upon the offender pursuant to divisions (E)(3)(a),
(E)(3)(b), (E)(3)(c) or (E)(3)(d) above or pursuant to any other provision of
law for the violation of division (C) above, if as a part of the same trial or
proceeding the offender also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a separate
charge charging the violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge of the
violation of division (C) above, the offender also shall be sentenced in
accordance with Ohio R.C. 4511.19, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, for that violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (F)   (1)   If a person violates division (C) above and if, at the time of
the violation, there were two or more children under 18 years of age in the
motor vehicle involved in the violation, the offender may be convicted of a
violation of division (C) above for each of the children, but the court may
sentence the offender for only one of the violations.
      (2)   (a)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation
of division (C) above, but the person is not also convicted of and does not
also plead guilty to a separate charge of violating Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge
of the violation of division (C) above, both the following apply:
            1.   For purposes of the provisions of Ohio R.C. 4511.99, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that set forth the penalties and
sanctions for a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the
violation of division (C) above shall not constitute a violation of Ohio R.C.
4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
            2.   For purposes of the provisions of law that refers to a
conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and that is not described in
division (F)(2)(a)1. above, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the
violation of division (C) above shall constitute a conviction or plea of guilty
to a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
         (b)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (C) above and the person also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
separate charge of violating Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge of the
violation of division (C) above, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the
violation of division (C) above shall not constitute, for the purposes of any
provision of law that refers to a conviction of or a plea of guilty to a
violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, a conviction of or a plea of guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C.
4511.19(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(ORC 2919.22(A) - (E), (H))
Statutory reference:
   Community service, requirements, see Ohio R.C. 2919.22(F)
   License suspension, requirements, see Ohio R.C. 2919.22(G)
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2903.15
§ 634.02 INTERFERENCE WITH CUSTODY.
   (A)   No person, knowing that he or she is without privilege to do so or
being reckless in that regard, shall entice, take, keep or harbor a person
identified in divisions (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) below from the parent,
guardian or custodian of the person identified in divisions (A)(1), (A)(2) or
(A)(3) below:
      (1)   A child under the age of 18, or a child with a mental or physical
disability under the age of 21;
      (2)   A person committed by law to an institution for delinquent, unruly,
neglected, abused or dependent children; and
      (3)   A person committed by law to an institution for persons with mental
illnesses or an institution for persons with intellectual disabilities.
   (B)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause or encourage a child or a
ward of the juvenile court who has been committed to the custody of any person,
department or public or private institution to leave the custody of that
person, department or institution without legal consent.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of enticing or taking under
division (A)(1) above that the actor reasonably believed that his or her
conduct was necessary to preserve the child’s health or safety. It is an
affirmative defense to a charge of keeping or harboring under division (A)
above that the actor in good faith gave notice to law enforcement or judicial
authorities within a reasonable time after the child or committed person came
under his or her shelter, protection or influence.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with custody.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision, a violation of
division (A)(1) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the child who is
the subject of a violation of division (A)(1) above is removed from the state
or if the offender previously has been convicted of an offense under this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (A)(1) above is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If the child who is the subject of a violation of
division (A)(1) above suffers physical harm as a result of the violation, a
violation of division (A)(1) above is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of divisions (A)(2) or (A)(3) above is a misdemeanor of
the third degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (B) above is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. Each day of a violation of division (B) above is a separate offense.
(ORC 2919.23)
§ 634.03 CONTRIBUTING TO THE UNRULINESS OR DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DELINQUENT CHILD. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2152.02.
      UNRULY CHILD. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2151.022.
   (B)   No person, including a parent, guardian or other custodian of a child,
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage or contribute to a child or a
ward of the juvenile court becoming an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (2)   Act in a way tending to cause a child or a ward of the juvenile
court to become an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (3)   Act in a way that contributes to an adjudication of the child as a
delinquent child based on the child’s violation of a court order adjudicating
the child an unruly child for being an habitual truant;
      (4)   If the person is the parent, guardian or custodian of a child who
has the duties under Ohio R.C. Ch. 2152 and 2950 to register, register a new
residence address and periodically verify a residence address and, if
applicable, to send a notice of intent to reside, and if the child is not
emancipated, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2919.121, fail to ensure that the child
complies with those duties under Ohio R.C. Ch. 2152 and 2950.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of contributing to the
unruliness or delinquency of a child, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each
day of violation of this section is a separate offense.
(ORC 2919.24)
§ 634.04 CURFEW.
   (A)   Responsibility of minors.
      (1)   No minor under the age of 18 years shall loiter, idle, wander,
stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks,
playgrounds, wharves, docks or other public grounds, public places and public
buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other
unsupervised places, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the
following day; provided, however, that, the provisions of this section do not
apply to a minor accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult
person having the care and custody of the minor, or where satisfactory evidence
is presented that the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business
directed by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care
and custody of the minor.
      (2)   Any minor violating the provisions of this section shall be dealt
with in accordance with Juvenile Court law and procedure.
      (3)   It is an exemption to a violation under this section that the
person engaged in the prohibited conduct while:
         (a)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
         (b)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
         (c)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
         (d)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
         (e)   Involved in an emergency;
         (f)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
Police Department about the minor’s presence;
         (g)   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization,
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
         (h)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
         (i)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority
removed in accordance with state law.
   (B)   Responsibility of parents. No parent, guardian or other adult person
having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 18 years shall
knowingly permit such minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon
the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, wharves, docks
or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of
amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places, between
the hours of 11:00 p. m. and 5:00 a. m. of the following day; provided,
however, that, the provisions of this section do not apply when the minor is
accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the
care and custody of the minor, or where satisfactory evidence is presented that
the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his or
her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the
minor.
   (C)   Penalty. Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 139-1955, passed 9-6-1955)
§ 634.045 COMPULSORY SCHOOL ATTENDANCE; PARENTAL DUTY.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section and §
634.047 of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
HABITUALLY TRUANT. One or more of the following:
      (a)   Three or more consecutive unexcused absences from school;
      (b)   Five or more unexcused absences from school in a two-week period;
or
      (c)   Fifteen or more unexcused absences from school within a school
year.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any street, highway, alley or right-of way, including
sidewalks; any park, playground, mall, or other place or building open to the
public; any cemetery, school yard, body of water or watercourse; any privately
or publicly owned place of amusement, entertainment or public accommodation,
including parking lots and other areas adjacent thereto; and any vacant lot or
land.
   (B)   (1)   No minor between the ages of six and 18 years of age shall be in
any public place within the city, except in attendance at school, between 8:30
a.m. and 2:30 p.m. on any school day, unless one of the following situations
exists:
         (a)   The minor has written proof from school authorities that he or
she is excused from school attendance at that particular time;
         (b)   The minor is accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian
or a responsible adult selected by the parent or legal guardian to supervise
the child; or
         (c)   The minor is employed, pursuant to an age or schooling
certificate, during actual working hours or traveling directly to or from the
job site.
      (2)   It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge under this division
(B) that the minor is not required by state law to be in attendance at school.
   (C)   No minor between the ages of six and 18 years of age shall be
habitually truant from school.
   (D)   No parent or legal guardian of a minor between the ages of six and 18
years of age shall negligently allow a minor to violate divisions (B) or (C)
above.
   (E)   It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge under division (D)
above that the parent or legal guardian had initiated the jurisdiction of the
Juvenile Court against the minor prior to the time that the minor was found
violating divisions (B) or (C) above.
   (F)   A police officer or school attendance officer, or a probation or
parole officer, when applicable, may transport any minor found violating
divisions (B) or (C) above to the Juvenile Detention Center. No minor
transported to the Juvenile Detention Center will be released, except into the
custody of his or her parent or legal guardian.
   (G)   Any minor who violates divisions (B) or (C) above is subject to the
jurisdiction of the Juvenile Court. Any parent or legal guardian who violates
division (D) above is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. The Juvenile Court may
require a person convicted of a violation of division (D) above to post bond in
the sum of $100, with sureties to the approval of the Court, conditioned that
the parent or legal guardian will not allow the minor in question again to
violate divisions (B) or (C) above.
(Ord. 19-1995, passed 3-27-1995; Ord. 109-2000, passed 6-12-2000)
§ 634.047 MINORS SUSPENDED OR EXPELLED FROM SCHOOL; PARENTAL DUTY.
   (A)   If a minor is suspended or expelled from school, that minor’s parent
or legal guardian shall, for the duration of the suspension or expulsion:
      (1)   Personally supervise the minor, or arrange for a responsible adult
to supervise the minor, at the times that the minor would have been required to
be in attendance at school had he or she not been expelled or suspended; and
      (2)   Prohibit the minor from being in any public place at the times that
the minor would have been required to be in attendance at school had he or she
not been suspended or expelled, except in the following circumstances:
         (a)   The minor is accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian
or a responsible adult selected by the parent or legal guardian to supervise
the child;
         (b)   The minor is employed, pursuant to an age or schooling
certificate, during actual working hours, or traveling directly to or from the
job site; or
         (c)   The minor has been directed by the parent or guardian to engage
in a specific activity or to carry out express instructions during the times
that the minor is actually engaged in fulfilling those directions or
instructions.
   (B)   The following shall be affirmative defense to a charge under division
(A) above:
      (1)   The minor is not required by state law to be in attendance at
school; and
      (2)   The parent or legal guardian has initiated the jurisdiction of the
Juvenile Court against the child prior to the time that the child violated
division (A) above.
   (C)   Any parent or legal guardian who violates division (A) above is guilty
of a minor misdemeanor. The Juvenile Court may also require a person convicted
of a violation of division (A) above to post bond in the sum of $100, with
sureties to the approval of Court, conditioned that he or she will not again
violate division (A) above.
(Ord. 19-1995, passed 3-27-1995)
§ 634.05 CHILD MOLESTING OR ATTEMPT.
   (A)   No person shall annoy, disturb, make indecent advances to, lead or
attempt to lead, take, carry, decoy or entice away a child under the age of 16
years, without just cause or without the authority of any person having lawful
charge or custody of such child, with intent to detain or conceal such child
from its parent, guardian or other person having the lawful charge or custody
thereof, or knowingly harbor or conceal a child so led, taken, carried, decoyed
or enticed away.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ATTEMPT. An endeavor to accomplish the leading, taking, carrying,
decoying or enticing beyond mere preparation, but falling short of execution of
the ultimate design or any part of it.
      INTENT TO DETAIN OR CONCEAL. The leading, taking, carrying, decoying or
enticing of a child under 16 years of age into an automobile, inhabited or
uninhabited dwelling, wooded area, vacant lot or any other location where a
child could be concealed or detained.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(Ord. 47-1969, passed 3-17-1969)
§ 634.06 ILLEGAL DISTRIBUTION OF CIGARETTES, OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS OR
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS; TRANSACTION SCANS.
   (A)   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products or
alternative nicotine products.
      (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         AGE VERIFICATION. A service provided by an independent third party
(other than a manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler or retailer of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products or papers
used to roll cigarettes) that compares information available from a
commercially available database, or aggregate of databases, that regularly are
used by government and businesses for the purpose of age and identity
verification to personal information provided during an internet sale or other
remote method of sale to establish that the purchaser is 21 years of age or
older.
         ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT.
            1.   Subject to division 2. of this definition, an electronic
smoking device, vapor product or any other product or device that consists of
or contains nicotine that can be ingested into the body by any means,
including, but not limited to, chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving or
inhaling.
            2.   The phrase does not include any of the following:
               a.   Any cigarette or other tobacco product;
               b.   Any product that is a “drug” as that term is defined in 21
U.S.C. § 321(g)(1);
               c.   Any product that is a “device” as that term is defined in
21 U.S.C. § 321(h); or
               d.   Any product that is a “combination product” as described in
21 U.S.C. § 353(g).
         CIGARETTE. Includes clove cigarettes and hand-rolled cigarettes.
         DISTRIBUTE. To furnish, give, or provide cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products or papers used to roll cigarettes to
the ultimate consumer of the cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products or papers used to roll cigarettes.
         ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE. Any device that can be used to deliver
aerosolized or vaporized nicotine or any other substance to the person inhaling
from the device including an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic
hookah, vaping pen or electronic pipe. The phrase includes any component, part
or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately, and includes any
substance intended to be aerosolized or vaporized during the use of the device.
The phrase does not include any product that is a drug, device or combination
product, as those terms are defined or described in 21 U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353
(g).
         PROOF OF AGE. A driver's license, a commercial driver's license, a
military identification card, a passport, or an identification card issued
under Ohio R.C. 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows that a person is 21 years of age
or older.
         TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any product that is made or derived from tobacco or
that contains any form of nicotine, if it is intended for human consumption or
is likely to be consumed, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved,
inhaled or ingested by any other means, including, but not limited to, a
cigarette, an electronic smoking device, a cigar, pipe tobacco, chewing
tobacco, snuff or snus. The phrase also means any component or accessory used
in the consumption of a tobacco product, such as filters, rolling papers,
pipes, blunt or hemp wraps, and liquids used in electronic smoking devices,
whether or not they contain nicotine. The phrase does not include any product
that is a drug, device or combination product, as those terms are defined or
described in 21 U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g).
         VAPOR PRODUCT. A product, other than a cigarette or other tobacco
product as defined in Ohio R.C. Ch. 5743, that contains or is made or derived
from nicotine and that is intended and marketed for human consumption,
including by smoking, inhaling, snorting or sniffing. The phrase includes any
component, part, or additive that is intended for use in an electronic smoking
device, a mechanical heating element, battery or electronic circuit and is used
to deliver the product. The phrase does not include any product that is a drug,
device or combination product, as those terms are defined or described in 21
U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g). The phrase includes any product containing nicotine,
regardless of concentration.
         VENDING MACHINE. Has the same meaning as “coin machine” in Ohio R.C.
2913.01.
      (2)   No manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler or retailer of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes, no agent, employee or representative of a
manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler or retailer of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products or papers used to roll
cigarettes, and no other person shall do any of the following:
         (a)   Give, sell, or otherwise distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes:
            1.   To any person under 21 years of age; or
            2.   Without first verifying proof of age.
         (b)   Give away, sell or distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products or papers used to roll cigarettes in
any place that does not have posted in a conspicuous place a legibly printed
sign in letters at least one-half inch high stating that giving, selling or
otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products or papers used to roll cigarettes to a person under 21 years of age is
prohibited by law;
         (c)   Knowingly furnish any false information regarding the name, age
or other identification of any person under 21 years of age with purpose to
obtain cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products or
papers used to roll cigarettes for that person;
         (d)   Manufacture, sell or distribute in the state any pack or other
container of cigarettes containing fewer than 20 cigarettes or any package of
roll-your-own tobacco containing less than six-tenths of one ounce of tobacco;
         (e)   Sell cigarettes or alternative nicotine products in a smaller
quantity than that placed in the pack or other container by the manufacturer;
         (f)   Give, sell or otherwise distribute alternative nicotine
products, papers used to roll cigarettes or tobacco products other than
cigarettes over the internet or through another remote method without age
verification;
         (g)   Allow an employee under 18 years of age to sell any tobacco
product;
         (h)   Give away or otherwise distribute free samples of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or coupons redeemable
for cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alterative tobacco products.
      (3)   No person shall sell or offer to sell cigarettes, other tobacco
products or alternative nicotine products by or from a vending machine, except
in the following locations:
         (a)   An area within a factory, business, office or other place not
open to the general public;
         (b)   An area to which persons under 21 years of age are not generally
permitted access; and
         (c)   Any other place not identified in divisions (A)(3)(a) or (A)(3)
(b) above, upon all of the following conditions:
            1.   The vending machine is located within the immediate vicinity,
plain view and control of the person who owns or operates the place, or an
employee of that person, so that all cigarettes, other tobacco product and
alternative nicotine product purchases from the vending machine will be readily
observed by the person who owns or operates the place or an employee of that
person. For the purpose of this section, a vending machine located in any
unmonitored area, including an unmonitored coatroom, restroom, hallway or outer
waiting area, shall not be considered located within the immediate vicinity,
plain view and control of the person who owns or operates the place, or an
employee of that person.
            2.   The vending machine is inaccessible to the public when the
place is closed.
            3.   A clearly visible notice is posted in the area where the
vending machine is located that states the following in letters that are
legibly printed and at least one-half inch high: "It is illegal for any person
under the age of 21 to purchase tobacco or alternative nicotine products."
      (4)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under division
(A)(2)(a) above:
         (a)   The person under 21 years of age was accompanied by a parent,
spouse who is 21 years of age or older or legal guardian of the person under 21
years of age; and
         (b)   The person who gave, sold or distributed cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products or papers used to roll
cigarettes to a person under 21 years of age under division (A)(2)(a) above is
a parent, spouse who is 21 years of age or older or legal guardian of the
person under 21 years of age.
      (5)   (a)   It is not a violation of division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of
this section for a person to give or otherwise distribute to a person under 21
years of age cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
or papers used to roll cigarettes while the person under 21 years of age is
participating in a research protocol if all of the following apply:
            1.   The parent, guardian, or legal custodian of the person under
21 years of age has consented in writing to the person under 21 years of age
participating in the research protocol.
            2.   An institutional human subjects protection review board, or an
equivalent entity, has approved the research protocol.
            3.   The person under 21 years of age is participating in the
research protocol at the facility or location specified in the research
protocol.
         (b)   It is not a violation of division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of this
section for an employer to permit an employee 18, 19, or 20 years of age to
sell a tobacco product.
      (6)   (a)   No delivery service shall accept from, transport or deliver
to, or allow pick-up by, a person under 21 years of age with respect to any of
the following:
            1.   Alternative nicotine products;
            2.   Papers used to roll cigarettes;
            3.   Tobacco products other than cigarettes.
         (b)   A delivery service shall require proof of age as a condition of
accepting, transporting, delivering, or allowing pickup of the items described
in divisions (A)(6)(a)1. to 3. of this section.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (A)(2)(a), (A)(2)(b), (A)(2)(d), (A)(2)
(e), (A)(2)(f), (A)(2)(g), (A)(2)(h), (A)(3) or (A)(6) of this section is
guilty of illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to illegal distribution of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (A)(2)(c) of this section is guilty of
permitting a person under 21 years of age to use cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, permitting a person under 21 years of age to use cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of division (A)(2)(c) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law
or municipal ordinance, permitting a person under 21 years of age to use
cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (9)   Any cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes that are given, sold, or otherwise
distributed to a person under 21 years of age in violation of this section and
that are used, possessed, purchased, or received by a person under 21 years of
age in violation of Ohio R.C. 2151.87 are subject to seizure and forfeiture as
contraband under R.C. Chapter 2981.
(ORC 2927.02)
   (B)   Transaction scan.
      (1)   As used in this division (B) and division (C) below:
         CARD HOLDER. Any person who presents a driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent or employee of a
seller, to purchase or receive cigarettes, other tobacco products or
alternative nicotine products from a seller, agent or employee.
         IDENTIFICATION CARD. An identification card issued under Ohio R.C.
4507.50 to 4507.52.
         SELLER. A seller of cigarettes, other tobacco products or alternative
nicotine products and includes any person whose gift of or other distribution
of cigarettes, other tobacco products or alternative nicotine products is
subject to the prohibitions of division (A) above.
         TRANSACTION SCAN. The process by which a seller or an agent or
employee of a seller checks, by means of a transaction scan device, the
validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card
that is presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving cigarettes, other
tobacco products or alternative nicotine products.
         TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE. Any commercial device or combination of
devices used at a point of sale that is capable of deciphering in an
electronically readable format the information encoded on the magnetic strip or
bar code of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification
card.
      (2)   (a)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a
card holder as a condition for selling, giving away or otherwise distributing
to the card holder cigarettes, other tobacco products or alternative nicotine
products.
         (b)   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (B)(2)(a) above fails to match the information printed on the
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the
card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information so
printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee of
the seller shall sell, give away or otherwise distribute any cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products to the card holder.
         (c)   Division (B)(2)(a) above does not preclude a seller or an agent
or employee of a seller from using a transaction scan device to check the
validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
identification card, if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip that
may be scanned by the device, as a condition for selling, giving away or
otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products or alternative
nicotine products to the person presenting the document.
      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under Ohio R.C.
4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this
division (B) and division (C) below.
      (4)   (a)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except for the following:
            1.   The name and date of birth of the person listed on the
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the
card holder; and
            2.   The expiration date and identification number of the driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the card
holder.
         (b)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the
information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be
recorded and maintained under division (B)(4)(a) above, except for purposes of
division (C) below.
         (c)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a
transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified in
division (C)(2)(a) above.
         (d)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or
otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including, but not limited to, selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by division (C) below or another
section of this code of ordinances or the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (B) or division (C) below relieves a
seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any responsibility to comply with
any other applicable local, state or federal laws or rules governing the sale,
giving away or other distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products or
alternative nicotine products.
      (6)   Whoever violates divisions (B)(2)(b) or (B)(4) above is guilty of
engaging in an illegal tobacco product or alternative nicotine product
transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender a civil penalty of
up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court shall pay each
collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into the County
Treasury.
(ORC 2927.021)
   (C)   Affirmative defenses.
      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found
guilty of a charge of a violation of division (A) above in which the age of the
purchaser or other recipient of cigarettes, other tobacco products or
alternative nicotine products is an element of the alleged violation, if the
seller, agent or employee raises and proves as an affirmative defense that all
of the following occurred:
         (a)   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive cigarettes,
other tobacco products or alternative nicotine products presented a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or an identification card;
         (b)   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that
the license or card was valid; and
         (c)   The cigarettes, other tobacco products or alternative nicotine
products were sold, given away or otherwise distributed to the card holder in
reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and the completed
transaction scan.
      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller
has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (C)(1) above, the trier
of fact in the action for the alleged violation of division (A) above shall
consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and implemented and
that is intended to prevent violations of division (A) above. For purposes of
division (C)(1)(c) above, the trier of fact shall consider that reasonable
reliance upon the identification presented and the completed transaction scan
may require a seller or an agent or employee of a seller to exercise reasonable
diligence to determine, and that the use of a transaction scan device does not
excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a seller from exercising reasonable
diligence to determine, the following:
         (a)   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a
seller sells, gives away or otherwise distributes cigarettes, other tobacco
products or alternative nicotine products is 21 years of age or older; and/or
         (b)   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by
division (C)(1) above is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a deputy
registrar who issued an identification card under Ohio R.C. 4507.50 to 4507.52
shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of that issuance
in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with the Bureau of
Motor Vehicles in the action.
(ORC 2927.022)
   (D)   Shipment of tobacco products.
      (1)   As used in this division (D):
         AUTHORIZED RECIPIENT OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS.
            1.   In the case of cigarettes, a person who is:
               a.    Licensed as a cigarette wholesale dealer under Ohio R.C.
5743.15;
               b.    Licensed as a retail dealer as long as the person
purchases cigarettes with the appropriate tax stamp affixed;
               c.   An export warehouse proprietor as defined in Internal
Revenue Code § 5702;
               d.   An operator of a customs bonded warehouse under 19 U.S.C. §
1311 or 19 U.S.C. § 1555;
               e.   An officer, employee, or agent of the federal government or
of this state acting in the person's official capacity;
               f.   A department, agency, instrumentality, or political
subdivision of the federal government or of this state;
               g.   A person having a consent for consumer shipment issued by
the Ohio Tax Commissioner under Ohio R.C. 5743.71.
            2.   In the case of electronic smoking devices or vapor products, a
person who is:
               a.    Licensed as a distributor of tobacco or vapor products
under Ohio R.C. 5743.61;
               b.   A retail dealer of vapor products, as defined in Ohio R.C.
5741.01(C)(3), that is not licensed as a vapor distributor, as long as the tax
levied by Ohio R.C. 5743.51, 5743.62, or 5743.63, as applicable, has been paid;
               c.   An operator of a customs bonded warehouse under 19 U.S.C. §
1311 or 19 U.S.C. § 1555;
               d.   An officer, employee, or agent of the federal government or
of this state acting in the person's official capacity;
               e.   A department, agency, instrumentality, or political
subdivision of the federal government or of this state.
         MOTOR CARRIER. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4923.01.
      (2)   The purpose of this section is to prevent the sale of cigarettes,
electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to minors and to ensure
compliance with the Master Settlement Agreement, as defined in Ohio R.C.
1346.01.
      (3)   (a)   No person shall cause to be shipped any cigarettes,
electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to any person in this
municipality other than an authorized recipient of tobacco products.
         (b)   No motor carrier, or other person shall knowingly transport
cigarettes, electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to any person in
this municipality that the carrier or other person reasonably believes is not
an authorized recipient of tobacco products. If cigarettes, electronic smoking
devices, and vapor products are transported to a home or residence, it shall be
presumed that the motor carrier, or other person knew that the person to whom
the cigarettes, electronic smoking devices, and vapor products were delivered
was not an authorized recipient of tobacco products.
      (4)   No person engaged in the business of selling cigarettes, electronic
smoking devices, and vapor products who ships or causes to be shipped
cigarettes, electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to any person in
this municipality in any container or wrapping other than the original
container or wrapping shall fail to plainly and visibly mark the exterior of
the container or wrapping in which the cigarettes, electronic smoking devices,
and vapor products are shipped with the words "cigarettes", "electronic smoking
devices", or "vapor products", as applicable.
      (5)   A court shall impose a fine of up to $1,000 for each violation of
divisions (D)(3)(a), (D)(3)(b) or (D)(4) above.
(ORC 2927.023)
   (E)   Furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products.
      (1)   No person who is 18 years of age or older, but younger than 21
years of age, shall knowingly furnish false information concerning that
person's name, age or other identification for the purpose of obtaining tobacco
products.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (E)(1) above is guilty of furnishing
false information to obtain tobacco products. Except as otherwise provided in
this division (E)(2), furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products
is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E)(1) above or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, furnishing false
information to obtain tobacco products is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 2927.024)
CHAPTER 635: NOISE ABATEMENT
Section
635.01   Advertising; machinery; instruments.
635.02   Sound-amplifying devices.
635.99   Penalty.
Editor’s note:
   This chapter, previously a codification of Ord. 41-1977, passed 3-7-1977,
and new matter, was re-enacted in its entirety by Ord. 149-1990, passed 9-10-
1990.
Cross-reference:
   Disorderly conduct; noise, see GEN. OFF.
648.04
   Disturbing the peace, see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 648
   Muffler noise, see TRAF.
331.26,
337.20
§ 635.01 ADVERTISING; MACHINERY; INSTRUMENTS.
   (A)   Noisy advertising. No person shall, by ringing a bell or gong, by
using a phonograph or other instrument for producing or reproducing sounds, by
using loud or boisterous language, or by any unusual noise whatever, advertise
goods, wares or merchandise for sale, either at auction or in any other manner,
or by any such means advertise any show, theater, exhibition or entertainment.
   (B)   Noisy machinery. No person shall maintain, run or operate any steam,
gas, gasoline or other engine, boiler, press, machine or other apparatus so
constructed or operated as to make any unnecessary noise, to the annoyance and
discomfort of the people of the city.
   (C)   Noise-producing instruments. No person shall use any device,
apparatus, radio, ticker or other noise- making and noise-emitting device for
general advertising purposes, or for the purpose of soliciting trade or
attracting attention to any wares, goods, merchandise, instrument or devise
offered for sale.
(Ord. 149-1990, passed 9-10-1990)
§ 635.02 SOUND-AMPLIFYING DEVICES.
   (A)   No person shall generate or permit to be generated unreasonable noise
or loud sound which is likely to cause inconvenience or annoyance to persons of
ordinary sensibilities by means of a radio, phonograph, television, tape
player, loudspeaker or any other sound-amplifying device, or by any horn, drum,
piano or other musical or percussion instrument.
   (B)   It is prima facie unlawful for a person to generate or permit to be
generated sound by the above described devices or instruments in the following
circumstances:
      (1)   On private property between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
of the following day in a predominantly residential area where the sound is
audible more than 80 feet from the property line of the property on which the
source of the sound is located; or
      (2)   On a street, highway or in the public right-of-way where the sound
is audible 100 feet from the device generating the sound. Persons in possession
of a current parade permit are exempt from the provisions of this division (B).
   (C)   No person, being the owner or person in possession of a premises, or
being the person in control of the premises by reason of employment, agency or
otherwise, whether such ownership, possession or control is exclusive or joint,
shall permit a violation of this section.
   (D)   Warning and alarm devices which have the purpose of signaling unsafe
or dangerous situations or calling for police are exempt from the prohibitions
of this section when used for such purposes.
   (E)   In any violation of this section involving sound equipment in a motor
vehicle, both the sound equipment and the motor vehicle are hereby deemed to be
contraband and shall be subject to seizure and forfeiture under Ohio R.C.
2981.11 through 2981.13(A) and §
606.24 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 219-1998, passed 11-9-1998)
§ 635.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Ord. 149-1990, passed 9-10-1990)
CHAPTER 636: OFFENSES RELATING TO PERSONS
Section
636.001   Definitions.
636.01   Negligent homicide.
636.02   Assault.
636.03   Negligent assault.
636.04   Aggravated menacing.
636.045   Menacing by stalking.
636.05   Menacing.
636.06   Unlawful restraint.
636.07   Child stealing. (Repealed)
636.075   Criminal child enticement. (Repealed)
636.08   Coercion.
636.09   Reserved for future legislation.
636.10   Non-support of dependents.
636.11   Reserved for future legislation.
636.12   Reserved for future legislation.
636.13   Party lines to be yielded in emergencies. (Repealed)
636.14   Threatening or harassing telecommunications.
636.15   Placing harmful substance or objects in food or confection.
636.16   Reserved for future legislation.
636.17   Soliciting alms. (Repealed)
636.18   Domestic violence.
636.19   Safety of crowds attending live entertainment performances.
636.20   Hazing.
636.21   Ethnic intimidation.
636.22   Intimidation in connection with housing.
636.23   Failing to provide for a person with a functional impairment.
636.24   Failure to perform viability testing.
636.25   Unlawful collection of bodily substances.
Cross-reference:
   Bathing in the nude prohibited, see GEN. OFF.
666.17
   Child molesting or attempt, see GEN. OFF.
634.05
   Definitions generally, see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Drug offenses, see GEN. OFF.
624.01 et seq.
   Loitering, see GEN. OFF.
624.18,
648.10,
666.085
   Minors, see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 634
   Minors’ curfew, see GEN. OFF.
634.04
   Personal accountability for organizational conduct, see GEN. OFF.
606.09
   “Physical harm to persons” defined, see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   See section histories for similar state law
   “Serious physical harm to persons” defined, see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Sex related offenses, see GEN. OFF. Ch. 666
   Shelters for victims of domestic violence, see Ohio R.C. 3113.33 et seq.
   Vehicular homicide and vehicular manslaughter, see TRAF.
333.08
§ 636.001 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ANOTHER’S UNBORN or OTHER PERSON’S UNBORN. A member of the species Homo
sapiens who is or was carried in the womb of another during a period that
begins with fertilization and that continues unless and until live birth
occurs.
      UNLAWFUL TERMINATION OF ANOTHER’S PREGNANCY. Causing the death of an
unborn member of the species Homo sapiens who is or was carried in the womb of
another, as a result of injuries inflicted during the period that begins with
fertilization and that continues unless and until live birth occurs.
   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) above, in no case shall the definitions
of the terms “another’s unborn”, “other person’s unborn” and “unlawful
termination of another’s pregnancy” that are set forth in division (A) above be
applied or construed in any of the following manners:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided herein, in a manner so that the
offense prohibits or is construed as prohibiting any pregnant woman or her
physician from performing an abortion with the consent of the pregnant woman,
with the consent of the pregnant woman implied by law in a medical emergency,
or with the approval of one otherwise authorized by law to consent to medical
treatment on behalf of the pregnant woman. An abortion that violates the
conditions described in the immediately preceding sentence may be punished as
any violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.05,
2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.21 or 2903.22, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, as applicable. An abortion that
does not violate the conditions described in the second immediately preceding
sentence but that does violate Ohio R.C. 2919.12, 2919.13(B), 2919.151, 2919.17
or 2919.18, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, may be punished
as a violation of such section, as applicable.
      (2)   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
         (a)   Her delivery of a stillborn baby;
         (b)   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a
viable, unborn human that she is carrying;
         (c)   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who
dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human;
         (d)   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human; or
         (e)   Her causing, threatening to cause or attempting to cause, in any
other manner, an injury, illness or other psychological illness or condition,
regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human that she is
carrying.
(ORC 2903.09)
§ 636.01 NEGLIGENT HOMICIDE.
   (A)   No person shall negligently cause the death of another or the unlawful
termination of another’s pregnancy by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2923.11.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent homicide, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2903.05)
Statutory reference:
   Reckless homicide, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2903.041
§ 636.02 ASSAULT.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm to
another or to another’s unborn.
   (B)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to another or
to another’s unborn.
   (C)   Whoever violates divisions (A) or (B) above is guilty of assault.
Except as provided in Ohio R.C. 2903.13(C), assault is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
   (D)   If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to assault when it
is a misdemeanor also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a specification as
described in Ohio R.C. 2941.1423 (victim of the offense was a woman whom the
defendant knew was pregnant at the time of the offense) that was included in
the indictment, count in the indictment or information charging the offense,
the court shall sentence the offender to a mandatory jail term as provided in
Ohio R.C. 2929.24(F).
   (E)   A prosecution for a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section
does not preclude a prosecution of a violation of any other section of the Ohio
Revised Code. One or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of behavior that
can be prosecuted under division (A) or (B) of this section or any other
section of the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under division (A) or (B) of
this section, the other section of the Ohio Revised Code, the municipal
ordinance, or both sections. However, if an offender is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section and also is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.22, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, based on the same conduct
involving the same victim that was the basis of the violation of division (A)
or (B) of this section, the offenses are allied offenses of similar import
under Ohio R.C. 2941.25.
(ORC 2903.13)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated and felonious assault, see Ohio R.C. 2903.11 and 2903.12
   Felony assault offenses, see Ohio R.C. 2903.13(C)
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2903.15
   Persons who may seek relief under anti- stalking protection order; ex parte
orders, see Ohio R.C. 2903.214
   Protection order as pretrial condition of release, see Ohio R.C. 2903.213
   Strangulation, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2903.18
   Vehicular assault and aggravated vehicular assault, felony offenses, see
Ohio R.C. 2903.08
§ 636.03 NEGLIGENT ASSAULT.
   (A)   No person shall negligently, by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance as defined in Ohio R.C. 2923.11, cause physical harm to another or to
another’s unborn.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent assault, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 2903.14)
§ 636.04 AGGRAVATED MENACING.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the offender
will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the other person,
such other person’s unborn, or a member of such other person’s immediate
family. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that the
offender will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the
other person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s
immediate family, the other person’s belief may be based on words or conduct of
the offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association or
other organization that employs the other person or to which the other person
belongs.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated menacing. Except
as otherwise provided in this division (B), aggravated menacing is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the victim of the offense is an officer or
employee of a public children services agency or a private child placing agency
and the offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or
anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties, aggravated
menacing is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law or, if the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an offense of
violence, the victim of that prior offense was an officer or employee of a
public children services agency or private child placing agency and that prior
offense related to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
   (C)   As used in this section, ORGANIZATION includes an entity that is a
governmental employer.
(ORC 2903.21)
§ 636.045 MENACING BY STALKING.
   (A)   Prohibited conduct.
      (1)   (a)   No person by engaging in a pattern of conduct shall knowingly
cause another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to
the other person or a family or household member of the other person or cause
mental distress to the other person or a family or household member of the
other person. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that
the offender will cause physical harm to the other person or the other person’s
family or household member or mental distress to the other person or the other
person’s family or household member, the other person’s belief or mental
distress may be based on words or conduct of the offender that are directed at
or identify a corporation, association or other organization that employs the
other person or to which the other person belongs.
         (b)   No person, through the use of any form of written communication
or any electronic method of remotely transferring information, including, but
not limited to, any computer, computer network, computer program, computer
system or telecommunication device, shall post a message or use any
intentionally written or verbal graphic gesture with purpose to do either of
the following:
            1.   Violate division (A)(1)(a) above; or
            2.   Urge or incite another to commit a violation of division (A)
(1)(a) above.
         (c)   No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate divisions (A)
(1)(a) or (A)(1)(b) above.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) above is guilty of menacing by
stalking.
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(2)(b) below,
menacing by stalking is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   Menacing by stalking is a felony, to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law, if any of the following applies:
            1.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.211 or a violation of Ohio R.C.
2911.211, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to either of these
offenses;
            2.   In committing the offense under divisions (A)(1)(a), (A)(1)(b)
or (A)(1)(c) above, the offender made a threat of physical harm to or against
the victim, or as a result of an offense committed under divisions (A)(1)(b) or
(A)(1)(c) above, a third person induced by the offender’s posted message made a
threat of physical harm to or against the victim;
            3.   In committing the offense under divisions (A)(1)(a), (A)(1)(b)
or (A)(1)(c) above, the offender trespassed on the land or premises where the
victim lives, is employed or attends school, or as a result of an offense
committed under divisions (A)(1)(b) or (A)(1)(c) above, a third person induced
by the offender’s posted message trespassed on the land or premises where the
victim lives, is employed or attends school;
            4.   The victim of the offense is a minor;
            5.   The offender has a history of violence towards the victim or
any other person or a history of other violent acts towards the victim or any
other person;
            6.   While committing the offense under division (A)(1)(a) above or
a violation of division (A)(1)(c) above based on conduct in violation of
division (A)(1)(a) above, the offender had a deadly weapon on or about the
offender’s person or under the offender’s control. This division (A)(2)(b)6.
does not apply in determining the penalty for a violation of this division (A)
(1)(b) or a violation of division (a)(1)C. of this section based on conduct in
violation of this division (A)(1)(b);
            7.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
the subject of a protection order issued under Ohio R.C. 2903.213 or Ohio R.C.
2903.214, regardless of whether or not the person to be protected under the
order is the victim of the offense or another person;
            8.   In committing the offense under divisions (A)(1)(a), (A)(1)(b)
or (A)(1)(c) above, the offender caused serious physical harm to the premises
at which the victim resides, to the real property on which that premises is
located or to any personal property located on that premises, or as a result of
an offense committed under division (A)(1)(b) above or an offense committed
under division (a)(1)C. of this section based on a violation of division (A)(1)
(b) above, a third person induced by the offender’s posted message caused
serious physical harm to that premises, that real property or any personal
property on that premises;
            9.   Prior to committing the offense, the offender had been
determined to represent a substantial risk of physical harm to others as
manifested by evidence of then-recent homicidal or other violent behavior,
evidence of then-recent threats that placed another in reasonable fear of
violent behavior and serious harm, or other evidence of then-present
dangerousness;
            10.   The victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a
public children services agency or a private child placing agency and the
offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties; or
            11.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an
officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child
placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer’s or employee’s
performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties.
      (3)   Ohio R.C. 2919.271 applies in relation to a defendant charged with
a violation of this section.
      (4)   For the purpose of division (A) above, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         COMPUTER, COMPUTER NETWORK, COMPUTER PROGRAM, COMPUTER SYSTEM and
TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
         EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. The singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in Ohio R.C. 2909.04
         EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. The singular of “emergency medical
services personnel” as defined in Ohio R.C. 2133.21.
         FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Any of the following:
            1.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
person against whom the act prohibited in division (A)(1) above is committed:
               a.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse or a former spouse of
the person;
               b.   A parent, a foster parent or a child of the person, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the person; or
               c.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse
or former spouse of the person, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse or former spouse of the person.
            2.   The natural parent of any child of whom the person against
whom the act prohibited in division (A)(1) above is committed is the other
natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
         MENTAL DISTRESS. Any of the following:
            1.   Any mental illness or condition that involves some temporary
substantial incapacity; or
            2.   Any mental illness or condition that would normally require
psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment or other mental health services,
whether or not any person requested or received psychiatric treatment,
psychological treatment or other mental health services.
         ORGANIZATION. Includes an entity that is a governmental employer.
         PATTERN OF CONDUCT. Two or more actions or incidents closely related
in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any of those
actions or incidents, or two or more actions or incidents closely related in
time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any of those
actions or incidents, directed at one or more persons employed by or belonging
to the same corporation, association or other organization. Actions or
incidents that prevent, obstruct or delay the performance by a public official,
firefighter, rescuer, emergency medical services person or emergency facility
person of any authorized act within the public official’s, firefighter’s,
rescuer’s, emergency medical services person’s, or emergency facility person’s
official capacity, or the posting of messages, use of intentionally written or
verbal graphic gestures, or receipt of information or data through the use of
any form of written communication or an electronic method of remotely
transferring information, including, but not limited to, a computer, computer
network, computer program, computer system or telecommunications device, may
constitute a PATTERN OF CONDUCT.
         PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. A person who is living or has lived with
the person against whom the act prohibited in division (A)(1) above is
committed in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting
with that person, or who otherwise has cohabited with the person within five
years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in question.
         POST A MESSAGE. Transferring, sending, posting, publishing,
disseminating or otherwise communicating, or attempting to transfer, send,
post, publish, disseminate or otherwise communicate, any message or
information, whether truthful or untruthful, about an individual, and whether
done under one’s own name, under the name of another or while impersonating
another.
         PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2921.01.
         SEXUAL MOTIVATION. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2971.01.
         THIRD PERSON. In relation to conduct as described in division (A)(1)
(b) above, an individual who is neither the offender nor the victim of the
conduct.
      (5)   The prosecution does not need to prove in a prosecution under
division (A) above that a person requested or received psychiatric treatment,
psychological treatment, or other mental heal services in order to show that
the person was caused mental distress as described in division (A)(4)(d)2.
above.
      (6)   (a)   Division (A) above does not apply to a person solely because
the person provided access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control, including
having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access or
connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the
information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the
material that is the subject of the access or connection. In addition, any
person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control shall not be
liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or
transmission through its service of any information that it believes is or will
be sent in violation of division (A) above.
         (b)   Division (A)(6)(a) above does not create an affirmative duty for
any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control to block the
receipt or transmission through its service of any information that it believes
is or will be sent in violation of division (A) above, except as otherwise
provided by law.
         (c)   Division (A)(6)(a) above does not apply to a person who
conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of this division (A) or who knowingly
advertises the availability of material of that nature.
(ORC 2903.211)
   (B)   Protection order. Consult Ohio R.C. 2903.213 for current provisions
regarding protection orders, consent agreements, anti-stalking protection
orders and orders issued by a court of another state.
   (C)   Violating a protection order, consent agreement, anti-stalking
protection order or order issued by a court of another state.
      (1)   No person shall recklessly violate the terms of any of the
following:
         (a)   A protection order issued or consent agreement approved pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 2919.26 or Ohio R.C. 3113.31;
         (b)   A protection order issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2151.34,
2903.213 or 2903.214; or
         (c)   A protection order issued by a court of another state.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates this division (C) is guilty of violating a
protection order.
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (C)(2)(c) or (C)(2)(d)
below, violating a protection order is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (c)   Violating a protection order is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the offender previously has been convicted of, pleaded
guilty to or been adjudicated a delinquent child for any of the following:
            1.   A violation of a protection order issued or consent agreement
approved pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2151.34, 2903.213, 2903.214, 2919.26 or 3113.31,
or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance;
            2.   Two or more violations of Ohio R.C. 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22
or 2911.211, or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
or any combination of those offenses, that involved the same person who is the
subject of the protection order or consent agreement;
            3.   One or more violations of this section, or any substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance.
         (d)   If the offender violates a protection order or consent agreement
while committing a felony offense, violating a protection order is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (e)   If the protection order violated by the offender was an order
issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2151.34 or 2903.214 that required electronic
monitoring of the offender pursuant to that section, the court may require in
addition to any other sentence imposed upon the offender that the offender be
electronically monitored for a period not exceeding five years by a law
enforcement agency designated by the court. If the court requires under this
division that the offender be electronically monitored, unless the court
determines that the offender is indigent, the court shall order that the
offender pay the costs of the installation of the electronic monitoring device
and the cost of monitoring the electronic monitoring device.
      (3)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (C)(1)(c)
above that the protection order issued by a court of another state does not
comply with the requirements specified in 18 U.S.C. § 2265(b) for a protection
order that must be accorded full faith a credit by a court of the state or that
it is not entitled to full faith and credit under 18 U.S.C. § 2265(c).
      (4)   In a prosecution for a violation of this section, it is not
necessary for the prosecution to prove that the protection order or consent
agreement was served on the defendant if the prosecution proves that the
defendant was shown the protection order or consent agreement or a copy of
either or a judge, magistrate, or law enforcement officer informed the
defendant that a protection order or consent agreement had been issued, and
proves that the defendant recklessly violated the terms of the order or
agreement.
      (5)   As used in this section, PROTECTION ORDER ISSUED BY A COURT OF
ANOTHER STATE means an injunction or another order issued by a criminal court
of another state for the purpose of preventing violent or threatening acts or
harassment against, contact or communication with or physical proximity to
another person including a temporary order, and means an injunction or order of
that nature issued by a civil court of another state, including a temporary
order and a final order issued in an independent action or as a pendente lite
order in a proceeding for other relief, if the court issued it in response to a
complaint, petition or motion filed by or on behalf of a person seeking
protection. The term does not include an order for support or for custody of a
child issued pursuant to the divorce and child custody laws of another state,
except to the extent that the order for support or for custody of a child is
entitled to full faith and credit under the laws of the United States.
(ORC 2919.27)
§ 636.05 MENACING.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the
offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other
person, the other person's unborn, or a member of the other person's immediate
family. In addition to any other basis for the other person's belief that the
offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other
person, the other person's unborn, or a member of the other person's immediate
family, the other person's belief may be based on words or conduct of the
offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association, or other
organization that employs the other person or to which the other person
belongs.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly place or attempt to place another in
reasonable fear of physical harm or death by displaying a deadly weapon,
regardless of whether the deadly weapon displayed is operable or inoperable, if
either of the following applies:
         (a)   The other person is an emergency service responder, the person
knows or reasonably should know that the other person is an emergency service
responder, and it is the person's specific purpose to engage in the specified
conduct against an emergency service responder.
         (b)   The other person is a family or household member or co-worker of
an emergency service responder, the person knows or reasonably should know that
the other person is a family or household member or co-worker of an emergency
service responder, and it is the person's specific purpose to engage in the
specified conduct against a family or household member or co-worker of an
emergency service responder.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of menacing. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, menacing is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If the victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a public
children services agency or a private child placing agency and the offense
relates to the officer's or employee's performance or anticipated performance
of official responsibilities or duties or if the victim of the offense is an
emergency service responder in the performance of the responder's official
duties, menacing is one of the following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) of this section, a
misdemeanor of the first degree;
      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an officer or
employee of a public children services agency or private child placing agency
or an emergency service responder, and that prior offense related to the
officer's or employee's performance or anticipated performance of official
responsibilities or duties or to the responder's performance of the responder's
official duties, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (C)   A prosecution for a violation of this section does not preclude a
prosecution of a violation of any other section of the Ohio Revised Code. One
or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of behavior that can be prosecuted
under this section or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code may be
prosecuted under this section, the other section of the Ohio Revised Code, or
both sections. However, if an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of this section and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.13, or any substantially similar municipal
ordinance, based on the same conduct involving the same victim that was the
basis of the violation of this section, the offenses are allied offenses of
similar import under Ohio R.C. 2941.25.
   (D)   As used in this section:
      CO-WORKER. Has the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2903.13.
      EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER. Has the same meanings as in Ohio R.C.
2903.13.
      FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Has the same meanings as in Ohio R.C.
2903.13.
      ORGANIZATION. Includes an entity that is a governmental employer.
(ORC 2903.22)
§ 636.06 UNLAWFUL RESTRAINT.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly restrain
another of his or her liberty.
   (B)   No person, without privilege to do so and with a sexual motivation,
shall knowingly restrain another of the other person’s liberty.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful restraint, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   As used in this section, SEXUAL MOTIVATION has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 2971.01.
(ORC 2905.03)
§ 636.07 CHILD STEALING. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 636.07 was repealed as part of the 1999 updating and revision of
this code of ordinances because substantially equivalent state law (Ohio R.C.
2905.04) was repealed by the Ohio General Assembly by Amended S.B. No. 2,
effective 7-1-1996.
§ 636.075 CRIMINAL CHILD ENTICEMENT. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note: This section was formerly based on R.C. § 2905.05, Criminal
Child Enticement. The Ohio Supreme Court held that R.C. § 2905.05(A) was
unconstitutionally overbroad in violation of the First Amendment. See State v.
Romage, 138 Ohio St. 3d. 390 (2014).
§ 636.08 COERCION.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to coerce another into taking or refraining
from action concerning which he or she has a legal freedom of choice, shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Threaten to commit any offense;
      (2)   Utter or threaten any slander against any person;
      (3)   Expose or threaten to expose any matter tending to subject any
person to hatred, contempt or ridicule, or to damage his or her personal or
business repute, or to impair his or her credit;
      (4)   Institute or threaten criminal proceedings against any person; or
      (5)   Take or withhold, or threaten to take or withhold official action,
or cause or threaten to cause official action to be taken or withheld.
   (B)   Divisions (A)(4) and (A)(5) above shall not be construed to prohibit a
prosecutor or court from doing any of the following in good faith and in the
interests of justice:
      (1)   Offering or agreeing to grant, or granting immunity from
prosecution pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2945.44;
      (2)   In return for a plea of guilty to one or more offenses charged or
to one or more other or lesser offenses, or in return for the testimony of the
accused in a case to which he or she is not a party, offering or agreeing to
dismiss, or dismissing one or more charges pending against an accused, or
offering or agreeing to impose, or imposing a certain sentence or modification
of sentence; or
      (3)   Imposing probation on certain conditions, including without
limitation requiring the offender to make restitution or redress to the victim
of his or her offense.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under divisions (A)(3), (A)
(4) or (A)(5) above that the actor’s conduct was a reasonable response to the
circumstances which occasioned it, and that his or her purpose was limited to:
      (1)   Compelling another to refrain from misconduct or to desist from
further misconduct;
      (2)   Preventing or redressing a wrong or injustice;
      (3)   Preventing another from taking action for which the actor
reasonably believed the other person to be disqualified; or
      (4)   Compelling another to take action which the actor reasonably
believed the other person to be under a duty to take.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of coercion, a misdemeanor of
the second degree.
   (E)   As used in this section, THREAT includes a direct threat and a threat
by innuendo.
(ORC 2905.12)
§ 636.09 RESERVED FOR FUTURE LEGISLATION.
§ 636.10 NON-SUPPORT OF DEPENDENTS.
   (A)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide adequate support to:
      (1)   The person's spouse, as required by law;
      (2)   The person's child who is under age 18, or the persons's child with
a mental or physical disability who is under age 21;
      (3)   The person's aged or infirm parent or adoptive parent, who from
lack of ability and means is unable to provide adequately for the parent's own
support.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide support as
established by a court order to, another person whom, by court order or decree,
the person:
         (a)   Is legally obligated to support; or
         (b)   Was legally obligated to support, and an amount for support:
            1.   Was due and owing prior to the date the person’s duty to pay
current support terminated; and
            2.   Remains unpaid.
      (2)   The period of limitation under Ohio R.C. 2901.13 applicable to
division (B)(1)(b) above shall begin to run on the date the person’s duty to
pay current support terminates.
   (C)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage or contribute to a
child or a ward of the juvenile court becoming a dependent child, as defined in
Ohio R.C. 2151.04, or a neglected child, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2151.03.
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of failure to provide
adequate support under division (A) above or a charge of failure to provide
support established by a court order under division (B) above that the accused
was unable to provide adequate support or the established support, but did
provide the support that was within his or her ability and means.
   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(3) of this
section that the parent abandoned the accused or failed to support the accused
as required by law, while the accused was under age 18, or had a mental or
physical disability and was under age 21.
   (F)   It is not a defense to a charge under division (B) above that the
person whom a court has ordered the accused to support is being adequately
supported by someone other than the accused.
   (G)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (G), whoever
violates divisions (A) or (B) above is guilty of non-support of dependents, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to a violation of divisions (A)(2) or (B) above or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or if the offender
has failed to provide support under divisions (A)(2) or (B) above for a total
accumulated period of 26 weeks out of 104 consecutive weeks, whether or not the
26 weeks were consecutive, then a violation of divisions (A)(2) or (B) above is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a felony violation of
this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a
violation of divisions (A)(2) or (B) above is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the offender is guilty of non-support of dependents by reason of
failing to provide support to his or her child as required by a child support
order issued on or after 4-15-1985, pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2151.23, 2151.231,
2151.232, 2151.33, 3105.21, 3109.05, 3111.13, 3113.04, 3113.31, 3115.401 or
former Ohio R.C. 3115.31, the court, in addition to any other sentence imposed,
shall assess all court costs arising out of the charge against the person and
require the person to pay any reasonable attorney’s fees of any adverse party
other than the state, as determined by the court, that arose in relation to the
charge.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (C) above is guilty of contributing to
the non-support of dependents, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day of a
violation of division (C) above is a separate offense.
(ORC 2919.21)
§ 636.11 RESERVED FOR FUTURE LEGISLATION.
§ 636.12 RESERVED FOR FUTURE LEGISLATION.
§ 636.13 PARTY LINES TO BE YIELDED IN EMERGENCIES. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 636.13, based on Ohio R.C. 4931.30, is obsolete and has been removed
as part of the 2008 updating and revision of this code of ordinances.
§ 636.14 THREATENING OR HARASSING TELECOMMUNICATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a
telecommunication, or knowingly permit a telecommunication to be made from a
telecommunications device under the person’s control, to another, if the caller
does any of the following:
      (1)   Makes the telecommunication with purpose to harass, intimidate or
abuse any person at the premises to which the telecommunication is made,
whether or not actual communication takes place between the caller and a
recipient;
      (2)   Describes, suggests, requests or proposes that the caller, the
recipient of the telecommunication or any other person engage in sexual
activity, and the recipient or another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made has requested, in a previous telecommunication or in
the immediate telecommunication, that the caller not make a telecommunication
to the recipient or to the premises to which the telecommunication is made;
      (3)   During the telecommunication, violates Ohio R.C. 2903.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (4)   Knowingly states to the recipient of the telecommunication that the
caller intends to cause damage to or destroy public or private property, and
the recipient, any member of the recipient’s family or any other person who
resides at the premises to which the telecommunication is made owns, leases,
resides or works in, will at the time of the destruction or damaging be near or
in, has the responsibility of protecting, or insures the property that will be
destroyed or damaged;
      (5)   Knowingly makes the telecommunication to the recipient of the
telecommunication, to another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made, or to those premises, and the recipient or another
person at those premises previously has told the caller not to make a
telecommunication to those premises or to any persons at those premises;
      (6)   Knowingly makes any comment, request, suggestion or proposal to the
recipient of the telecommunication that is threatening, intimidating, menacing,
coercive or obscene with the intent to abuse, threaten, or harass the
recipient;
      (7)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly interrupts the
telecommunication service of any person;
      (8)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly transmits to any
person, regardless of whether the telecommunication is heard in its entirety,
any file, document or other communication that prevents that person from using
the person’s telephone service or electronic communication device;
      (9)   Knowingly makes any false statement concerning the death, injury,
illness, disfigurement, reputation, indecent conduct or criminal conduct of the
recipient of the telecommunication or family or household member of the
recipient with purpose to abuse, threaten, intimidate, or harass the recipient;
      (10)   Knowingly incites another person through a telecommunication or
other means to harass or participate in the harassment of a person; and/or
      (11)   Knowingly alarms the recipient by making a telecommunication
without a lawful purpose at an hour or hours known to be inconvenient to the
recipient and in an offensive or repetitive manner.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall make or cause to be made a telecommunication or
permit a telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under
the person’s control, with purpose to abuse, threaten or harass another person.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly post a text or audio statement or an
image on an internet web site or web page for the purpose of abusing,
threatening or harassing another person.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of telecommunications
harassment.
      (2)   A violation of divisions (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(5), (A)(6),
(A)(7), (A)(8), (A)(9), (A)(10) or (A)(11) above or this division (C) is a
misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony on each
subsequent offense, which shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(3), a violation
of division (A)(4) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree on a first
offense and a felony on each subsequent offense, to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If a violation of division (A)(4) above results in
economic harm of $1,000 or more, telecommunications harassment is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (D)   No cause of action may be asserted in any court of the municipality
against any provider of a telecommunications service, interactive computer
service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or against any
officer, employee or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, for any
injury, death or loss to person or property that allegedly arises out of the
provider’s, officer’s, employee’s or agent’s provision of information,
facilities or assistance in accordance with the terms of a court order that is
issued in relation to the investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation
of this section. A provider of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or an
officer, employee or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, is
immune from any civil or criminal liability for injury, death or loss to person
or property that allegedly arises out of the provider’s, officer’s, employees
or agent’s provision of information, facilities, or assistance in accordance
with the terms of a court order that is issued in relation to the investigation
or prosecution of an alleged violation of this section.
   (E)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person solely because the
person provided access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control, including
having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access or
connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the
information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the
material that is the subject of the access or connection. In addition, any
person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control shall not be
liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or
transmission through its service of any information that the person believes
is, or will be sent, in violation of this section.
      (2)   Division (E)(1) above does not create an affirmative duty for any
person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control to block the
receipt or transmission through its service of any information that it believes
is, or will be sent, in violation of this section, except as otherwise provided
by law.
      (3)   Division (E)(1) above does not apply to a person who conspires with
a person actively involved in the creation or knowing distribution of material
in violation of this section or who knowingly advertises the availability of
material of that nature.
      (4)   A provider or user of an interactive computer service, as defined
in 47 U.S.C. § 230, shall neither be treated as the publisher or speaker of any
information provided by another information content provider, as defined in 47
U.S.C. § 230, nor held civilly or criminally liable for the creation or
development of information provided by another information content provider, as
defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230. Nothing in this division (E)(4) shall be construed
to protect a person from liability to the extent that the person developed or
created any content in violation of this section.
   (F)   Divisions (A)(5) to (A)(11) and (B)(2) above do not apply to a person
who, while employed or contracted by a newspaper, magazine, press association,
news agency, news wire service, cable channel or cable operator or radio or
television station, is gathering, processing, transmitting, compiling, editing
or disseminating information for the general public within the scope of the
person’s employment in that capacity or the person’s contractual authority in
that capacity.
   (G)   For the purpose of divisions (A) through (D) above, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CABLE OPERATOR. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1332.21.
      CALLER. The person described in the definition of “cable operator” who
makes or causes to be made a telecommunication or who permits a
telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under that
person’s control.
      ECONOMIC HARM. All direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary harm
suffered by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. The term includes,
but is not limited to, all of the following:
         (a)   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of
the criminal conduct;
         (b)   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
         (c)   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is
shut down as a result of the criminal conduct; and
         (d)   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
      FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Any of the following:
         (a)   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in division
(A)(9) above is committed:
            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse of
the recipient;
            2.   A parent, a foster parent or a child of the recipient, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the recipient; or
            3.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse, or
former spouse of the recipient, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse or former spouse of the
recipient.
         (b)   The natural parent of any child of whom the recipient of the
telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in division (A)(9) above is
committed is the other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
      PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. A person who is living or has lived with the
recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in division
(A)(9) above is committed in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise
is cohabiting with the recipient, or who otherwise has cohabited with the
recipient within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the
act in question.
      SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2907.01.
      TELECOMMUNICATION and TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Have the same meanings
as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
   (H)   Nothing in this section prohibits a person from making a
telecommunication to a debtor that is in compliance with the Fair Debt
Collection Practices Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1692, as amended, or the Telephone
Consumer Protection Act, 47 U.S.C. § 227, as amended.
(ORC 2917.21)
§ 636.15 PLACING HARMFUL SUBSTANCE OR OBJECTS IN FOOD OR CONFECTION.
   (A)   No person shall do either of the following, knowing or having
reasonable cause to believe that any person may suffer physical harm or be
seriously inconvenienced or annoyed thereby:
      (1)   Place a pin, razor blade, glass, laxative, drug of abuse or other
harmful or hazardous object or substance in any food or confection; or
      (2)   Furnish to any person any food or confection which has been
adulterated in violation of division (A)(1) above.
(ORC 3716.11)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 3716.99(C))
§ 636.16 RESERVED FOR FUTURE LEGISLATION.
§ 636.17 SOLICITING ALMS. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 636.17 was repealed by Ord. 53-2018, passed 5-14-2018.
§ 636.18 DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.
   (A)   Prohibited conduct.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm
to a family or household member.
      (2)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to a family
or household member.
      (3)   No person, by threat of force, shall knowingly cause a family or
household member to believe that the offender will cause imminent physical harm
to the family or household member.
      (4)   (a)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of domestic violence,
and the court shall sentence the offender as provided in divisions (A)(4)(b) to
(A)(4)(e) below.
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (A)(4)(c), (A)(4)(d)
or (A)(4)(e) below, a violation of division (A)(3) above is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree and a violation of divisions (A)(1) or (A)(2) above is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (c)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(4)(d) below, if the
offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of domestic
violence, a violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or the United States that is substantially equivalent
to domestic violence, a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.14, 2909.06, 2909.07,
2911.12, 2911.211 or 2919.22 if the victim of the violation was a family or
household member at the time of the violation, a violation of an existing or
former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United
States that is substantially equivalent to any of those sections if the victim
of the violation was a family or household member at the time of the commission
of the violation, or any offense of violence if the victim of the offense was a
family or household member at the time of the commission of the offense, a
violation of divisions (A)(1) or (A)(2) above is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law, and a violation of division (A)(3) above is a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
         (d)   If the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been
convicted of two or more offenses of domestic violence or two or more
violations or offenses of the type described in division (A)(4)(c) above
involving a person who was a family or household member at the time of the
violations or offenses, a violation of divisions (A)(1) or (A)(2) above is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a violation of
division (A)(3) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (e)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (A)(4)(c) or (A)(4)(d)
above, if the offender knew that the victim of the violation was pregnant at
the time of the violation, a violation of divisions (A)(1) or (A)(2) above is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a violation of
division (A)(3) above is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (5)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no court or
unit of state or local government shall charge any fee, cost, deposit or money
in connection with the filing of charges against a person alleging that the
person violated this section or a municipal ordinance substantially equivalent
to this section or in connection with the prosecution of any charges so filed.
      (6)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Any of the following:
            1.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
offender:
               a.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse as defined below or a
former spouse of the offender;
               b.   A parent, a foster parent, a child of the offender or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the offender; and
               c.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the offender, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse or former spouse of the
offender.
            2.   The natural parent of any child of whom the offender is the
other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
         PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. A person who is living or has lived with
the offender in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting
with the offender, or who otherwise has cohabited with the offender within five
years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in question.
(ORC 2919.25)
   (B)   Temporary protection order. Consult Ohio R.C. 2919.26 for current
provisions regarding protection orders.
   (C)   Violating a protection order, consent agreement, anti-stalking
protection order or order issued by a court of another state. See §
636.045(C) of this chapter for current provisions.
§ 636.19 SAFETY OF CROWDS ATTENDING LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CONCERT. A musical performance of which the primary component is a
presentation by persons singing or playing musical instruments, that is
intended by its sponsors mainly, but not necessarily exclusively, for the
listening enjoyment of the audience, and that is held in a facility. A CONCERT
does not include any performance in which music is a part of the presentation
and the primary component of which is acting, dancing, a motion picture, a
demonstration of skills or talent other than singing or playing an instrument,
an athletic event, an exhibition or a speech.
      FACILITY. Any structure that has a roof or partial roof and that has
walls that wholly surround the area on all sides, including, but not limited
to, a stadium, hall, arena, armory, auditorium, ballroom, exhibition hall,
convention center or music hall.
      LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCE. Any live speech; any live musical
performance, including a concert; any live dramatic performance; any live
variety show; and any other live performance with respect to which the primary
intent of the audience can be construed to be viewing the performers. A LIVE
ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCE does not include any form of entertainment with
respect to which the person purchasing a ticket routinely participates in
amusements as well as views performers.
      PERSON. Includes, in addition to an individual or entity specified in
Ohio R.C. 1.59(C), any governmental entity.
      RESTRICTED ENTERTAINMENT AREA. Any wholly or partially enclosed area,
whether indoors or outdoors, that has limited access through established
entrances or established turnstiles or similar devices.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or offer in return for a
donation, any ticket that is not numbered and that does not correspond to a
specific seat for admission to either of the following:
         (a)   A live entertainment performance that is not exempted under
division (D) below, that is held in a restricted entertainment area, and for
which more than 8,000 tickets are offered to the public; or
         (b)   A concert that is not exempted under division (D) below and for
which more than 3,000 tickets are offered to the public.
      (2)   No person shall advertise any live entertainment performance as
described in division (B)(1)(a) above or any concert as described in division
(B)(1)(b) above, unless the advertisement contains the words “Reserved Seats
Only”.
   (C)   Unless exempted by division (D)(1) below, no person who owns or
operates any restricted entertainment area shall fail to open, maintain and
properly staff at least the number of entrances designated under division (E)
below for a minimum of 90 minutes prior to the scheduled start of any live
entertainment performance that is held in the restricted entertainment area and
for which more than 3,000 tickets are sold, offered for sale or offered in
return for a donation.
   (D)   (1)   A live entertainment performance, other than a concert, is
exempted from the provisions of divisions (B) and (C) above if both of the
following apply:
         (a)   The restricted entertainment area in which the performance is
held has at least eight entrances or, if both entrances and separate admission
turnstiles or similar devices are used, has at least eight turnstiles or
similar devices; and
         (b)   The eight entrances or, if applicable, the eight turnstiles or
similar devices, are opened, maintained and properly staffed at least one hour
prior to the scheduled start of the performance.
      (2)   (a)   The officer responsible for public safety in the municipality
may, upon application of the sponsor of a concert covered by division (B)
above, exempt the concert from the provisions of that division if such officer
finds that the health, safety and welfare of the participants and spectators
would not be substantially affected by failure to comply with the provisions of
that division. In determining whether to grant an exemption, the officer shall
consider the following factors:
            1.   The size and design of the facility in which the concert is
scheduled;
            2.   The size, age and anticipated conduct of the crowd expected to
attend the concert; and
            3.   The ability of the sponsor to manage and control the expected
crowd.
         (b)   If the sponsor of any concert desires to obtain an exemption
under this division (D)(2)(b), the sponsor shall apply to the appropriate
official on a form prescribed by that official. The official shall issue an
order that grants or denies the exemption within five day. after receipt of the
application. The sponsor may appeal any order that denies an exemption to the
Court of Common Pleas of the county in which the facility is located.
         (c)   If an official grants an exemption under division (D)(2)(a)
above, the official shall designate an on-duty law enforcement officer to be
present at the concert. The designated officer has authority to issue orders to
all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety and welfare
of the participants and spectators.
      (3)   Notwithstanding division (D)(2) above, in the case of a concert
held in a facility located on the campus of an educational institution covered
by Ohio R.C. 3345.04, a state university law enforcement officer appointed
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3345.04 and 3345.21 shall do both of the following:
         (a)   Exercise the authority to grant exemptions provided by division
(D)(2)(a) above in lieu of an official designated in that division;
         (b)   If the officer grants an exemption under division (D)(3)(a)
above, designate an on-duty state university law enforcement officer to be
present at the concert. The designated officer has authority to issue orders to
all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety and welfare
of the participants and spectators.
   (E)   (1)   Unless a live entertainment performance is exempted by division
(D)(1) above, the officer responsible for public safety within the municipality
shall designate, for purposes of division (C) above, the minimum number of
entrances required to be opened, maintained and staffed at each live
entertainment performance so as to permit crowd control and reduce congestion
at the entrances. The designation shall be based on such factors as the size
and nature of the crowd expected to attend the live entertainment performance,
the length of time prior to the live entertainment performance that crowds are
expected to congregate at the entrances and the amount of security provided at
the restricted entertainment area.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (E)(1) above, a state university law
enforcement officer appointed pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3345.04 and 3345.21 shall
designate the number of entrances required to be opened, maintained and staffed
in the case of a live entertainment performance that is held at a restricted
entertainment area located on the campus of an educational institution covered
by Ohio R.C. 3345.04.
   (F)   No person shall enter into any contract for a live entertainment
performance that does not permit or require compliance with this section.
   (G)   (1)   This section does not apply to a live entertainment performance
held in a restricted entertainment area if one admission ticket entitles the
holder to view or participate in three or more different games, rides,
activities or live entertainment performances occurring simultaneously at
different sites within the restricted entertainment area and if the initial
admittance entrance to the restricted entertainment area, for which the ticket
is required, is separate from the entrance to any specific live entertainment
performance and an additional ticket is not required for admission to the
particular live entertainment performance.
      (2)   This section does not apply to a symphony orchestra performance, a
ballet performance, horse races, dances or fairs.
   (H)   This section does not prohibit the Council from imposing additional
requirements, not in conflict with the section, for the promotion or holding of
live entertainment performances.
   (I)   (1)   Whoever violates divisions (B), (C) or (F) above is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If any individual suffers physical harm to his or her person as a
result of a violation of this section, the sentencing court shall consider this
factor in favor of imposing a term of imprisonment upon the offender.
(ORC 2917.40)
§ 636.20 HAZING.
   (A)    As used in this section:
      HAZING. Means doing any act or coercing another, including the victim, to
do any act of initiation into any student or other organization or any act to
continue or reinstate membership in or affiliation with any student or other
organization that causes or creates a substantial risk of causing mental or
physical harm to any person, including coercing another to consume alcohol or a
drug of abuse, as defined in R.C. § 3719.011.
      ORGANIZATION. Includes a national or international organization with
which a fraternity or sorority is affiliated.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing of another.
      (2)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post-secondary school or any other educational institution, public or private,
shall recklessly permit the hazing of any person associated with the
organization.
   (C)   (1)   No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing of another
when the hazing includes coerced consumption of alcohol or drugs of abuse
resulting in serious physical harm to the other person.
      (2)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post-secondary school or any other educational institution, public or private,
shall recklessly permit the hazing of any person associated with the
organization when the hazing includes coerced consumption of alcohol or drugs
of abuse resulting in serious physical harm to that person.
   (D)   Whoever violates divisions (B) or (C) of this section is guilty of
hazing. A violation of division (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the second degree. A violation of division (C)(1) or (C)(2) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.31)
   (E)   Reckless failure to immediately report knowledge of hazing.
      (1)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post-secondary school or any other public or private educational institution,
who is acting in an official and professional capacity shall recklessly fail to
immediately report the knowledge of hazing to a law enforcement agency in the
county in which the victim of hazing resides or in which the hazing is
occurring or has occurred.
      (2)   A violation of division (E)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree, except that the violation is a misdemeanor of the first
degree if the hazing causes serious physical harm.
(R.C. § 2903.311(B), (C))
   (F)   (1)   Any person who is subject to hazing, as defined in division (A)
above, may commence a civil action for injury or damages, including mental and
physical pain and suffering, that result from the hazing. The action may be
brought against any participant in the hazing, any organization whose local or
national directors, trustees or officers authorized, requested, commanded or
tolerated the hazing, and any local or national director, trustee or officer of
the organization who authorized, requested, commanded or tolerated the hazing.
If the hazing involves students in a primary, secondary or post- secondary
school, university, college or any other educational institution, an action may
also be brought against any administrator, employee or faculty member of the
school, university, college or other educational institution who knew or
reasonably should have known of the hazing and who did make reasonable attempts
to prevent it and against the school, university, college or other educational
institution. If an administrator, employee or faculty member is found liable in
a civil action for hazing, then notwithstanding Ohio R.C. Ch. 2743, the school,
university, college or other educational institution that employed the
administrator, employee or faculty member may also be held liable.
      (2)   The negligence or consent of the plaintiff or any assumption of the
risk by the plaintiff is not a defense to an action brought pursuant to this
section. In an action against a school, university, college or other
educational institution, it is an affirmative defense that the school,
university, college or other institution was actively enforcing a policy
against hazing at the time the cause of action arose.
(ORC 2307.44)
    (G)   The penalty provided for in division (D) above shall be in addition
to the civil remedy provided for in division (F) above.
§ 636.21 ETHNIC INTIMIDATION.
   (A)   No person shall violate Ohio R.C. 2903.21, 2903.22, 2909.06 or
2909.07, or Ohio R.C. 2917.21(A)(3), (4) or (5), or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these sections, by reason of the race,
color, religion or national origin of another person or group of persons.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of ethnic intimidation. Ethnic
intimidation is an offense of the next higher degree than the offense the
commission of which is a necessary element of ethnic intimidation. In the case
of an offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree, ethnic intimidation is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2927.12)
§ 636.22 INTIMIDATION IN CONNECTION WITH HOUSING.
   (A)   No person, whether or not acting under color of law, shall by force or
threat of force willfully injure, intimidate or interfere with, or attempt to
injure, intimidate or interfere with any of the following:
      (1)   Any person because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status,
as defined in Ohio R.C. 4112.01, national origin, military status as defined in
that section, disability as defined in that section or ancestry and because
that person is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying,
contracting or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or
occupation of any housing accommodations, or applying for or participating in
any service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or
renting housing accommodations;
      (2)   Any person because that person is or has been doing, or in order to
intimidate that person or any other person or any class of persons from doing
either of the following:
         (a)   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4112.01, national
origin, military status as defined in that section, disability as defined in
that section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations or
facilities described in division (A)(1) above; or
         (b)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate.
      (3)   Any person because that person is or has been, or in order to
discourage that person or any other person from, lawfully aiding or encouraging
other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status as defined in Ohio R.C. 4112.01, national
origin, military status as defined in that section, disability as defined in
that section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations or
facilities described in division (A)(1) above, or participating lawfully in
speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity to so
participate.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(ORC 2927.03)
§ 636.23 FAILING TO PROVIDE FOR A PERSON WITH A FUNCTIONAL IMPAIRMENT.
   (A)   No caretaker shall knowingly fail to provide a person with a
functional impairment under the caretaker's care with any treatment, care,
goods, or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the
person with a functional impairment when this failure results in physical harm
or serious physical harm to the person with a functional impairment.
   (B)   No caretaker shall recklessly fail to provide a person with a
functional impairment under the caretaker's care with any treatment, care,
goods, or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the
person with a functional impairment when this failure results in serious
physical harm to the person with a functional impairment.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
knowingly failing to provide for a person with a functional impairment, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the person with a functional impairment
under the offender's care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the
violation of this section, a violation of division (a) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
recklessly failing to provide for a person with a functional impairment, a
misdemeanor of the second degree. If the person with a functional impairment
under the offender's care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the
violation of this section, a violation of division (B) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2903.16)
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CARETAKER. AA person who assumes the duty to provide for the care and
protection of a person with a functional impairment on a voluntary basis, by
contract, through receipt of payment for care and protection, as a result of a
family relationship, or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. The term
does not include a person who owns, operates, or administers, or who is an
agent or employee of, a care facility, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2903.33.
      PERSON WITH A FUNCTIONAL IMPAIRMENT. Any person who has a physical or
mental impairment that prevents the person from providing for the person's own
care or protection or whose infirmities caused by aging prevent the person from
providing for the person's own care or protection.
(ORC 2903.10)
§ 636.24 FAILURE TO PERFORM VIABILITY TESTING.
   (A)   Except in a medical emergency that prevents compliance with this
division, no physician shall perform or induce or attempt to perform or induce
an abortion on a pregnant woman after the beginning of the twentieth week of
gestation unless, prior to the performance or inducement of the abortion or the
attempt to perform or induce the abortion, the physician determines, in the
physician’s good faith medical judgment, that the unborn child is not viable,
and the physician makes that determination after performing a medical
examination of the pregnant woman and after performing or causing to be
performed those tests for assessing gestational age, weight, lung maturity or
other tests that the physician, in that physician’s good faith medical
judgment, believes are necessary to determine whether an unborn child is
viable.
   (B)   Except in a medical emergency that prevents compliance with this
division (B), no physician shall perform or induce or attempt to perform or
induce an abortion on a pregnant woman after the beginning of the twentieth
week of gestation without first entering the determination made in division (A)
above and the associated findings of the medical examination and tests in the
medical record of the pregnant woman.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to perform
viability testing, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (D)   The State Medical Board shall suspend a physician’s license to
practice medicine in this state for a period of not less than six months if the
physician violates this section.
(ORC 2919.18)
§ 636.25 UNLAWFUL COLLECTION OF BODILY SUBSTANCES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly collect any blood, urine, tissue or other
bodily substance of another person without privilege or consent to do so.
   (B)   (1)   Division (A) above does not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a law
enforcement officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice
of a law enforcement officer, for purposes of a chemical test or tests of the
substance under Ohio R.C. 1547.111(A)(1) or Ohio R.C. 4511.191(A)(2) to
determine the alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled
substance or combination content of the bodily substance; or
         (b)   The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a peace
officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice of a peace
officer, for purposes of a test or tests of the substance as provided in Ohio
R.C. 4506.17(A) to determine the person’s alcohol concentration or the presence
of any controlled substance or metabolite of a controlled substance.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) above shall not be construed as implying that the
persons identified in divisions (B)(1)(a) and (B)(1)(b) above do not have
privilege to collect the bodily substance of another person as described in
those divisions or as limiting the definition of “privilege” set forth in Ohio
R.C. 2901.01.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of unlawful collection
of a bodily substance. Except as otherwise provided in this division (C),
unlawful collection of a bodily substance is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of division (A) above or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, unlawful collection of a bodily substance is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2927.15)
CHAPTER 642: OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY
Section
642.01   Definitions.
642.02   Theft.
642.03   Degree of offense when certain property involved.
642.035   Evidence of theft of rented property.
642.04   Unauthorized use of a vehicle; vehicle trespass.
642.05   Unauthorized use of property.
642.06   Injuring vines, bushes, trees or crops.
642.07   Reserved for future legislation.
642.08   Insurance fraud.
642.09   Arson.
642.10   Criminal damaging or endangering; vehicular vandalism.
642.11   Criminal mischief.
642.12   Criminal trespass.
642.125   Aggravated trespass.
642.13   Tampering with coin machines.
642.14   Passing bad checks.
642.145   Forging or selling forged identification cards.
642.146   Criminal simulation.
642.15   Misuse of credit cards.
642.155   Recording credit card, telephone or Social Security numbers.
642.16   Making or using slugs.
642.17   Prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud.
642.18   Tampering with records.
642.19   Securing writings by deception.
642.20   Personating an officer.
642.205   Identity fraud. (Repealed)
642.21   Defrauding creditors.
642.22   Receiving stolen property.
642.23   Desecration.
642.24   Removal of improvements from real property.
642.25   Removal of shopping carts.
642.26   Advertising on private and public property.
642.27   Political signs. (Repealed)
642.28   Diminishing or interfering with forfeitable property.
642.29   Prosecutions for theft of utilities.
642.30   Determining property value in theft offense.
642.31   Determining property value in arson.
642.32   Food stamps. (Repealed)
642.33   Misconduct involving a public transportation system.
642.34   Workers’ compensation fraud.
642.35   Medicaid fraud.
642.36   Motion picture piracy.
642.37   Prohibit camping upon public property.
Cross-reference:
   Alteration, injury, removal of traffic-control devices, see TRAF.
313.08
   Definitions generally, see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Detention of shoplifters, see GEN. OFF.
606.23
   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police Division, see
GEN. OFF.
606.24
   Parents’ liability for destructive acts of their children, see Ohio R.C.
3109.09
   “Physical harm to property” defined, see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Possessing criminal tools, see GEN. OFF.
672.17
   “Property” defined, see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   See section histories for similar state law
   “Serious physical harm to property” defined, see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Value of written instrument or evidence of debt, see Ohio R.C. 1.07
§ 642.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter and §
618.21 of this code of ordinances, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTIVE DUTY SERVICE MEMBER. Any member of the armed forces of the United
States performing active duty under U.S.C. Title 10.
   ANHYDROUS AMMONIA. A compound formed by the combination of two gaseous
elements, nitrogen and hydrogen, in the manner described below. ANHYDROUS
AMMONIA is one part nitrogen to three parts hydrogen (NH3). ANHYDROUS AMMONIA
by weight is fourteen parts nitrogen to three parts hydrogen, which is
approximately 82% nitrogen to 18% hydrogen.
   ASSISTANCE DOG. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 955.011.
   CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE. Any services provided by or through the facilities
of any cable television system or other similar closed circuit coaxial cable
communications system, or any microwave or similar transmission service used in
connection with any cable television system or other similar closed circuit
coaxial cable communications system.
   COIN MACHINE. Any mechanical or electronic device designed to do both of the
following:
      (1)   Receive a coin or bill, or token made for that purpose; and
      (2)   In return for the insertion or deposit of a coin, bill or token,
automatically dispense property, provide a service or grant a license.
   COMPUTER. An electronic device that performs logical, arithmetic and memory
functions by the manipulation of electronic or magnetic impulses. COMPUTER
includes, but is not limited to, all input, output, processing, storage,
computer program or communication facilities that are connected, or related, in
a computer system or network to an electronic device of that nature.
   COMPUTER CONTAMINANT. A computer program that is designed to modify, damage,
destroy, disable, deny or degrade access to, allow unauthorized access to,
functionally impair, record or transmit information within a computer, computer
system or computer network without the express or implied consent of the owner
or other person authorized to give consent and that is of a type or kind
described in divisions (1) through (4) of this definition or of a type or kind
similar to a type or kind described in divisions (1) through (4) of this
definition:
      (1)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “viruses” and
“worms” that are self- replicating or self-propagating and that are designed to
contaminate other computer programs, compromise computer security, consume
computer resources, modify, destroy, record or transmit data, or disrupt the
normal operation of the computer, computer system, or computer network;
      (2)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “Trojans” or “Trojan
horses” that are not self-replicating or self-propagating and that are designed
to compromise computer security, consume computer resources, modify, destroy,
record or transmit data, or disrupt the normal operation of the computer,
computer system, or computer network;
      (3)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “zombies” that are
designed to use a computer without the knowledge and consent of the owner, or
other person authorized to give consent, and that are designed to send large
quantities of data to a targeted computer network for the purpose of degrading
the targeted computer’s or network’s performance, or denying access through the
network to the targeted computer or network, resulting in what is commonly
known as “denial of service” or “distributed denial of service” attacks; or
      (4)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “trap doors”, “back
doors” or “root kits” that are designed to bypass standard authentication
software and that are designed to allow access or use of a computer without the
knowledge or consent of the owner, or other person authorized to give consent.
   COMPUTER HACKING.
      (1)   COMPUTER HACKING means any of the following:
         (a)   Gaining access or attempting to gain access to all or part of a
computer, computer system or a computer network without express or implied
authorization with the intent to defraud or with intent to commit a crime;
         (b)   Misusing computer or network services including but not limited
to mail transfer programs, file transfer programs, proxy servers and web
servers by performing functions not authorized by the owner of the computer,
computer system or computer network or other person authorized to give consent.
As used in this division, “misuse of computer and network services” includes,
but is not limited to, the unauthorized use of any of the following:
            1.   Mail transfer programs to send mail to persons other than the
authorized users of that computer or computer network;
            2.   File transfer program services or proxy servers to access
other computers, computer systems or computer networks; or
            3.   Web servers to redirect users to other web pages or web
servers.
         (c)   1.   Subject to division (1)(c)2. of this definition, using a
group of computer programs commonly known as “port scanners” or “probes” to
intentionally access any computer, computer system or computer network without
the permission of the owner of the computer, computer system or computer
network or other person authorized to give consent. The group of computer
programs referred to in this division includes, but is not limited to, those
computer programs that use a computer network to access a computer, computer
system or another computer network to determine any of the following: the
presence or types of computers or computer systems on a network; the computer
network’s facilities and capabilities; the availability of computer or network
services; the presence or versions of computer software including, but not
limited to, operating systems, computer services or computer contaminants; the
presence of a known computer software deficiency that can be used to gain
unauthorized access to a computer, computer system, or computer network; or any
other information about a computer, computer system or computer network not
necessary for the normal and lawful operation of the computer initiating the
access.
            2.   The group of computer programs referred to in division (1)
(c)1. of this definition does not include standard computer software used for
the normal operation, administration, management and test of a computer,
computer system or computer network including but not limited to domain name
services, mail transfer services, and other operating system services, computer
programs commonly called “ping”, “tcpdump”, and “traceroute” and other network
monitoring and management computer software, and computer programs commonly
knows as “nslookup” and “whois” and other systems administration computer
software.
         (d)   The intentional use of a computer, computer system or a computer
network in a manner that exceeds any right or permission granted by the owner
of the computer, computer system or computer network or other person authorized
to give consent.
      (2)   COMPUTER HACKING does not include the introduction of a computer
contaminant, as defined in this section, into a computer, computer system,
computer program or computer network.
   COMPUTER NETWORK. A set of related and remotely-connected computers and
communication facilities that includes more than one computer system that has
the capability to transmit among the connected computers and communication
facilities through the use of computer facilities.
   COMPUTER PROGRAM. An ordered set of data representing coded instructions or
statements that, when executed by a computer, causes the computer to process
data.
   COMPUTER SERVICES. Includes, but is not limited to, the use of a computer
system, computer network, computer program, data that is prepared for computer
use or data that is contained within a computer system or computer network.
   COMPUTER SOFTWARE. Computer programs, procedures and other documentation
associated with the operation of a computer system.
   COMPUTER SYSTEM. A computer and related devices, whether connected or
unconnected, including, but not limited to, data input, output and storage
devices, data communications links and computer programs and data that make the
system capable of performing specified special purpose data processing tasks.
   COUNTERFEIT TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. A telecommunications device that,
alone or with another telecommunications device, has been altered, constructed,
manufactured or programmed to acquire, intercept, receive or otherwise
facilitate the use of a telecommunications service or information service
without the authority or consent of the provider of the telecommunications
service or information service. The phrase includes, but is not limited to, a
clone telephone, clone microchip, tumbler telephone or tumbler microchip; a
wireless scanning device capable of acquiring, intercepting, receiving or
otherwise facilitating the use of telecommunications service or information
service without immediate detection; or a device, equipment, hardware or
software designed for, or capable of, altering or changing the electronic
serial number in a wireless telephone.
   CREATE A SUBSTANTIAL RISK OF SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO ANY PERSON. Includes
the creation of a substantial risk of serious physical harm to any emergency
personnel.
   CREDIT CARD. Includes, but is not limited to, a card, code, device or other
means of access to a customer’s account for the purpose of obtaining money,
property, labor or services on credit, or for initiating an electronic fund
transfer at a point-of-sale terminal, an automated teller machine or a cash
dispensing machine. It also includes a county procurement card issued under
Ohio R.C. 301.29.
   DANGEROUS DRUG. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
   DATA. A representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts, or
instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner and
that are intended for use in a computer, computer system or computer network.
   DECEPTION. To knowingly deceive another or cause another to be deceived by
any false or misleading representation, by withholding information, by
preventing another from acquiring information, or by any other conduct, act or
omission that creates, confirms or perpetuates a false impression in another,
including a false impression as to law, value, state of mind or other objective
or subjective fact.
   DEFRAUD. To knowingly obtain, by deception, some benefit for oneself or
another or to knowingly cause, by deception, some detriment to another.
   DEPRIVE. To do any of the following:
      (1)   To withhold property of another permanently, or for a period that
appropriates a substantial portion of its value or use, or with purpose to
restore it only upon payment of a reward or other consideration;
      (2)   To dispose of property so as to make it unlikely that the owner
will recover it; or
      (3)   To accept, use or appropriate money, property or services, with
purpose not to give proper consideration in return for the money, property or
services, and without reasonable justification or excuse for not giving proper
consideration.
   DISABLED ADULT. A person who is 18 years of age or older and has some
impairment of body or mind that makes the person unable to work at any
substantially remunerative employment that the person otherwise would be able
to perform and that will, with reasonable probability, continue for a period of
at least 12 months without any present indication of recovery from the
impairment, or who is 18 years of age or older and has been certified as
permanently and totally disabled by an agency of the state or the United States
that has the function of so classifying persons.
   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2925.01.
   ELDERLY PERSON. A person who is 65 years of age or older.
   ELECTRONIC FUND TRANSFER. Has the same meaning as in 92 Stat. 3728, 15
U.S.C. § 1693a, as amended.
   EMERGENCY PERSONNEL. Any of the following persons:
      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2935.01;
      (2)   A member of a fire department or other firefighting agency of a
municipal corporation, township, township fire district, joint fire district,
other political subdivision or combination of political subdivisions;
      (3)   A member of a private fire company, as defined in Ohio R.C. 9.60,
or a volunteer firefighter;
      (4)    A member of a joint ambulance district or joint emergency medical
services district;
      (5)   An emergency medical technician-basic, emergency medical
technician-intermediate, emergency medical technician-paramedic, ambulance
operator or other member of an emergency medical service that is owned or
operated by a political subdivision or a private entity;
      (6)   The State Fire Marshal, the Chief Deputy State Fire Marshal or an
assistant State fire marshal; or
      (7)   A fire prevention officer of a political subdivision or an arson,
fire or similar investigator of a political subdivision.
   FEDERALLY-LICENSED FIREARMS DEALER. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
5502.63.
   FIREARM and DANGEROUS ORDNANCE. Have the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2923.11.
   FORGE. To fabricate or create, in whole or in part and by any means, any
spurious writing, or to make, execute, alter, complete, reproduce or otherwise
purport to authenticate any writing, when the writing in fact is not
authenticated by that conduct.
   GAIN ACCESS. To approach, instruct, communicate with, store data in,
retrieve data from or otherwise make use of any resources of a computer,
computer system or computer network, or any cable service or cable system both
as defined in Ohio R.C. 2913.04.
   INFORMATION SERVICE.
      (1)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, the offering of a
capability for generating, acquiring, storing, transforming, processing,
retrieving, utilizing or making available information via telecommunications,
including, but not limited to, electronic publishing.
      (2)   INFORMATION SERVICE does not include any use of a capability of a
type described in division (1) of this definition for the management, control
or operation of a telecommunications system or the management of a
telecommunications service.
   INTERNET. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 341.42.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
   OCCUPIED STRUCTURE. Any house, building, outbuilding, watercraft, aircraft,
railroad car, truck, trailer, tent or other structure, vehicle or shelter, or
any portion thereof, to which any of the following applies:
      (1)   It is maintained as a permanent or temporary dwelling, even though
it is temporarily unoccupied and whether nor not any person is actually
present;
      (2)   At the time, it is occupied as the permanent or temporary
habitation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;
      (3)   At the time, it is specially adapted for the overnight
accommodation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present; or
      (4)   At the time, any person is present or likely to be present in it.
   OWNER. Unless the context requires a different meaning, any person, other
than the actor, who is the owner of, who has possession or control of or who
has any license or interest in property or services, even though the ownership,
possession, control, license or interest is unlawful.
   POLICE DOG OR HORSE. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2921.321.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2744.01.
   RENTED PROPERTY. Personal property in which the right of possession and use
of the property is for a short and possibly indeterminate term in return for
consideration; the rentee generally controls the duration of possession of the
property within any applicable minimum or maximum term; and the amount of
consideration is generally determined by the duration of possession of the
property.
   SERVICES. Includes labor, personal services, professional services, rental
services, public utility services including wireless service as defined in Ohio
R.C. 128.01(F)(1), common carrier services and food, drink, transportation,
entertainment and cable television services and, for purposes of Ohio R.C.
2913.04 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, includes cable
services as defined in that section.
   SLUG. An object that, by virtue of its size, shape, composition or other
quality, is capable of being inserted or deposited in a coin machine as an
improper substitute for a genuine coin, bill or token made for that purpose.
   STATE. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2744.01.
   TELECOMMUNICATION. The origination, emission, dissemination, transmission or
reception of data, images, signals, sounds or other intelligence or equivalence
or intelligence of any nature over any communications system by any method,
including, but not limited to, a fiber optic, electronic, magnetic, optical,
digital or analog method.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Any instrument, equipment, machine or other
device that facilitates telecommunication, including, but not limited to, a
computer, computer network, computer chip, computer circuit, scanner,
telephone, cellular telephone, pager, personal communications device,
transponder, receiver, radio, modem or device that enables the use of a modem.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. The providing, allowing, facilitating or
generating of any form of telecommunication through the use of a
telecommunications device over a telecommunications system.
   THEFT OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12,
2911.13, 2911.31, 2911.32, 2913.02, 2913.03, 2913.04, 2913.041, 2913.11,
2913.21, 2913.31, 2913.32, 2913.33, 2913.34, 2913.40, 2913.42, 2913.43,
2913.44, 2913.45, 2913.47, 2913.48, former Ohio R.C. 2913.47 or 2913.48, or
Ohio R.C. 2913.51, 2915.05 or 2921.41;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
section listed in division (1) of this definition, or a violation of Ohio R.C.
2913.41, 2913.81 or 2915.06 as it existed prior to 7-1-1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or the United States involving robbery, burglary,
breaking and entering, theft, embezzlement, wrongful conversion, forgery,
counterfeiting, deceit or fraud; or
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit or complicity in
committing any offense under divisions (1), (2) or (3) of this definition.
   UTTER. To issue, publish, transfer, use, put or send into circulation,
deliver or display.
   WRITING. Any computer software, document, letter, memorandum, note, paper,
plate, data, film or other thing having in or upon it any written, type-written
or printed matter, and any token, stamp, seal, credit card, badge, trademark,
label or other symbol of value, right, privilege, license or identification.
(ORC 2909.01, 2913.01)
§ 642.02 THEFT.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to deprive the owner of property or services,
shall knowingly obtain or exert control over either the property or services in
any of the following ways:
      (1)   Without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give
consent;
      (2)   Beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the owner or
person authorized to give consent;
      (3)   By deception;
      (4)   By threat; or
      (5)   By intimidation.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of theft. Except as otherwise
provided in this division, a violation of this section is misdemeanor theft, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If any of the following criteria are met, then
a violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law:
      (1)   If the value of the property or services is $1,000 or more;
      (2)   If the property stolen is any of the property listed in Ohio R.C.
2913.71;
      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person, disabled adult,
active duty service member or spouse of an active duty service member;
      (4)   If the property stolen is a firearm or dangerous ordnance;
      (5)   If the property stolen is a motor vehicle;
      (6)   If the property stolen is any dangerous drug, or if the offender
previously has been convicted of a felony drug abuse offense;
      (7)   If the property stolen is a police dog or horse or an assistance
dog and the offender knows or should know that the property stolen is a police
dog or horse or an assistance dog;
      (8)   If the property stolen is anhydrous ammonia; or
      (9)   If the property stolen is a special purchase article as defined in
Ohio R.C. 4737.04 or is a bulk merchandise container as defined in Ohio R.C.
4737.012.
   (C)   In addition to the penalties described in division (B) above, if the
offender committed the violation by causing a motor vehicle to leave the
premises of an establishment at which gasoline is offered for retail sale
without the offender making full payment for gasoline that was dispensed into
the fuel tank of the motor vehicle or into another container, the court may do
one of the following:
      (1)   Unless division (C)(2) below applies, suspend for not more than six
months the offender’s driver’s license, probationary driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit or non-resident
operating privilege;
      (2)   If the offender’s driver’s license, probationary driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit or non-resident
operating privilege has previously been suspended pursuant to division (C)(1)
above, or any other substantially equivalent state or local law, impose a class
seven suspension of the offender’s license, permit or privilege from the range
specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(7), provided that the suspension shall be at
least six months;
      (3)   The court, in lieu of suspending the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, probationary driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or nonresident operating privilege pursuant to divisions
(C)(1) or (C)(2) above, instead may require the offender to perform community
service for a number of hours determined by the court.
   (D)   (1)   In addition to the penalties described in division (B) above, if
the offender committed the violation by stealing rented property or rental
services, the court may order that the offender make restitution pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 2929.18 or Ohio R.C. 2929.28.
      (2)   Restitution may include, but is not limited to, the cost of
repairing or replacing the stolen property, or the cost of repairing the stolen
property and any loss of revenue resulting from deprivation of the property due
to theft of rental services that is less than or equal to the actual value of
the property at the time it was rented.
      (3)   Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental
services shall be determined pursuant to the provisions of Ohio R.C. 2913.72.
   (E)   The sentencing court that suspends an offender’s license, permit or
nonresident operating privilege under division (C) above may grant the offender
limited driving privileges during the period of the suspension in accordance
with Ohio R.C. Ch. 4510.
(ORC 2913.02)
Statutory reference:
   Felony theft provisions, see Ohio R.C. 2913.02(B)
§ 642.03 DEGREE OF OFFENSE WHEN CERTAIN PROPERTY INVOLVED.
   Regardless of the value of the property involved, and regardless of whether
the offender previously has been convicted of a theft offense, a violation of
§§ 642.02 or 642.22 of this chapter is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the property involved is any of the following:
   (A)   A credit card;
   (B)   A printed form for a check or other negotiable instrument, that on its
face identifies the drawer or maker for whose use it is designed or identifies
the account on which it is to be drawn and that has not been executed by the
drawer or maker or on which the amount is blank;
   (C)   A motor vehicle identification license plate as prescribed by R.C. §
4503.22, a temporary motor vehicle license registration as prescribed by R.C. §
4503.182, or any comparable temporary motor vehicle license registration as
prescribed by the applicable law of another state or the United States;
   (D)   A blank form for a certificate of title or a manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate to a motor vehicle, as prescribed by Ohio R.C. 4505.07;
and/or
   (E)   A blank form for any license listed in Ohio R.C. 4507.01.
(R.C. § 2913.71)
§ 642.035 EVIDENCE OF THEFT OF RENTED PROPERTY.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      RENTER. A person who owns rented property.
      RENTEE. A person who pays consideration to a renter for the use of rented
property.
   (B)   Each of the following shall be considered evidence of intent to commit
theft of rented property or rental services:
      (1)   At the time of entering into the rental contract, the rentee
presented the renter with identification that was materially false, fictitious
or not current with respect to name, address, place of employment or other
relevant information; and
      (2)   After receiving a notice demanding the return of the rented
property as provided in division (C) below, the rentee neither returned the
rented property nor made arrangements acceptable with the renter to return the
rented property.
   (C)   To establish that a rentee has an intent to commit theft of rented
property or rental services under division (B)(2) above, a renter may issue a
notice to a rentee demanding the return of the rented property. The renter
shall mail the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
rentee at the address the rentee gave when the rental contract was executed or
to the rentee at the last address the rentee or the rentee’s agent furnished in
writing to the renter.
   (D)   A demand for the return of the rented property is not a prerequisite
for the prosecution of a rentee for theft of rented property or rental
services. The evidence specified in division (B) above does not constitute the
only evidence that may be considered as evidence of intent to commit theft of
rented property or rental services.
(ORC 2913.72)
§ 642.04 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF A VEHICLE; VEHICLE TRESPASS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorcycle, motorboat or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of
the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorboat or other motor- propelled vehicle without the consent of the owner or
person authorized to give consent, and either remove it from the state, or keep
possession of it for more than 48 hours.
   (C)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section:
      (1)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor, though mistaken,
reasonably believed that he or she was authorized to use or operate the
property; and
      (2)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor reasonably believed
that the owner or person empowered to give consent would authorize the actor to
use or operate the property.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unauthorized use of a
vehicle.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (D)(1), a violation
of division (A) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the victim of
the offense is an elderly person or disabled adult and if the victim incurs a
loss as a result of the violation, a violation of division (A) above is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (B) above is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2913.03)
   (E)   No person shall knowingly enter in or upon a motor vehicle, motorcycle
or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of the owner thereof or of
a person authorized to give consent.
   (F)   Whoever violates division (E) above is guilty of vehicle trespass, a
minor misdemeanor.
Statutory reference:
   Theft offense involving motor vehicle, offender to pay towing and storage
fees, see Ohio R.C. 2913.82
§ 642.05 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly use or operate the property of another
without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (B)   No person, in any manner and by any means, including, but not limited
to, computer hacking, shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to
or cause access to be gained to any computer, computer system, computer
network, cable service, cable system, telecommunications device,
telecommunications service or information service without the consent of, or
beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the owner of the
computer, computer system, computer network, cable service, cable system,
telecommunications device, telecommunications service or information service or
other person authorized to give consent.
   (C)   Except as permitted under Ohio R.C. 5503.101, no person shall
knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to, cause access to be granted
to or disseminate information gained from access to the law enforcement
automated database system created pursuant to Ohio R.C. 5503.10 without the
consent of, or beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the chair
of the Law Enforcement Automated Data System Steering Committee.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to,
cause access to be granted to or disseminate information gained from access to
the Ohio law enforcement gateway established and operated pursuant to Ohio R.C.
109.57(C)(1) without the consent of, or beyond the scope of the express or
implied consent of, the Superintendent of the Bureau of Criminal Identification
and Investigation.
   (E)   The affirmative defenses contained in Ohio R.C. 2913.03(C) are
affirmative defenses to a charge under this section.
   (F)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of unauthorized use of
property. Except as otherwise provided in this division (F), unauthorized use
of property is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (1)   If unauthorized use of property is committed for the purpose of
devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to obtain property or services,
unauthorized use of property is whichever of the following is applicable:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided below, unauthorized use of property
is a misdemeanor of the first degree; and
         (b)   If the value of the property or services or the loss to the
victim is $1,000 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (2)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, unauthorized use of property is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (G)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of unauthorized use of
computer, cable or telecommunication property, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (H)   Whoever violates division (C) above is guilty of unauthorized use of
the law enforcement automated database system, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (I)   Whoever violates division (D) above is guilty of unauthorized use of
the Ohio law enforcement gateway, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (K)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CABLE OPERATOR. Any person or group of persons that does either of the
following:
         (a)   Provides cable service over a cable system and directly through
one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that cable system; or
         (b)   Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of a cable system.
      CABLE SERVICE. Any of the following:
         (a)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
of information that a cable operator makes available to all subscribers
generally;
         (b)   Subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the
selection or use of video programming or of information that a cable operator
makes available to all subscribers generally, both as described in this
definition; and/or
         (c)   Any cable television service:
            1.   Any facility that serves only to retransmit the television
signals of one or more television broadcast stations;
            2.   Any facility that serves subscribers without using any public
right-of-way;
            3.   Any facility of a common carrier that, under 47 U.S.C. § 522
(7)(c), is excluded from the term “cable system” as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522
(7);
            4.   Any open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. § 573; or
            5.   Any facility of any electric utility used solely for operating
its electric utility system.
(ORC 2913.04)
Statutory reference:
   Telecommunications: fraud and unlawful use of a device, felony offenses, see
Ohio R.C. 2913.05 and 2913.06
§ 642.06 INJURING VINES, BUSHES, TREES OR CROPS.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly cut down,
destroy, girdle or otherwise injure a vine, bush, shrub, sapling, tree or crop
standing or growing on the land of another or upon public land.
   (B)   In addition to the penalty provided in division (C) below, whoever
violates this section is liable in treble damages for the injury caused.
(ORC 901.51)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(ORC 901.99(A))
§ 642.07 RESERVED FOR FUTURE LEGISLATION.
§ 642.08 INSURANCE FRAUD.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DATA. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01 and additionally
includes any other representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts or
instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner.
      DECEPTIVE. That a statement, in whole or in part, would cause another to
be deceived because it contains a misleading representation, withholds
information, prevents the acquisition of information, or by any other conduct,
act or omission creates, confirms or perpetuates a false impression, including,
but not limited to, a false impression as to law, value, state of mind or other
objective or subjective fact.
      INSURER. Any person that is authorized to engage in the business of
insurance in the state under Ohio R.C. Title 39, the Ohio Fair Plan
Underwriting Association created under Ohio R.C. 3929.43, any health insuring
corporation and any legal entity that is self-insured and provides benefits to
its employees or members.
      POLICY. A policy, certificate, contract or plan that is issued by an
insurer.
      STATEMENT. Includes, but is not limited to, any notice, letter or
memorandum; proof of loss; bill of lading; receipt for payment; invoice,
account or other financial statement; estimate of property damage; bill for
services; diagnosis or prognosis; prescription; hospital, medical or dental
chart or other record; x-ray, photograph, videotape or movie film; test result;
other evidence of loss, injury or expense; computer-generated document; and
data in any form.
   (B)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Present to, or cause to be presented to, an insurer any written or
oral statement that is part of, or in support of, an application for insurance,
a claim for payment pursuant to a policy or a claim for any other benefit
pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement or any part of the statement,
is false or deceptive; or
      (2)   Assist, aid, abet, solicit, procure or conspire with another to
prepare or make any written or oral statement that is intended to be presented
to an insurer as part of, or in support of, an application for insurance, a
claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other benefit
pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement,
is false or deceptive.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of insurance fraud. Except as
otherwise provided in this division (C), insurance fraud is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the amount of the claim that is false or deceptive is
$1,000 or more, insurance fraud is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (D)   This section shall not be construed to abrogate, waive or modify Ohio
R.C. 2317.02(A).
(ORC 2913.47)
§ 642.09 ARSON.
   (A)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do any of
the following:
      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
property of another without the other person’s consent;
      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
property of the offender or another, with purpose to defraud;
      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to the
statehouse or a courthouse, school building, or other building or structure
that is owned or controlled by the state, any political subdivision, or any
department, agency or instrumentality of the state or a political subdivision,
and that is used for public purposes;
      (4)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm, through the
offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other consideration, to any
property of another without the other person’s consent or to any property of
the offender or another with purpose to defraud;
      (5)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any park,
preserve, wildlands, brush- covered land, cut-over land, forest, timberland,
greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or controlled by
another person, the state or a political subdivision without the consent of the
other person, the state or the political subdivision; and/or
      (6)   With purpose to defraud, cause or create a substantial risk of,
physical harm to any park, preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over
land, forest, timberland, greenlands, woods or similar real property that is
owned or controlled by the offender, another person, the state or a political
subdivision.
   (B)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do any of
the following:
      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
structure of another that is not an occupied structure;
      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm, through the
offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other consideration, to any
structure of another that is not an occupied structure; and/or
      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
structure that is not an occupied structure and that is in or on any park,
preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over land, forest, timberland,
greenlands, woods or similar real property that is owned or controlled by
another person, the state or a political subdivision.
   (C)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under divisions (B)(1)
or (B)(2) above that the defendant acted with the consent of the other person.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B)(3)
above that the defendant acted with the consent of the other person, the state
or the political subdivision.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of arson.
      (2)   A violation of divisions (A)(1) or (B)(1) above is one of the
following:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(2)(b) below, a
misdemeanor of the first degree; or
         (b)   If the value of the property or the amount of the physical harm
involved is $1,000 or more, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (3)   A violation of divisions (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), (A)(5), (A)(6),
(B)(2) or (C)(3) above is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
(ORC 2909.03)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated arson, felony provisions, see Ohio R.C. 2909.02
   Arson, felony provisions generally, see Ohio R.C. 2909.03
   Convicted arsonist to make restitution to public agency, see Ohio R.C.
2929.28
§ 642.10 CRIMINAL DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING; VEHICULAR VANDALISM.
   (A)   Criminal damaging or endangering.
      (1)   No person shall cause or create a substantial risk of physical harm
to any property of another without the other person’s consent:
         (a)   Knowingly, by any means; or
         (b)   Recklessly, by means of fire, explosion, flood, poison gas,
poison, radioactive material, caustic or corrosive material, or other
inherently dangerous agency or substance.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of criminal damaging
or endangering, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If violation of this
division (A) creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging
or endangering is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the property involved
in a violation of this division (A) is an aircraft, an aircraft engine,
propeller, appliance, spare part or any other equipment or implement used or
intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the violation
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging or endangering
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the property
involved in a violation of this division (A) is an aircraft, an aircraft
engine, propeller, appliance, spare part or any other equipment or implement
used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the
violation creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or if the
property involved in a violation of this division (A) is an occupied aircraft,
criminal damaging or endangering is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(ORC 2909.06)
   (B)   Vehicular vandalism.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (B), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         ALLEY, STREET and VEHICLE. Have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C.
4511.01.
         HIGHWAY. Any highway as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.01 or any lane,
road, street, alley, bridge or overpass.
         VESSEL and WATERS IN THIS STATE. Have the same meanings as in Ohio
R.C. 1546.01.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any
object at, onto, or in the path of any of the following:
         (a)   Any vehicle on a highway; or
         (b)   Any boat or vessel on any of the waters in this state.
      (3)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of vehicular
vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this division (B)(3), vehicular
vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of this
division (B) creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or the
violation of this division (B) causes serious physical harm to property,
vehicular vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
If the violation of this division (B) causes physical harm to any person or
serious physical harm to any person, vehicular vandalism is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2909.09)
Statutory reference:
   Disrupting public services, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2909.04
   Vandalism, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2909.05
§ 642.11 CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
   (A)   No person shall:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy
or otherwise improperly tamper with the either of the following:
         (a)   The property of another; or
         (b)   One’s own residential real property with the purpose to decrease
the value of or enjoyment of the residential real property, if both of the
following apply:
            1.   The residential real property is subject to a mortgage; and
            2.   The person has been served with a summons and complaint in a
pending residential mortgage loan foreclosure action relating to that real
property. As used in this division (A)(1)(b), PENDING includes the time between
judgment entry and confirmation of sale.
      (2)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of property of
another, employ a tear gas device, stink bomb, smoke generator or other device
releasing a substance that is harmful or offensive to persons exposed, or that
tends to cause public alarm;
      (3)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy
or otherwise improperly tamper with a bench mark, triangulation station,
boundary marker or other survey station, monument or marker;
      (4)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy
or otherwise improperly tamper with any safety device, the property of another
or the property of the offender when required or placed for the safety of
others, so as to destroy or diminish its effectiveness or availability for its
intended purpose;
      (5)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of the property
of another, set a fire on the land of another or place personal property that
has been set on fire on the land of another, which fire or personal property is
outside and apart from any building, other structure or personal property that
is on that land; and/or
      (6)   Without privilege to do so, and with intent to impair the
functioning of any computer, computer system, computer network, computer
software or computer program, knowingly do any of the following:
         (a)   In any manner or by any means, including, but not limited to,
computer hacking, alter, damage, destroy or modify a computer, computer system,
computer network, computer software or computer program or data contained in a
computer, computer system, computer network, computer software or computer
program;
         (b)   Introduce a computer contaminant into a computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software or computer program.
      (7)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly destroy or improperly tamper
with a critical infrastructure facility.
   (B)   As used in this section:
      CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2911.21.
      IMPROPERLY TAMPER. Means to change the physical location or the physical
condition of the property.
      SAFETY DEVICE. Means any fire extinguisher, fire hose, or fire axe, or
any fire escape, emergency exit, or emergency escape equipment, or any life
line, life-saving ring, life preserver, or life boat or raft, or any alarm,
light, flare, signal, sign, or notice intended to warn of danger or emergency,
or intended for other safety purposes, or any guard railing or safety
barricade, or any traffic sign or signal, or any railroad grade crossing sign,
signal, or gate, or any first aid or survival equipment, or any other device,
apparatus, or equipment intended for protecting or preserving the safety of
persons or property.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal mischief,
and shall be punished as provided in division (C)(2), (C)(3), or (C)(4) of this
section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree. Except as otherwise provided
in this division, if the violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4),
or (A)(5) of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person,
criminal mischief committed in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3),
(A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
property involved in the violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4),
or (A)(5) of this section is an aircraft, an aircraft engine, propeller,
appliance, spare part, fuel, lubricant, hydraulic fluid, any other equipment,
implement, or material used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft, or any cargo carried or intended to be carried in an aircraft and if
the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or if the
aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief committed in
violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (A)(6) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the value of the computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software, computer program, or data involved in the violation
of division (A)(6) of this section or the loss to the victim resulting from the
violation is $1,000 or more, or if the computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software, computer program, or data involved in the violation
of division (A)(6) is used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft and the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or
if the aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (A)(6) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Criminal mischief committed in violation of division (A)(7) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.07)
§ 642.12 CRIMINAL TRESPASS.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another;
      (2)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, the
use of which is lawfully restricted to certain persons, purposes, modes or
hours, when the offender knows the offender is in violation of any such
restriction or is reckless in that regard;
      (3)   Recklessly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, as
to which notice against unauthorized access or presence is given by actual
communication to the offender, or in a manner prescribed by law, or by posting
in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential
intruders, or by fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to restrict
access; and/or
      (4)   Being on the land or premises of another, negligently fail or
refuse to leave upon being notified by signage posted in a conspicuous place or
otherwise being notified to do so by the owner or occupant, or the agent or
servant of either;
      (5)   Knowingly enter or remain on a critical infrastructure facility.
   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the land or
premises involved was owned, controlled or in custody of a public agency.
   (C)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the offender was
authorized to enter or remain on the land or premises involved, when the
authorization was secured by deception.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal trespass.
Criminal trespass in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), or (A)(4) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Criminal trespass in
violation of division (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   Notwithstanding Ohio R.C. 2929.28, if the person, in committing the
violation of this section, used a snowmobile, off- highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle, the court shall impose a fine of two times the usual amount
imposed for the violation.
      (3)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to two or more violations of this section, Ohio R.C. 2911.21 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and the offender, in committing each violation,
used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, the court, in
addition to or independent of all other penalties imposed for the violation,
may impound the certificate of registration of that snowmobile or off-highway
motorcycle or the certificate of registration and license plate of that all-
purpose vehicle for not less than 60 days. In such a case, Ohio R.C. 4519.47
applies.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, if the
offender, in committing the violation of this section, used an all-purpose
vehicle, the Clerk of the Court shall pay the fine imposed pursuant to this
section to the State Recreational Vehicle Fund created by Ohio R.C. 4519.11.
   (F)   As used in divisions (A) through (E) of this section:
      ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE, and SNOWMOBILE. Have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4519.01.
      CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Means:
         (a)   One of the following, if completely enclosed by a fence or other
physical barrier that is obviously designed to exclude intruders, or if clearly
marked with signs that are reasonably likely to come to the attention of
potential intruders and that indicate entry is forbidden without site
authorization:
            1.   A petroleum or alumina refinery;
            2.   An electric generating facility, substation, switching
station, electrical control center, or electric transmission and distribution
lines and associated equipment;
            3.   A chemical, polymer, or rubber manufacturing facility;
            4.   A water intake structure, water treatment facility, waste
water facility, drainage facility, water management facility, or any similar
water or sewage treatment system and its water and sewage piping;
            5.   A natural gas company facility or interstate natural gas
pipeline, including a pipeline interconnection, a natural gas compressor
station and associated facilities, city gate or town border station, metering
station, above-ground piping, regulator station, valve site, delivery station,
fabricated assembly, or any other part of a natural gas storage facility
involved in the gathering, storage, transmission, or distribution of gas;
            6.   A telecommunications central switching office or remote
switching facility or an equivalent network facility that serves a similar
purpose;
            7.   Wireline or wireless telecommunications infrastructure,
including telecommunications towers and telephone poles and lines, including
fiber optic lines;
            8.   A port, trucking terminal, or other freight transportation
facility;
            9.   A gas processing plant, including a plant used in the
processing, treatment, or fractionation of natural gas or natural gas liquids;
            10.   A transmission facility used by a federally licensed radio or
television station;
            11.   A steel-making facility that uses an electric arc furnace to
make steel;
            12.   A facility identified and regulated by the United States
Department of Homeland Security's Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards
Program under 6 C.F.R. part 27;
            13.   A dam that is regulated by the state or federal government;
            14.   A crude oil or refined products storage and distribution
facility, including valve sites, pipeline interconnections, pump station,
metering station, below- or above-ground pipeline, or piping and truck loading
or off-loading facility;
            15.   A video service network and broadband infrastructure,
including associated buildings and facilities, video service headends, towers,
utility poles, and utility lines such as fiber optic lines. As used in this
division, "video service network" has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
            16.   Any above-ground portion of an oil, gas, hazardous liquid or
chemical pipeline, tank, or other storage facility;
            17.   Any above-ground portion of a well, well pad, or production
operation;
            18.   A laydown area or construction site for pipe and other
equipment intended for use on an interstate or intrastate natural gas or crude
oil pipeline;
            19.   Any mining operation, including any processing equipment,
batching operation, or support facility for that mining operation.
         (b)   With respect to a video service network or broadband or wireless
telecommunications infrastructure, the above-ground portion of a facility
installed in a public right-of-way on a utility pole or in a conduit;
         (c)   Any railroad property;
         (d)   An electronic asset of any of the following:
            1.   An electric light company that is a public utility under R.C.
§ 4905.02;
            2.   An electric cooperative, as defined in R.C. § 4928.01;
            3.   A municipal electric utility, as defined in R.C. § 4928.01;
            4.   A natural gas company that is a public utility under R.C. §
4905.02;
            5.   A telephone company that is a public utility under R.C. §
4905.02;
            6.   A video service provider, including a cable operator, as those
terms are defined in R.C. § 1332.21.
      ELECTRONIC ASSET. Includes, but is not limited to, the hardware,
software, and data of a programmable electronic device; all communications,
operations, and customer data networks; and the contents of those data
networks.
      LAND or PREMISES. Includes any land, building, structure, or place
belonging to, controlled by, or in custody of another, and any separate
enclosure or room, or portion thereof.
      PRODUCTION OPERATION, WELL, and WELL PAD. Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 1509.01.
(R.C. § 2911.21)
   (G)   (1)   As used in this division (G), PLACE OF PUBLIC AMUSEMENT means a
stadium, theater or other facility, whether licensed or not, at which a live
performance, sporting event or other activity takes place for entertainment of
the public and to which access is made available to the public, regardless of
whether admission is charged.
      (2)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly enter or
remain on any restricted portion of a place of public amusement and, as a
result of that conduct, interrupt or cause the delay of the live performance,
sporting event or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement
after a printed written notice has been given as provided in division (G)(4)(a)
below that the general public is restricted from access to that restricted
portion of the place of public amusement. A restricted portion of a place of
public amusement may include, but is not limited to, a playing field, an
athletic surface or a stage located at the place of public amusement.
      (3)   An owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an agent of the
owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a place of public amusement
may use reasonable force to restrain and remove a person from a restricted
portion of the place of public amusement if the person enters or remains on the
restricted portion of the place of public amusement and, as a result of that
conduct, interrupts or causes the delay of the live performance, sporting event
or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement. This division
(G)(3) does not provide immunity from criminal liability for any use of force
beyond reasonable force by an owner or lessee of a place of public amusement,
an agent of either the owner or lessee or a performer or participant at a place
of public amusement.
      (4)   (a)   Notice has been given that the general public is restricted
from access to a portion of a place of public amusement if a printed written
notice of the restricted access has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at
the entrance to that portion of the place of public amusement. If a printed
written notice is posted or exhibited as described in this division (G)(4)
regarding a portion of a place of public amusement, in addition to that posting
or exhibition, notice that the general public is restricted from access to that
portion of the place of public amusement also may be given, but is not required
to be given, by either of the following means:
            1.   By notifying the person personally, either orally or in
writing, that access to that portion of the place of public amusement is
restricted; or
            2.   By broadcasting over the public address system of the place of
public amusement an oral warning that access to that portion of the place of
public amusement is restricted.
         (b)   If notice that the general public is restricted from access to a
portion of a place of public amusement is provided by the posting or exhibition
of a printed written notice as described in division (G)(4)(a) above, the
municipality, in a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (G)(2)
above, is not required to prove that the defendant received actual notice that
the general public is restricted from access to a portion of a place of public
amusement.
      (5)   (a)   Whoever violates division (G)(2) above is guilty of criminal
trespass on a place of public amusement, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   In addition to any jail term, fine or other sentence, penalty or
sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to division (G)(5)(a) above, a
court may require an offender who violates this section to perform not less
than 30 and not more than 120 hours of supervised community service work.
(R.C. § 2911.23)
§ 642.125 AGGRAVATED TRESPASS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall enter or remain on the land or premises of
another with purpose to commit on that land or those premises a misdemeanor,
the elements of which involve causing physical harm to another person or
causing another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to
that person.
      (2)   No person shall enter or remain on a critical infrastructure
facility with purpose to destroy or tamper with the facility.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated trespass.
Aggravated trespass in violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Aggravated trespass in violation of division
(A)(2) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
   (C)   As used in this section, CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2911.21.
(R.C. § 2911.211)
§ 642.13 TAMPERING WITH COIN MACHINES.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to commit theft or to defraud, shall knowingly
enter, force an entrance into, tamper with or insert any part of an instrument
into any coin machine.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with coin
machines, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of this section or of any theft offense as
defined in Ohio R.C. 2913.01, tampering with coin machines is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2911.32)
§ 642.14 PASSING BAD CHECKS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CHECK. Includes any form of debit from a demand deposit account,
including, but not limited to, any of the following:
         (a)   A check, bill of exchange, draft, order of withdrawal or similar
negotiable or non-negotiable instrument; or
         (b)   An electronic check, electronic transaction, debit card
transaction, check card transaction, substitute check, web check or any form of
automated clearing house transaction.
      ISSUE A CHECK. Causing any form of debit from a demand deposit account.
   (B)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall issue or transfer or cause
to be issued or transferred a check or other negotiable instrument, knowing
that it will be dishonored or knowing that a person has ordered or will order
stop payment on the check or other negotiable instrument.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers a check
or other negotiable instrument is presumed to know that it will be dishonored
if either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The drawer has no account with the drawee at the time of issue or
the stated date, whichever is later; or
      (2)   The check or other negotiable instrument was properly refused
payment for insufficient funds upon presentment within 30 days after issue or
the stated date, whichever is later, and the liability of the drawer, indorser
or any party who may be liable thereon is not discharged by payment or
satisfaction within ten days after receiving notice of dishonor.
   (D)   In determining the value of the payment for purposes of division (E)
below, the court may aggregate all checks and other negotiable instruments that
the offender issued or transferred or caused to be issued or transferred in
violation of division (B) above within a period of 180 consecutive days.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of passing bad checks. Except
as otherwise provided in this division (E), passing bad checks is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the check or checks or other negotiable instrument or
instruments are issued or transferred to a single vendor or single other person
for the payment of $1,000 or more, or if the check or checks or other
negotiable instrument or instruments are issued or transferred to multiple
vendors or persons for the payment of $1,500 or more, passing bad checks is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.11)
§ 642.145 FORGING OR SELLING FORGED IDENTIFICATION CARDS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Forge an identification card; or
      (2)   Sell or otherwise distribute a card that purports to be an
identification card, knowing it was forged.
   (B)   As used in this section, IDENTIFICATION CARD means a card that
includes personal information or characteristics of an individual, a purpose of
which is to establish the identity of the bearer described on the card, whether
the words “identity”, “identification”, “identification card” or other similar
words appear on the card.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of forging identification
cards or selling or distributing forged identification cards. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, forging identification cards or selling or
distributing forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division (A)
above or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, forging
identification cards or selling or distributing forged identification cards is
a misdemeanor of the first degree and, in addition, the court shall impose upon
the offender a fine not less than $250.
(ORC 2913.31(B), (C)(2))
Statutory reference:
   Forgery, felony provisions, see Ohio R.C. 2913.31(A), (C)(1)
   Forgery of originating address or other routing information in connection
with the transmission of an electronic mail advertisement, felony provisions,
see Ohio R.C. 2307.64
§ 642.146 CRIMINAL SIMULATION.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud, or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Make or alter any object so that it appears to have value because
of antiquity, rarity, curiosity, source or authorship, which it does not in
fact possess;
      (2)   Practice deception in making, retouching, editing or reproducing
any photograph, movie film, video tape, phonograph record or recording tape;
      (3)   Falsely or fraudulently make, simulate, forge, alter or counterfeit
any wrapper, label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control
Commission under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4301 and 4303, falsely or fraudulently cause to
be made, simulated, forged, altered or counterfeited any wrapper, label, stamp,
cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under Ohio R.C. Ch.
4301 and 4303, or use more than once any wrapper, label, stamp, cork or cap
prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4301 and 4303;
or
      (4)   Offer, or possess with the purpose to offer, any object that the
person knows to have been simulated as provided in divisions (A)(1), (A)(2) or
(A)(3) above.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal simulation. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, criminal simulation is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the loss to the victim is $1,000 or more, criminal
simulation is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2913.32)
§ 642.15 MISUSE OF CREDIT CARDS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Practice deception for the purpose of procuring the issuance of a
credit card, when a credit card is issued in actual reliance thereon;
      (2)   Knowingly buy or sell a credit card from or to a person other than
the issuer; or
      (3)   As an officer, employee or appointee of a political subdivision or
as a public servant as defined under Ohio R.C. 2921.01, knowingly misuse a
credit card account held by a political subdivision.
   (B)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Obtain control over a credit card as security for a debt;
      (2)   Obtain property or services by the use of a credit card, in one or
more transactions, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the card
has expired or been revoked, or was obtained, is retained or is being used in
violation of law;
      (3)   Furnish property or services upon presentation of a credit card,
knowing that the card is being used in violation of law; or
      (4)   Represent or cause to be represented to the issuer of a credit card
that property or services have been furnished, knowing that the representation
is false.
   (C)   No person, with purpose to violate this section, shall receive,
possess, control or dispose of a credit card.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misuse of credit cards.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) below, a violation
of divisions (A), (B)(1) or (C) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (D)(2) or division
(D)(3) below, a violation of divisions (B)(2), (B)(3) or (B)(4) above is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the cumulative retail value of the property
and services involved in one or more violations of divisions (B)(2), (B)(3) or
(B)(4) above which violations involve one or more credit card accounts and
occur within a period of 90 consecutive days commencing on the date of the
first violation, is $1,000 or more, misuse of credit cards is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, and if the offense involves a violation of divisions (B)(1) or (B)(2)
above, misuse of credit cards is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(ORC 2913.21)
§ 642.155 RECORDING CREDIT CARD, TELEPHONE OR SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS.
   (A)   No person shall record or cause to be recorded either of the
following:
      (1)   A credit card account number of the other party to a transaction,
when a check, bill of exchange or other draft is presented for payment; or
      (2)   The telephone number or Social Security account number of the other
party to a transaction, when payment is made by credit card charge agreement,
check, bill of exchange or other draft.
   (B)   Division (A) above does not apply to a transaction, if all of the
following conditions are met:
      (1)   The credit card account number, Social Security account number or
telephone number is recorded for a legitimate business purpose, including
collection purposes;
      (2)   The other party to the transaction consents to the recording of the
credit card account number, Social Security account number or telephone number;
and
      (3)   The credit card account number, Social Security account number or
telephone number that is recorded during the course of the transaction is not
disclosed to any third party for any purposes other than collection purposes
and is not used to market goods or services unrelated to the goods or services
purchased in the transaction.
   (C)   Nothing in this section prohibits the recording of the number of a
credit card account when given in lieu of a deposit to secure payment in the
event of default, loss, damage or other occurrence, or requires a person to
accept a check presented for payment, if the other party to the transaction
refuses to consent to the recording of the number of the party’s Social
Security account or license to operate a motor vehicle.
(ORC 1349.17)
   (D)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 1349.99)
§ 642.16 MAKING OR USING SLUGS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Insert or deposit a slug in a coin machine, with purpose to
defraud; or
      (2)   Make, possess or dispose of a slug, with purpose of enabling
another to defraud by inserting or depositing it in a coin machine.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or using slugs, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
(ORC 2913.33)
§ 642.17 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF PURPOSE TO DEFRAUD.
   In a prosecution of a person for a theft offense that alleges that the
person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she was facilitating a
fraud, hired or rented an aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy or other property or equipment, kept or
operated any of the same that has been hired or rented, or engaged
accommodations at a hotel, motel, inn, campground or other hostelry, it is
prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud if the person did any of the
following:
   (A)   Used deception to induce the rental agency to furnish the person with
the aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, sailboat, camper, trailer,
horse, buggy or other property or equipment, or used deception to induce the
hostelry to furnish the person with accommodations;
   (B)   Hired or rented any aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy or other property or equipment, or
engaged accommodations, knowing that he or she is without sufficient means to
pay the hire or rental;
   (C)   Absconded without paying the hire or rental;
   (D)   Knowingly failed to pay the hire or rental as required by the contract
of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure; or
   (E)   Knowingly failed to return hired or rented property as required by the
contract of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure.
(ORC 2913.41)
§ 642.18 TAMPERING WITH RECORDS.
   (A)   No person, knowing that he or she has no privilege to do so, and with
purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is facilitating a fraud, shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Falsify, destroy, remove, conceal, alter, deface or mutilate any
writing, computer software, data or record; or
      (2)   Utter any writing or record, knowing it to have been tampered with
as provided in division (A)(1) above.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with records.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) below, if the offense does
not involve data or computer software, tampering with records is whichever of
the following is applicable:
         (a)   If division (B)(1)(b) below does not apply, it is a misdemeanor
of the first degree; or
         (b)   If the writing or record is a will unrevoked at the time of the
offense, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) below, if the offense
involves a violation of division (A) above involving data or computer software,
tampering with records is whichever of the following is applicable:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2)(b) below, it is
a misdemeanor of the first degree; or
         (b)   If the value of the data or computer software involved in the
offense or the loss to the victim is $1,000 or more or if the offense is
committed for the purpose of devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to
obtain property or services and the value of the property or services or the
loss to the victim is $7,500 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the writing, data, computer software, or record is kept by or
belongs to a local, state or federal governmental entity, it is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2913.42)
§ 642.19 SECURING WRITINGS BY DECEPTION.
   (A)   No person, by deception, shall cause another to execute any writing
that disposes of or encumbers property, or by which a pecuniary obligation is
incurred.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of securing writings by
deception. Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), securing writings
by deception is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property
or the obligation involved is $1,000 or more, securing writings by deception is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate to state law. If the victim of the
offense is an elderly person, disabled adult, active duty service member or
spouse of an active duty service member, securing writings by deception is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2913.43)
§ 642.20 PERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is
facilitating a fraud, or with purpose to induce another to purchase property or
services, shall personate a law enforcement officer, or an inspector,
investigator or agent of any governmental agency.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of personating an officer, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2913.44)
§ 642.205 IDENTITY FRAUD. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 642.205 was repealed as part of the 2006 updating and revision of
this code of ordinances because a violation of substantially equivalent state
law (Ohio R.C. 2913.49) was made a felony by the Ohio General Assembly.
§ 642.21 DEFRAUDING CREDITORS.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud one or more of his or her
creditors, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Remove, conceal, destroy, encumber, convey or otherwise deal with
any of his or her property; or
      (2)   Misrepresent or refuse to disclose to a fiduciary appointed to
administer or manage his or her affairs or estate, the existence, amount or
location of any of his or her property, or any other information regarding the
property which he or she is legally required to furnish to the fiduciary.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of defrauding creditors.
Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), defrauding creditors is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property involved is
$1,000 or more, defrauding creditors is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(ORC 2913.45)
§ 642.22 RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall receive, retain or dispose of property of another
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the property has been
obtained through commission of a theft offense.
   (B)   It is not a defense to a charge of receiving stolen property in
violation of this section that the property was obtained by means other than
through the commission of a theft offense if the property was explicitly
represented to the accused person as being obtained through the commission of a
theft offense.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of receiving stolen property.
Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), receiving stolen property is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If any of the following criteria are met,
then a violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law:
      (1)   The value of the property involved is $1,000 or more;
      (2)   The property involved is any of the property listed in Ohio R.C.
2913.71;
      (3)   The property involved is a firearm or dangerous ordnance, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 2923.11;
      (4)   The property involved is a motor vehicle, as defined in Ohio R.C.
4501.01;
      (5)   The property involved is any dangerous drug, as defined in Ohio
R.C. 4729.01; or
      (6)   The property involved in violation of this section is a special
purchase article as defined in Ohio R.C. 4737.04 or a bulk merchandise
container as defined in Ohio R.C. 4737.012.
(ORC 2913.51)
§ 642.23 DESECRATION.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall purposely deface, damage,
pollute or otherwise physically mistreat any of the following:
      (1)   Any public monument;
      (2)   Any historical or commemorative marker, or any structure, Indian
mound or earthwork, cemetery, thing or site of great historical or
archeological interest;
      (3)   A place of worship, its furnishings or religious artifacts or
sacred texts within the place of worship or within the grounds upon which the
place of worship is located;
      (4)   A work of art or museum piece; and
      (5)   Any other object of reverence or sacred devotion.
   (B)   As used in this section, CEMETERY means any place of burial and
includes burial sites that contain American Indian burial objects placed with
or containing American Indian human remains.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of desecration. A violation of
divisions (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(4) or (A)(5) above is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (A)(3) above is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(ORC 2927.11)
§ 642.24 REMOVAL OF IMPROVEMENTS FROM REAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person having an interest in real property, buyer, lessee, tenant
or occupant of real property, knowing that such real property is mortgaged or
the subject of a land contract, shall remove or cause or permit the removal of
any improvement or fixture from such real property without the consent of the
mortgagee, vendor under the land contract or other person authorized to give
such consent.
(ORC 5301.61)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 5301.99)
§ 642.25 REMOVAL OF SHOPPING CARTS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CART. Includes any type of cart provided by a merchant for the
transporting of goods, wares or groceries from his or her place of business.
      PREMISES. Includes the parking area adjoining a place of business, but is
limited to the geographical boundaries of any business complex.
   (B)   No person shall remove a cart from the premises of the owner or
without his or her consent.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 127-1969, passed 7-7-1969)
§ 642.26 ADVERTISING ON PRIVATE AND PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   Private property. No person shall stick or post any advertisement,
poster, sign, handbill or placard of any description upon any building,
vehicle, tree, post, fence, billboard or other structure or thing, the private
property of another, without permission of the occupant or owner of the same,
nor paint, mark, write, print, impress or in any manner attach any notice or
advertisement or the name of any commodity or thing or any trade mark, symbol
or figure of any kind upon anything, the property of another, without first
obtaining permission of the owner of such thing on which such person desires to
place such notice, advertisement, name, mark or figure.
   (B)   Public property. No person shall stick, post or attach any
advertisement, poster, sign, handbill or placard of any kind or description
upon any telegraph, telephone, railway or electric light pole within the
corporate limits or upon any public building, vehicle, voting booth, flagging,
curb, tree lawn, walk, step, stone or sidewalk, nor write, print, impress or in
any manner attach any notice or advertisement of any kind upon any public
building, voting booth, flagging, curb, tree lawn, step, stone or sidewalk, the
property of the municipality or within the street lines of the municipality or
over which the municipality or Council has the care, custody or control, except
such as may be required by the laws of the state or upon written permission of
the Mayor.
   (C)   Penalty. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 642.27 POLITICAL SIGNS. (REPEALED)
§ 642.28 DIMINISHING OR INTERFERING WITH FORFEITABLE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall destroy, damage, remove or transfer property that is
subject to forfeiture or otherwise take any action in regard to property that
is subject to forfeiture with purpose to do any of the following:
      (1)   Prevent or impair the state’s or political subdivision’s lawful
authority to take the property into its custody or control under Ohio R.C. Ch.
2981 or to continue holding the property under its lawful custody or control;
      (2)   Impair or defeat the court’s continuing jurisdiction over the
person and property; or
      (3)   Devalue property that the person knows, or has reasonable cause to
believe, is subject to forfeiture proceedings under Ohio R.C. Ch. 2981.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with or
diminishing forfeitable property. Except as otherwise provided in this division
(B), interference with or diminishing forfeitable property is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the value of the property is $1,000 or more, interference
with or diminishing forfeitable property is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(ORC 2981.07)
§ 642.29 PROSECUTIONS FOR THEFT OF UTILITIES.
   (A)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2913.01,
that involves alleged tampering with a gas, electric, steam or water meter,
conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the utility,
proof that a meter, conduit or attachment of a utility has been tampered with
is prima facie evidence that the person who is obligated to pay for the service
rendered through the meter, conduit or attachment, and who is in possession or
control of the meter, conduit or attachment at the time the tampering occurred
has caused the tampering with intent to commit a theft offense.
   (B)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2913.01,
that involves the alleged reconnection of a gas, electric, steam or water
meter, conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the
utility, proof that a meter, conduit or attachment disconnected by a utility
has been reconnected without the consent of the utility is prima facie evidence
that the person in possession or control of the meter, conduit or attachment at
the time of the reconnection has reconnected the meter, conduit or attachment
with intent to commit a theft offense.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      UTILITY. Any electric light company, gas company, natural gas company,
pipe-line company, water- works company or heating or cooling company, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G) or (H), its lessees,
trustees or receivers, or any similar utility owned or operated by a political
subdivision.
      TAMPER. To interfere with, damage or bypass a utility meter, conduit or
attachment with the intent to impede the correct registration of a meter or the
proper functions of a conduit or attachment so as to reduce the amount of
utility service that is registered on the meter.
(ORC 4933.18)
   (D)   Each electric light company, gas company, natural gas company,
pipeline company, waterworks company or heating or cooling company, as defined
by Ohio R.C. 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G) or (H), or its lessees, trustees or
receivers, and each similar utility owned or operated by a political
subdivision, shall notify its customers, on an annual basis, that tampering
with or bypassing a meter constitutes a theft offense that could result in the
imposition of criminal sanctions.
(ORC 4933.19)
§ 642.30 DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE IN THEFT OFFENSE.
   (A)   If more than one item of property or services is involved in a theft
offense or in a violation of Ohio R.C. 1716.14(A) involving a victim who is an
elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the value of the property or services involved for the purpose of
determining the value as required by Ohio R.C. 2913.61(A) is the aggregate
value of all property or services involved in the offense.
   (B)   (1)   When a series of offenses under Ohio R.C. 2913.02, or a series
of violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate,
or complicity in violations of Ohio R.C. 1716.14(A), Ohio R.C. 2913.02, 2913.03
or 2913.04, Ohio R.C. 2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2), or Ohio R.C. 2913.31 or 2913.43
involving a victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, is
committed by the offender in the offender’s same employment, capacity or
relationship to another, all of those offenses shall be tried as a single
offense. When a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02, or a series of
violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate or
complicity in violations of Ohio R.C. 2913.02 or 2913.43 involving a victim who
is an active duty service member or spouse of an active duty service member, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, is
committed by the offender in the offender’s same employment, capacity or
relationship to another, all of those offenses shall be tried as a single
offense. The value of the property or services involved in the series of
offenses for the purpose of determining the value as required by Ohio R.C.
2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property and services involved in all
offenses in the series.
      (2)   If an offender commits a series of offenses under Ohio R.C. 2913.02
that involves a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims, all of
the offenses may be tried as a single offense. If an offender is being tried
for the commission of a series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation
of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of Ohio R.C. 1716.14
(A), Ohio R.C. 2913.02, 2913.03 or 2913.04, Ohio R.C. 2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2),
or Ohio R.C. 2913.31 or 2913.43, whether committed against one victim or more
than one victim, involving a victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses,
pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried
as a single offense. If an offender is being tried for the commission of a
series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to
violate, or complicity in violations of Ohio R.C. 2913.02 or 2913.43, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, whether
committed against one victim or more than one victim, involving a victim who is
an active duty service member or spouse of an active duty service member
pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried
as a single offense. If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the value
of the property or services involved for the purpose of determining the value
as required by Ohio R.C. 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property and
services involved in all of the offenses in the course of conduct.
      (3)   When a series of two or more offenses under Ohio R.C. 2913.40,
2913.48 or 2921.41 is committed by the offender in the offender’s same
employment, capacity or relationship to another, all of those offenses may be
tried as a single offense. If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the
value of the property or services involved for the purpose of determining the
value as required by Ohio R.C. 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all
property and services involved in all of the offenses in the series of two or
more offenses.
      (4)   In prosecuting a single offense under divisions (B)(1), (B)(2) or
(B)(3) above, it is not necessary to separately allege and prove each offense
in the series. Rather, it is sufficient to allege and prove that the offender,
within a given span of time, committed one or more theft offenses or violations
of Ohio R.C. 2913.40, 2913.48 or 2921.41 in the offender’s same employment,
capacity, or relationship to another as described in divisions (B)(1) or (B)(3)
above, or committed one or more theft offenses that involve a common course of
conduct to defraud multiple victims or a scheme or course of conduct as
described in division (B)(2) above. While it is not necessary to separately
allege and prove each offense in the series in order to prosecute a single
offense under divisions (B)(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3) above, it remains necessary in
prosecuting them as a single offense to prove the aggregate value of the
property or services in order to meet the requisite statutory offense level
sought by the prosecution.
   (C)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   The value of an heirloom, memento, collector’s item, antique,
museum piece, manuscript, document, record or other thing that has intrinsic
worth to its owner and that either is irreplaceable or is replaceable only on
the expenditure of substantial time, effort or money, is the amount which would
compensate the owner for its loss;
      (2)   The value of personal effects and household goods, and of
materials, supplies, equipment and fixtures used in the profession, business,
trade, occupation or avocation of its owner, which property is not covered
under division (C)(1) above, and which retains substantial utility for its
purpose regardless of its age or condition, is the cost of replacing such
property with new property of like kind and quality; and
      (3)   The value of any real or personal property that is not covered
under divisions (C)(1) or (C)(2) above, and the value of services, is the fair
market value of the property or services. As used in this section, FAIR MARKET
VALUE is the money consideration which a buyer would give and a seller would
accept for property or services, assuming that the buyer is willing to buy and
the seller is willing to sell, that both are fully informed as to all facts
material to the transaction and that neither is under any compulsion to act.
   (D)   Without limitation on the evidence which may be used to establish the
value of property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   When the property involved is personal property held for sale at
wholesale or retail, the price at which the property was held for sale is prima
facie evidence of its value;
      (2)   When the property involved is a security or commodity traded on an
exchange, the closing price or, if there is no closing price, the asked price,
given in the latest marked quotation prior to the offense, is prima facie
evidence of the value of the security or commodity;
      (3)   When the property involved is livestock, poultry or raw
agricultural products for which a local market price is available, the latest
local market price prior to the offense is prima facie evidence of the value of
the livestock, poultry or products;
      (4)   When the property involved is a negotiable instrument, the face
value is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument;
      (5)   When the property involved is a warehouse receipt, bill of lading,
pawn ticket, claim check or other instrument entitling the holder or bearer to
receive property, the face value or, if there is no face value, the value of
the property covered by the instrument less any payment necessary to receive
the property, is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument;
      (6)   When the property involved is a ticket of admission, ticket for
transportation, coupon, token or other instrument entitling the holder or
bearer to receive property or services, the face value or, if there is no face
value, the value of the property or services which may be received by the
instrument is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument;
      (7)   When the services involved are gas, electricity, water, telephone,
transportation, shipping or other services for which the rate is established by
law, the duly established rate is prima facie evidence of the value of the
services; and
      (8)   When the services involved are services for which the rate is not
established by law, and the offender has been notified prior to the offense of
the rate for the services, either in writing, or orally, or by posting in a
manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential offenders,
the rate contained in the notice is prima facie evidence of the value of the
services.
(ORC 2913.61(B) - (E))
§ 642.31 DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE IN ARSON.
   (A)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or amount of physical harm involved in a violation of §
642.06 of this chapter:
      (1)   If the property is an heirloom, memento, collector’s item, antique,
museum piece, manuscript, document, record or other thing that is either
irreplaceable or is replaceable only on the expenditure of substantial time,
effort or money, the value of the property or the amount of physical harm
involved is the amount that would compensate the owner for its loss;
      (2)   If the property is not covered under division (A)(1) above, and the
physical harm is such that the property can be restored substantially to its
former condition, the amount of physical harm involved is the reasonable cost
of restoring the property; and
      (3)   If the property is not covered under division (A)(1) above, and the
physical harm is such that the property cannot be restored substantially to its
former condition, the value of the property, in the case of personal property,
is the cost of replacing the property with new property of like kind and
quality, and in the case of real property or real property fixtures, is the
difference in the fair market value of the property immediately before and
immediately after the offense.
   (B)   As used in this section, FAIR MARKET VALUE has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 2913.61.
   (C)   Prima facie evidence of the value of property, as provided in Ohio
R.C. 2913.61(D), may be used to establish the value of property pursuant to
this section.
(ORC 2909.11(B) - (D))
§ 642.32 FOOD STAMPS. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 642.32 was repealed as part of the 1997 updating and revision of
this code of ordinances because a violation of substantially equivalent state
law (Ohio R.C. 2913.46) was made a felony by the Ohio General Assembly by Am.
Sub. S.B. No. 269, effective 6-28-1996 and 7-1-1996.
§ 642.33 MISCONDUCT INVOLVING A PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM.
   (A)   As used in this section, PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM means a county
transit system operated in accordance with Ohio R.C. 306.01 to 306.13, a
regional transit authority operated in accordance with Ohio R.C. 306.30 to
306.71, or a regional transit commission operated in accordance with Ohio R.C.
306.80 to 306.90.
   (B)   No person shall evade the payment of the known fares of a public
transportation system.
   (C)   No person shall alter any transfer, pass, ticket or token of a public
transportation system with the purpose of evading the payment of fares or of
defrauding the system.
   (D)   No person shall do any of the following while in any facility or on
any vehicle of a public transportation system:
      (1)   Play sound equipment without the proper use of a private earphone;
      (2)   Smoke, eat or drink in any area where the activity is clearly
marked as being prohibited; or
      (3)   Expectorate upon a person, facility or vehicle.
   (E)   No person shall write, deface, draw or otherwise mark on any facility
or vehicle of a public transportation system.
   (F)   No person shall fail to comply with a lawful order of a public
transportation system police officer, and no person shall resist, obstruct or
abuse a public transportation police officer in the performance of the
officer’s duties.
   (G)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of
misconduct involving a public transportation system.
      (1)   A violation of divisions (B), (C) or (F) above is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
      (2)   A violation of division (D) above is a minor misdemeanor on a first
offense. If a person previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of any division of this section or of a municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to any division of this section, a violation of
division (D) above is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (E) above is a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
   (H)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 75% of each fine paid to
satisfy a sentence imposed for a violation of any of the provisions of this
section shall be deposited into the treasury of the county and 25% shall be
deposited with the county transit board, regional transit authority or regional
transit commission that operates the public transportation system involved in
the violation, unless the Board of County Commissioners operates the public
transportation system, in which case 100% of each fine shall be deposited into
the treasury of the county.
(ORC 2917.41)
§ 642.34 WORKERS’ COMPENSATION FRAUD.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Receive workers’ compensation benefits to which the person is not
entitled;
      (2)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false or
misleading statement with the purpose to secure payment for goods or services
rendered under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4121, 4123, 4127 or 4131 or to secure workers’
compensation benefits;
      (3)   Alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any record or document
that is necessary to fully establish the validity of any claim filed with, or
necessary to establish the nature and validity of all goods and services for
which reimbursement or payment was received or is requested from the Bureau of
Workers’ Compensation, or a self-insuring employer under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4121,
4123, 4127, or 4131;
      (4)   Enter into an agreement or conspiracy to defraud the Bureau of
Workers’ Compensation or a self- insuring employer by making or presenting or
causing to be made or presented a false claim for workers’ compensation
benefits;
      (5)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false statement
concerning manual codes, classification or employees, payroll, paid
compensation or number of personnel, when information of that nature is
necessary to determine the actual workers’ compensation premium or assessment
owed to the Bureau by an employer;
      (6)   Alter, forge or create a workers’ compensation certificate or
falsely show current or correct workers’ compensation coverage; and/or
      (7)   Fail to secure or maintain workers’ compensation coverage as
required by Ohio R.C. Ch. 4123 with the intent to defraud the Bureau of
Workers’ Compensation.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of workers’ compensation
fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division, workers’ compensation
fraud is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of premiums and
assessments unpaid pursuant to actions described in divisions (A)(5), (A)(6) or
(A)(7) above, or goods, services, property or money stolen is $1,000 or more,
workers’ compensation fraud is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (C)   Upon application of the governmental body that conducted the
investigation and prosecution of a violation of this section, the court shall
order the person who is convicted of the violation to pay the governmental body
its costs of investigating and prosecuting the case. These costs are in
addition to any other costs or penalty provided under federal, state or local
law.
   (D)   The remedies and penalties provided in this section are not exclusive
remedies and penalties and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or
civil remedy or penalty for any act that is in violation of this section.
   (E)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CLAIM. Any attempt to cause the Bureau of Workers’ Compensation, an
independent third party with whom the administrator or an employer contracts
under Ohio R.C. 4121.44, or a self-insuring employer to make payment or
reimbursement for workers’ compensation benefits.
      EMPLOYER, EMPLOYEE and SELF-INSURING EMPLOYER. Have the same meanings as
in Ohio R.C. 4123.01.
      EMPLOYMENT. Participating in any trade, occupation, business, service or
profession for substantial gainful remuneration.
      FALSE. Wholly or partially untrue or deceptive.
      GOODS. Includes, but is not limited to, medical supplies, appliances,
rehabilitative equipment and any other apparatus or furnishing provided or used
in the care, treatment or rehabilitation of a claimant for workers’
compensation benefits.
      RECORDS. Any medical, professional, financial or business record relating
to the treatment or care of any person, to goods or services provided to any
person, or to rates paid for goods or services provided to any person, or any
record that the administrator of workers’ compensation requires pursuant to
rule.
      REMUNERATION. Includes but is not limited to wages, commissions, rebates
and any other reward or consideration.
      SERVICES. Includes, but is not limited to, any service provided by any
health care provider to a claimant for workers’ compensation benefits and any
and all services provided by the Bureau as part of workers’ compensation
insurance coverage.
      STATEMENT. Includes, but is not limited to, any oral, written,
electronic, electronic impulse or magnetic communication notice, letter,
memorandum, receipt for payment, invoice, account, financial statement, bill
for services; a diagnosis, prognosis, prescription, hospital, medical or dental
chart or other record; and a computer generated document.
      WORKERS’ COMPENSATION BENEFITS. Any compensation or benefits payable
under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4121, 4123, 4127 or 4131.
(ORC 2913.48)
§ 642.35 MEDICAID FRAUD.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PROVIDER. Any person who has signed a provider agreement with the
Department of Medicaid to provide goods or services pursuant to the Medicaid
program or any person who has signed an agreement with a party to such a
provider agreement under which the person agrees to provide goods or services
that are reimbursable under the Medicaid program.
      PROVIDER AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 5164.01.
      RECIPIENT. Any individual who receives goods or services from a provider
under the Medicaid program.
      RECORDS. Any medical, professional, financial or business records
relating to the treatment or care of any recipient, to goods or services
provided to any recipient, or to rates paid for goods or services provided to
any recipient and any records that are required by the rules of the Medicaid
Director to be kept for the Medicaid program.
      STATEMENT or REPRESENTATION. Any oral, written, electronic, electronic
impulse or magnetic communication that is used to identify an item of goods or
a service for which reimbursement may be made under the Medicaid program or
that states income and expense and is or may be used to determine a rate of
reimbursement under the Medicaid program.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a false or
misleading statement or representation for use in obtaining reimbursement from
the Medicaid program.
   (C)   No person, with purpose to commit fraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Contrary to the terms of the person’s provider agreement, charge,
solicit, accept or receive for goods or services that the person provides under
the Medicaid program any property, money or other consideration in addition to
the amount of reimbursement under the Medicaid program and the person’s
provider agreement for the goods or services and any cost-sharing expenses
authorized by Ohio R.C. 5162.20 or rules adopted by the Medicaid Director
regarding the Medicaid program; or
      (2)   Solicit, offer or receive any remuneration, other than any cost-
sharing expenses authorized by Ohio R.C. 5162.20 or rules adopted by the
Medicaid Director regarding the Medicaid program, in cash or in kind,
including, but not limited to, a kickback or rebate, in connection with the
furnishing of goods or services for which whole or partial reimbursement is or
may be made under the Medicaid program.
   (D)   No person, having submitted a claim for or provided goods or services
under the Medicaid program, shall do either of the following for a period of at
least six years after a reimbursement pursuant to that claim or a reimbursement
for those goods or services, is received under the Medicaid program:
      (1)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records
that are necessary to fully disclose the nature of all goods or services for
which the claim was submitted, or for which reimbursement was received, by the
person; or
      (2)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records
that are necessary to disclose fully all income and expenditures upon which
rates of reimbursements were based for the person.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of medicaid fraud. Except as
otherwise provided in this division (E), medicaid fraud is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the value of the property, services or funds obtained in
violation of this section is $1,000 or more, medicaid fraud is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (F)   Upon application of the governmental agency, office or other entity
that conducted the investigation and prosecution in a case under this section,
the court shall order any person who is convicted of a violation of this
section for receiving any reimbursement for furnishing goods or services under
the Medicaid program to which the person is not entitled to pay to the
applicant its cost of investigating and prosecuting the case. The costs of
investigation and prosecution that a defendant is ordered to pay pursuant to
this division (F) shall be in addition to any other penalties for the receipt
of that reimbursement that are provided in this section, Ohio R.C. 2913.40 or
5164.35 or any other provision of law.
   (G)   The provisions of this section are not intended to be exclusive
remedies and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for
any act that is in violation of this section.
(ORC 2913.40)
   (H)   (1)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following in an
application for enrollment in the Medicaid program or in a document that
requires a disclosure of assets for the purpose of determining eligibility for
the Medicaid program:
         (a)   Make or cause to be made a false or misleading statement;
         (b)   Conceal an interest in property;
         (c)   1.   Except as provided in division (H)(1)(c)2. below, fail to
disclose a transfer of property that occurred during the period beginning 36
months before submission of the application or document and ending on the date
the application or document was submitted; or
            2.   Fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during
the period beginning 60 months before submission of the application or document
and ending on the date the application or document was submitted and that was
made to an irrevocable trust a portion of which is not distributable to the
applicant for or recipient of Medicaid or to a revocable trust.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates this division (H) is guilty of Medicaid
eligibility fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division (H)(2), a
violation of this division (H) is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
value of the Medicaid services paid as a result of the violation is $1,000 or
more, a violation of this division (H) is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
         (b)   In addition to imposing a sentence under division (H)(2)(a)
above, the court shall order that a person who is guilty of Medicaid
eligibility fraud make restitution in the full amount of any Medicaid services
paid on behalf of an applicant for or recipient of Medicaid for which the
applicant or recipient was not eligible, plus interest at the rate applicable
to judgments on unreimbursed amounts from the date on which the Medicaid
services were paid to the date on which restitution is made.
         (c)   The remedies and penalties provided in this division (H) are not
exclusive and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for
any act that is in violation of this division (H).
      (3)   This division (H) does not apply to a person who fully disclosed in
an application for Medicaid or in a document that requires a disclosure of
assets for the purpose of determining eligibility for Medicaid all of the
interests in property of the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid, all
transfers of property by the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid and the
circumstances of all those transfers.
      (4)   Any amounts of Medicaid services recovered as restitution under
this division (H) and any interest on those amounts shall be credited to the
general revenue fund, and any applicable federal share shall be returned to the
appropriate agency or department of the United States.
      (5)   For the purpose of this division (H), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         MEDICAID SERVICES. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 5164.01.
         PROPERTY. Any real or personal property or other asset in which a
person has any legal title or interest.
(ORC 2913.401)
§ 642.36 MOTION PICTURE PIRACY.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AUDIOVISUAL RECORDING FUNCTION. The capability of a device to record or
transmit a motion picture or any part of a motion picture by means of any
technology existing on, or developed after, 3-9-2004.
      FACILITY. A movie theater.
   (B)   No person, without the written consent of the owner or lessee of the
facility and of the licensor of the motion picture, shall knowingly operate an
audiovisual recording function of a device in a facility in which the motion
picture is being shown.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of motion picture
piracy, a misdemeanor of the first degree on the first offense and a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
   (D)   This section does not prohibit or restrict a lawfully authorized
investigative, law enforcement, protective or intelligence gathering employee
or agent of the government of the state or a political subdivision of the
state, or of the federal government, when acting in an official capacity, from
operating an audiovisual recording function of a device in any facility in
which a motion picture is being shown.
   (E)   Division (B) above does not limit or affect the application of any
other prohibition in this code or the Ohio Revised Code. Any act that is a
violation of both division (B) above and another provision of this code or the
Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, under the other
provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code or under both this section and
the other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code.
(ORC 2913.07)
§ 642.37 PROHIBIT CAMPING UPON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   Except as may be permitted by the Mayor, or his or her designee, or as
otherwise provided in division (C) of this section, it is unlawful to camp upon
any public property owned by the city, including, without limitation, streets,
sidewalks, easements, parks, parking lots, public grounds or public right-of-
ways.
   (B)   As used in this section, TO CAMP means setting up, remaining in, or at
property for the purpose of sleeping, making preparation to sleep, storing
personal property, and/or performing cooking activities for habitation
purposes.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to persons who:
      (1)   Have no alternative lodging available to them, and are otherwise
homeless, and
      (2)   Have insufficient resources to secure alternative lodging, and
      (3)   Are unable to secure free services such as shelters within a
reasonable proximity to the city, or hotel/motel vouchers which are or have
been made available.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of "illegal public camping."
Except as otherwise provided, "illegal public camping" is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of, or pleaded
guilty to "illegal public camping" than the violation is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(Ord. 109-2022, passed 7-25-2022)
CHAPTER 648: PEACE DISTURBANCES
Section
648.01   Riot.
648.02   Failure to disperse.
648.03   Justifiable use of force to suppress riot.
648.04   Disorderly conduct.
648.05   Disturbing the peace.
648.06   Disturbing a lawful meeting.
648.07   Misconduct at an emergency.
648.08   Inducing panic.
648.09   Making false alarms.
648.10   Loitering.
648.11   Blocking sidewalks or streets.
648.12   Public speeches; permit required.
648.13   Civil emergencies.
648.14   Inciting to violence.
648.15   Impeding public passage of an emergency service responder.
Cross-reference:
   Arson, see GEN. OFF.
642.09
   Assault, see GEN. OFF.
636.02,
636.03
   Barking dogs, see GEN. OFF.
618.13
   Cordoning off riot areas; prohibiting sales of firearms and explosives, see
Ohio R.C. 3761.16
   “Deadly force” defined, see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Definitions generally, see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Desecration, see GEN. Off. 642.23
   Drug-related loitering, see GEN. OFF.
624.18
   Fireworks, see GEN. OFF.
672.12
   “Force” defined, see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Interfering with civil rights, see GEN. OFF.
606.20
   Liquor sale to intoxicated person, see GEN. OFF.
612.03
   Menacing, see GEN. OFF.
636.04 et seq.
   Noisy mufflers, see TRAF.
337.20
   Power to regulate peace disturbances, see Ohio R.C. 715.49
   Resisting arrest, see GEN. OFF.
606.16
   Riot and civil disorder assistance by State Highway Patrol, see Ohio R.C.
5503.02
   See section histories for similar state law
   Sirens, whistles and bells on motor vehicles, see TRAF.
337.19
   Suspension of beer and liquor sales during emergency, see Ohio R.C. 4301.251
   Trespass, see GEN. OFF.
642.12,
642.125
§ 648.01 RIOT.
   (A)   No person shall participate with four or more others in a course of
disorderly conduct in violation of Ohio R.C. 2917.11 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance:
      (1)   With purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a
misdemeanor, other than disorderly conduct;
      (2)   With purpose to intimidate a public official or employee into
taking or refraining from official action, or with purpose to hinder, impede or
obstruct a function of government; or
      (3)   With purpose to hinder, impede or obstruct the orderly process of
administration or instruction at an educational institution, or to interfere
with or disrupt lawful activities carried on at the institution.
   (B)   No person shall participate with four or more others with purpose to
do an act with unlawful force or violence, even though the act might otherwise
be lawful.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of riot, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(ORC 2917.03)
   (D)   For the purposes of prosecuting violations of this section, the
prosecution is not required to allege or prove that the offender expressly
agreed with four or more others to commit any act that constitutes a violation
this section prior to or while committing those acts.
(ORC 2917.031)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated riot, felony provisions, see Ohio R.C. 2917.02
§ 648.02 FAILURE TO DISPERSE.
   (A)   Where five or more persons are participating in a course of disorderly
conduct in violation of Ohio R.C. 2917.11 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and there are other persons in the vicinity whose presence
creates the likelihood of physical harm to persons or property or of serious
public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, a law enforcement officer or other
public official may order the participants and the other persons to disperse.
No person shall knowingly fail to obey the order.
   (B)   Nothing in this section requires persons to disperse who are peaceably
assembled for a lawful purpose.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to disperse.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3) below, failure to
disperse is a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   Failure to disperse is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the
failure to obey the order described in division (A) above creates the
likelihood of physical harm to persons or is committed at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind.
(ORC 2917.04)
§ 648.03 JUSTIFIABLE USE OF FORCE TO SUPPRESS RIOT.
   A law enforcement officer or firefighter engaged in suppressing a riot or in
protecting persons or property during a riot:
   (A)   Is justified in using force, other than deadly force, when and to the
extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary to
disperse or apprehend rioters; or
   (B)   Is justified in using force, including deadly force, when and to the
extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary to
disperse or apprehend rioters whose conduct is creating a substantial risk of
serious physical harm to persons.
(ORC 2917.05)
§ 648.04 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   No person shall recklessly cause inconvenience, annoyance or alarm to
another, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Engaging in fighting, in threatening harm to persons or property or
in violent or turbulent behavior;
      (2)   Making unreasonable noise or an offensively coarse utterance,
gesture or display, or communicating unwarranted and grossly abusive language
to any person;
      (3)   Insulting, taunting or challenging another, under circumstances in
which that conduct is likely to provoke a violent response;
      (4)   Hindering or preventing the movement of persons on a public street,
road, highway or right-of- way, or to, from, within or upon public or private
property, so as to interfere with the rights of others, and by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender; or
      (5)   Creating a condition that is physically offensive to persons or
that presents a risk of physical harm to persons or property, by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender.
   (B)   No person while voluntarily intoxicated shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   In a public place or in the presence of two or more persons, engage
in conduct likely to be offensive or to cause inconvenience, annoyance or alarm
to persons of ordinary sensibilities, which conduct the offender, if he or she
were not intoxicated, should know is likely to have such effect on others; or
      (2)   Engage in conduct or create a condition that presents a risk of
physical harm to himself, herself or another, or to the property of another.
   (C)   Violation of any statute or ordinance of which an element is operating
a motor vehicle, locomotive, watercraft, aircraft or other vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse is not a violation of division
(B) above.
   (D)   If a person appears to an ordinary observer to be intoxicated, it is
probable cause to believe that the person is voluntarily intoxicated for
purposes of division (B) above.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disorderly conduct.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (E)(2) below, disorderly
conduct is a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Disorderly conduct is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if any of
the following applies:
         (a)   The offender persists in disorderly conduct after reasonable
warning or request to desist;
         (b)   The offense is committed in the vicinity of a school or in a
school safety zone;
         (c)   The offense is committed in the presence of any law enforcement
officer, firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services
person or other authorized person who is engaged in the person’s duties at the
scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind; or
         (d)   The offense is committed in the presence of any emergency
facility person who is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility.
   (F)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL. Has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 2925.01.
      EMERGENCY FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2909.04.
      EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. The singular of “emergency facility personnel”
as defined in Ohio R.C. 2909.04.
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. The singular of “emergency medical
services personnel” as defined in Ohio R.C. 2133.21.
(ORC 2917.11)
§ 648.05 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   (A)   No person shall disturb the good order and quiet of the municipality
by clamors or noises, by intoxication, drunkenness, fighting, quarreling,
wrangling, committing assault, assault and battery, using obscene or profane
language in the streets and other public places to the annoyance of the
citizens, or otherwise violate the public peace by indecent and disorderly
conduct, or by lewd and lascivious behavior.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $50 or
imprisoned not more than 30 days for a first offense, not more than 90 days for
the second offense, not more than six months for the third offense and not more
than one year for each subsequent offense.
§ 648.06 DISTURBING A LAWFUL MEETING.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting,
procession or gathering, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Do any act which obstructs or interferes with the due conduct of
the meeting, procession or gathering; or
      (2)   Make any utterance, gesture or display which outrages the
sensibilities of the group.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disturbing a lawful
meeting. Except as otherwise provided in this division, disturbing a lawful
meeting is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Disturbing a lawful meeting is a
misdemeanor of the first degree if either of the following applies:
      (1)   The violation is committed with the intent to disturb or disquiet
any assemblage of people met for religious worship at a tax-exempt place of
worship, regardless of whether the conduct is within the place at which the
assemblage is held or is on the property on which that place is located and
disturbs the order and solemnity of the assemblage.
      (2)   The violation is committed with the intent to prevent, disrupt, or
interfere with a virtual meeting or gathering of people for religious worship,
through use of a computer, computer system, telecommunications device, or other
electronic device or system, or in any other manner.
   (C)   As used in this section:
      COMPUTER. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
      COMPUTER SYSTEM. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
      VIRTUAL MEETING OR GATHERING. A meeting or gathering by interactive video
conference or teleconference, or by a combination thereof.
(ORC 2917.12)
§ 648.07 MISCONDUCT AT AN EMERGENCY.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Hamper the lawful operations of any law enforcement officer,
firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services person or
other authorized person engaged in the person’s duties at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot or emergency of any kind;
      (2)   Hamper the lawful activities of any emergency facility person who
is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility; or
      (3)   Fail to obey the lawful order of any law enforcement officer
engaged in the law enforcement officer’s duties at the scene of or in
connection with a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit access or deny
information to any news media representative in the lawful exercise of the news
media representative’s duties.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misconduct at an emergency.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, misconduct at an emergency is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If violation of this section creates a risk
of physical harm to persons or property, misconduct at an emergency is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      EMERGENCY FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2909.04.
      EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. The singular of “emergency facility personnel”
as defined in Ohio R.C. 2909.04.
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. The singular of emergency medical
services personnel” as defined in Ohio R.C. 2133.21.
(ORC 2917.13)
§ 648.08 INDUCING PANIC.
   (A)   No person shall cause the evacuation of any public place, or otherwise
cause serious public inconvenience or alarm, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Initiating or circulating a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false;
      (2)   Threatening to commit any offense of violence; or
      (3)   Committing any offense, with reckless disregard of the likelihood
that its commission will cause serious public inconvenience or alarm.
   (B)   Division (A)(1) above does not apply to any person conducting an
authorized fire or emergency drill.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inducing panic.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3) below, inducing
panic is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If a violation of this section results in physical harm to any
person, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law. If a violation of this section results in economic harm of $1,000 or more,
inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the
public place involved in a violation of division (A)(1) above is a school or an
institution of higher education, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law. If a violation of this section pertains to a
purported, threatened or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction, inducing
panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (D)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or this code of ordinances may be prosecuted under
this section, the other section or both sections.
   (E)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BIOLOGICAL AGENT. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2917.33.
      ECONOMIC HARM. Any of the following:
         (a)   All direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary harm suffered
by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. ECONOMIC HARM, as described in
this division, includes, but is not limited to, all of the following:
            1.   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            2.   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            3.   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is
shut down as a result of the criminal conduct; and
            4.   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
         (b)   All costs incurred by the state or any political subdivision as
a result of, or in making any response to, the criminal conduct that
constituted the violation of this section or Ohio R.C. 2917.32, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, including, but not limited to,
all costs so incurred by any law enforcement officers, firefighters, rescue
personnel or emergency medical services personnel of the state or the political
subdivision.
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL. Has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 2133.21.
      INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION. Any of the following:
         (a)   A state university or college as defined in Ohio R.C. 3345.12(A)
(1), community college, state community college, university branch or technical
college;
         (b)   A private, nonprofit college, university or other post-secondary
institution located in this state that possesses a certificate of authorization
issued by the Chancellor of Higher Education pursuant to R.C. Chapter 1713; or
         (c)   A post-secondary institution with a certificate of registration
issued by the State Board of Career Colleges and Schools pursuant to Ohio R.C.
Ch. 3332.
      SCHOOL. Any school operated by a board of education or any school for
which the Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum standards
under Ohio R.C. 3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular
activities or training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a
violation of this section is committed.
      WEAPON OF MASS DESTRUCTION. Any of the following:
         (a)   Any weapon that is designed or intended to cause death or
serious physical harm through the release, dissemination or impact of toxic or
poisonous chemicals or other precursors;
         (b)   Any weapon involving a disease organism or biological agent;
         (c)   Any weapon that is designed to release radiation or
radioactivity at a level dangerous to human life;
         (d)   Any of the following, except to the extent that the item or
device in question is expressly excepted from the definition of “destructive
device” pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(4) and regulations issued under that
section:
            1.   Any explosive, incendiary or poison gas bomb, grenade, rocket
having a propellant charge of more than four ounces, missile having an
explosive or incendiary charge of more than one-quarter ounce, mine or similar
device;
            2.   Any combination of parts either designed or intended for use
in converting any item or device into any item or device described in division
(d)1. of this definition and from which an item or device described in that
division may be readily assembled.
(ORC 2917.31)
§ 648.09 MAKING FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false and likely to cause public inconvenience or alarm;
      (2)   Knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be
transmitted to or within any organization, public or private, for dealing with
emergencies involving a risk of physical harm to persons or property; or
      (3)   Report to any law enforcement agency an alleged offense or other
incident within its concern, knowing that the offense did not occur;
      (4)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false and likely to impede the operation of a critical
infrastructure facility.
   (B)   This section does not apply to any person conducting an authorized
fire or emergency drill.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making false alarms. Except
as otherwise provided in this division (C), making false alarms is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If a violation of this section results in
economic harm of $1,000 or more, making false alarms is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. If a violation of this section pertains
to a purported, threatened or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction,
making false alarms is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (D)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or theis code of ordinances may be prosecuted under
this section, the other section or both sections.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2911.21.
      ECONOMIC HARM and WEAPON OF MASS DESTRUCTION. Have the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2917.31.
(R.C. § 2917.32)
§ 648.10 LOITERING.
   (A)   No person shall loiter or prowl in any public or private place at a
time, in a manner or under circumstances which warrant alarm for the safety of
persons or security of property in the surrounding area.
   (B)   Without limitation, the following circumstances may be considered in
determining whether such alarm is warranted:
      (1)   The flight of a person upon the appearance of a police officer;
      (2)   Attempted concealment by a person upon the appearance of a police
officer; and
      (3)   The systematic checking by a person of doors, windows or other
means of access to buildings, houses or vehicles.
   (C)   Unless flight by the actor or other circumstances make it
impracticable, a police officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under
this section, afford the actor an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would
otherwise be warranted, by requesting him or her to identify himself or herself
and explain his or her presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an
offense under this section if the police officer did not comply with the
preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the
actor was true and, if believed by the police officer at the time, would have
dispelled the alarm.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LOITERING. Lingering, hanging around, delaying, sauntering and moving
slowly about, where such conduct is not due to physical defects or conditions.
      PRIVATE PLACE. Places privately owned but open to the public generally,
such as shopping centers, retail stores, transportation terminals, movie
theaters, office buildings, restaurants and all distinctly private places such
as homes or private residences and apartment houses.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Public streets and alleyways, public restrooms, public
sidewalks, public parks, public buildings and municipal airports.
      SURROUNDING AREA. That area easily and immediately accessible to the
person under observation.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 648.11 BLOCKING SIDEWALKS OR STREETS.
   (A)   No person shall linger, congregate or assemble upon any sidewalk,
crossing, platform, porch, stairway, bridge or other public place, in such a
manner as to unnecessarily impede and hinder the free passage and progress of
other persons upon or along such places.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 648.12 PUBLIC SPEECHES; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall congregate upon or occupy any street or alley for the
purpose of holding any meeting or making or delivering any lecture, speech or
harangue, without first obtaining permission in writing therefor from the
Mayor, designating the street or place where such meeting may be held.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 648.13 CIVIL EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   The purpose of this section is to better define and authorize actions
and procedures to be taken by the Mayor and other officers of the city in time
of public danger or emergency. Nothing herein shall be interpreted as limiting
the authority of the Mayor to take any appropriate action in time of public
danger or emergency which he or she is authorized to take under any other
provision of this code of ordinances, the statutes or Constitution of the state
or the laws and Constitution of the United States.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ABSENCE. Includes incapacity of the Mayor or inability to make immediate
contact with the Mayor.
      PUBLIC DANGER OR EMERGENCY. The following:
         (a)   A riot, as defined in any degree by this code of ordinances or
the Ohio Revised Code, any civil disturbance, disorder or other occurrence that
constitutes a clear and present danger to the health, safety and property of
the residents of the city, or substantially impairs the functioning of the city
government and its ability to protect the lives and property of the people; or
         (b)   Any natural disaster or human-made calamity, or clear and
present danger thereof, including, but not limited to, flood, conflagration,
cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the corporate limits of the
city resulting in the death or injury of persons or the destruction of property
to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the
public peace, health, safety or welfare.
   (C)   Whenever, in his or her judgment, the Mayor determines that a public
danger or emergency exists as a result of mob action or other civil
disobedience causing danger of injury to or damage to any person or property,
he or she shall have power to impose, by proclamation, any or all of the
following regulations necessary to preserve the peace and order of the city:
      (1)   To impose a curfew upon all or any portion of the city thereby
requiring all persons in such designated curfew areas to forthwith remove
themselves from the public streets, alleys, parks or other public places;
provided, however, that, Council members, physicians, nurses and ambulance
operators performing medical services, utility personnel maintaining essential
public services, firefighters and city, authorized or requested law enforcement
officers and personnel may be exempt from such curfew;
      (2)   To order the closing of any business establishment anywhere in the
city for the period of emergency, such businesses to include, but not be
limited to, those selling intoxicating liquors, malt beverages, gasoline or
firearms;
      (3)   To designate any public street, thoroughfare or vehicle parking
area closed to motor vehicles and pedestrian traffic; and
      (4)   To call upon regular and auxiliary law enforcement agencies and
organizations within or without the city to assist in preserving and keeping
the peace within the city.
   (D)   The proclamation of emergency provided herein shall become effective
upon its issuance and dissemination to the public by appropriate news media.
   (E)   Any emergency proclaimed in accordance with the provisions of this
section shall terminate after 48 hours from the issuance thereof, or upon the
issuance of a proclamation determining that an emergency no longer exists,
whichever occurs first; provided, however, that, such emergency may be extended
for such additional periods of time as determined necessary by the Mayor.
   (F)   Whoever willfully fails or refuses to comply with the orders of duly
authorized law enforcement officers or personnel charged with the
responsibility of enforcing the proclamation of emergency authorized herein is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Ord 83-1969, passed 4-7-1969)
§ 648.14 INCITING TO VIOLENCE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly engage in conduct designed to urge or incite
another to commit any offense of violence when either of the following apply:
      (1)   The conduct takes place under circumstances that create a clear and
present danger that any offense of violence will be committed; and/or
      (2)   The conduct proximately results in the commission of any offense of
violence.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inciting to violence. If
the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or incited to
commit is a misdemeanor, inciting to violence is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or
incited to commit is a felony, inciting to violence is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2917.01)
§ 648.15 IMPEDING PUBLIC PASSAGE OF AN EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly obstruct any
highway, street, sidewalk, or any other public passage in such a manner as to
render the highway, street, sidewalk, or passage impassable without
unreasonable inconvenience or hazard if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The obstruction prevents an emergency vehicle from accessing a
highway or street, prevents an emergency service responder from responding to
an emergency, or prevents an emergency vehicle or an emergency service
responder from having access to an exit from an emergency.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a request or order from an emergency service
responder to remove or cease the obstruction, the person refuses to remove or
cease the obstruction.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not limit or affect the application
of Ohio R.C. 2921.31 or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code. Any conduct
that is a violation of division (A) of this section and that also is a
violation of Ohio R.C. 2921.31 or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code
may be prosecuted under this section, the other section of the Ohio Revised
Code, or both sections.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawfully impeding public
passage of an emergency service responder, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (D)   As used in this section, "emergency service responder" has the same
meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2903.13.
(ORC 2917.14)
CHAPTER 654: RAILROADS
Editors’ note:
   The United States Circuit Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit has held in
a recent case that the Federal Railway Safety Act preempts local ordinances
regarding railroad obstructions and railroad safety. See CSX Transportation,
Inc. v. City of Plymouth, 86 F.3d 626 (6th Cir. 1996). Therefore, the
provisions in this chapter have been repealed. For current enforcement, please
consult appropriate state law.
Cross-reference:
   See section histories for similar state law
   Lighting railroads, see Ohio R.C. 723.33 et seq.
   Climbing upon railroad cars, see Ohio R.C. 4999.02
   Duties of locomotive engineers, see Ohio R.C. 4999.04
   Obstructing streets by railroad companies, see Ohio R.C. 5589.21, 5589.211
   Railroad Grad Crossing Improvement Fund, see Ohio R.C. 5589.24
   Stopping at grade crossings, see TRAF. 432.31 et seq.
   Definitions generally, see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Organizational criminal liability, see GEN. OFF.
606.08
   Personal accountability for organizational conduct, see GEN. OFF.
606.09
CHAPTER 656: REGISTRATION OF CONVICTED PERSONS
Section
656.01   New residents of city.
656.02   Photographs and fingerprints.
656.03   Change of residence.
656.04   False reports.
656.05   Compliance with regulations.
656.06   Exceptions.
656.07   Reports confidential.
656.08   Prohibitions on residency.
Cross-reference:
   Carrying concealed weapons, see GEN. OFF.
672.02
   Registration of sex offenders in cities and counties, see Ohio R.C. 2950.01
§ 656.01 NEW RESIDENTS OF CITY.
   (A)   Every person who comes into the city from any point outside of the
city, whether in transit through the city or otherwise, who, within the period
of five years prior thereto, has been convicted in any federal court or court
of any state of a crime which is a felony under the laws of the United States
or which if committed in Ohio would have been a felony under the laws of the
State of Ohio, shall report to the Police Division within 24 hours after
arrival within the boundaries of the city and shall furnish to the Division, in
a written statement signed by the person, the true name of the person and each
other name or alias by which the person is or has been known, a full and
complete description of himself or herself, and the name of each crime of which
he or she has been convicted, together with the name of the place where each
crime was committed, the name under which he or she was convicted, and the date
of the conviction thereof, the name, if any, and the location of each prison,
reformatory or other penal institution in which he or she has been confined as
punishment therefor, together with the location or address of his or her
residence, stopping place or living quarters in the city, and each one thereof,
if any, or the address or location of his or her intended residence, stopping
place or living quarters in the city, and each one thereof with a description
of the character of the place, whether an apartment house, dwelling house or
otherwise, giving the street number thereof, if any, or such other description
of the address or location thereof as will so identify the same as to make it
possible of location, and the length of time he or she expects or intends to
reside within the territory or boundaries of the city.
   (b)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 656.02 PHOTOGRAPHS AND FINGERPRINTS.
   At the time of furnishing the information required by §
656.01 of this chapter, the person shall be photographed and fingerprinted by
the Police Division and the photograph and fingerprints shall be made a part of
the permanent records of the Division.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 656.03 CHANGE OF RESIDENCE.
   (A)   In the event that any person who is required by the provisions of this
chapter to register, changes his or her place of residence, stopping place or
living quarters to any new or different place within the city other than the
place last reported to the Police Division in such report hereinabove provided
for, the person shall, within 24 hours after removing himself or herself from
the place of abode previously given, notify the Division, in a written and
signed statement, of such change of address, and shall furnish in the written
statement to the Division his or her new address, and each one thereof.
   (B)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 656.04 FALSE REPORTS.
   (A)   No person required by any provision of this chapter to furnish any
such report herein required shall furnish in the report any false or fictitious
address or any address other than a true address or intended address, or
furnish in making any such report any false, untrue or misleading information
or statement relating to any information required by the provisions of this
chapter to be made or furnished.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 656.05 COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No person required by any provision of this chapter to furnish any
report or information shall fail, neglect or refuse to make such report or to
furnish any such information, photograph or fingerprints, or fail, neglect or
refuse to render or furnish the same within the time prescribed by this
chapter, or fail, neglect or refuse to furnish to the Police Division, within
such time, any information, photograph or fingerprints required to be furnished
by this chapter, or to furnish any false, untrue or misleading information on
or make a statement relating to any information required by this chapter.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 656.06 EXCEPTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person
who has received a pardon for each crime for which he or she has been
convicted.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 656.07 REPORTS CONFIDENTIAL.
   (A)   All reports, records, photographs and fingerprints taken pursuant to
this chapter shall be private records of the Police Division, open to
inspection only by city police officers or persons having official duties to
perform in connection therewith. No person having access to such records shall
disclose to anyone else, other than in the regular discharge of his or her
duties, any information contained therein.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 656.08 PROHIBITIONS ON RESIDENCY.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person who is required to register as a
sexually oriented offender under R.C. § 2950.04 and classified as a "Tier III
sex offender" or whose conviction was of a "child-victim oriented offense" as
those terms are defined by R.C. § 2950.01, to reside within 1,000 feet of any
school, preschool, commercial childcare center, city owned parks, and the
Towpath.
   (B)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor in the
first degree.
   (C)   This section applies to any person registering on or after the
effective date of this legislation.
(Ord. 149-2021, passed 12-20-2021)
CHAPTER 660: SAFETY, SANITATION AND HEALTH
Section
660.01   Venting of heaters and burners.
660.02   Spreading contagion.
660.03   Trash deposits.
660.04   Noxious odors; filthy accumulations; polluting and diverting
watercourses.
660.05   Littering.
660.06   Abandoned refrigerators and airtight containers.
660.07   Contamination from the illegal manufacture of methamphetamine.
660.08   Regulations for ice cream vendors.
660.09   Clandestine drug labs.
660.10   Reserved for future legislation.
660.11   Reserved for future legislation.
660.12   Reserved for future legislation.
660.13   Burning rubber prohibited.
660.14   Scavenging prohibited.
660.15   Spitting.
660.16   Dangerous, abandoned excavations or buildings.
660.17   Barbed wire or electrically charged fences.
660.18   Improper drainage.
660.19   Unguarded swimming prohibited.
660.20   Open burning.
660.21   Smoking in public places.
Cross-reference:
   Excavation liability, see Ohio R.C. 723.49 et seq.
   Inducing panic, see GEN. OFF.
648.08
   Junk cars, see GEN. OFF. 632
   Littering from motor vehicles, see TRAF.
331.41
   Loads dropping or leaking; tracking mud; removal required, see TRAF.
339.08
   Nuisances, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3767
   Placing harmful substance or objects in food or confection, see GEN. OFF.
636.15
   Placing injurious material or obstruction in street, see TRAF.
311.01
   Rabies quarantine, see GEN. OFF.
618.11
   Riot, see GEN. OFF.
648.01 et seq.
   Safety and equipment for motor vehicles, see TRAF. Ch.
337
   See section histories for similar state law
   Streets and sidewalks, see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 668
   Weapons and explosives, see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 672
   Willfully leaving vehicles on private or public property, see TRAF.
303.09
§ 660.01 VENTING OF HEATERS AND BURNERS.
   (A)   The use of a brazier, salamander, space heater, room heater, furnace,
water heater or other burner or heater using wood, coal, coke, fuel oil,
kerosene, gasoline, natural gas, liquid petroleum gas or similar fuel and
tending to give off carbon monoxide or other harmful gases must comply with the
following provisions.
      (1)   When used in living quarters, or in any enclosed building or space
in which persons are usually present, shall be used with a flue or vent so
designed, installed and maintained as to vent the products of combustion
outdoors; except in storage, factory or industrial buildings which are provided
with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide poisoning.
      (2)   When used as a portable or temporary burner or heater at a
construction site, or in a warehouse, shed or structure in which persons are
temporarily present, shall be vented as provided in division (A)(1) above or
used with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide
poisoning.
   (B)   This section does not apply to domestic ranges, laundry stoves, gas
logs installed in a fireplace with an adequate flue, or hot plates, unless the
same are used as space or room heaters.
   (C)   No person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in charge
or occupant of premises, negligently permit the use of a burner or heater in
violation of the standards for venting and ventilation provided in this
section.
   (D)   Division (A) above does not apply to any kerosene-fired space or room
heater that is equipped with an automatic extinguishing tip-over device, or to
any natural gas-fired or liquid petroleum gas-fired space or room heater that
is equipped with an oxygen depletion safety shut-off system, and that has its
fuel piped from a source outside the building in which it is located, that are
approved by an authoritative source recognized by the State Fire Marshal in the
State Fire Code adopted by him or her under Ohio R.C. 3737.82.
   (E)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules to ensure the safe use of
unvented kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum gas heaters exempted from
division (A) above when used in assembly buildings, business buildings, high
hazard buildings, institutional buildings, mercantile buildings and type R-
1 and R-2 residential buildings, as these groups of buildings are defined in
rules adopted by the Board of Building Standards under Ohio R.C. 3781.10. No
person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in charge or occupant
of premises, negligently permit the use of a heater in violation of any rules
adopted under this division (E).
   (F)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules prescribing standards for
written instructions containing ventilation requirements and warning of any
potential fire hazards that may occur in using a kerosene, natural gas, or
liquid petroleum gas heater. No person shall sell or offer for sale any
kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum gas heater unless the manufacturer
provides with the heater written instructions that comply with any rules
adopted under this division (F).
   (G)   No product labeled as a fuel additive for kerosene heaters and having
a flash point below 100°F or 37.8°C shall be sold, offered for sale or used in
any kerosene space heater.
   (H)   No device that prohibits any safety feature on a kerosene, natural gas
or liquid petroleum gas space heater from operating shall be sold, offered for
sale or used in connection with any kerosene, natural gas or liquid petroleum
gas space heater.
   (I)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any kerosene-fired, natural gas
or liquid petroleum gas-fired heater that is not exempt from division (A)
above, unless it is marked conspicuously by the manufacturer on the container
with the phrase “Not Approved For Home Use”.
   (J)   No person shall use a cabinet-type, liquid petroleum gas-fired heater
having a fuel source within the heater, inside any building, except as
permitted by the State Fire Marshal in the State Fire Code adopted by him or
her under Ohio R.C. 3737.82.
(ORC 3701.82)
   (K)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 3701.99(B))
§ 660.02 SPREADING CONTAGION.
   (A)   No person, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the
person has a dangerous, contagious disease, shall knowingly fail to take
reasonable measures to prevent exposing self to other persons, except when
seeking medical aid.
   (B)   No person, having charge or care of a person whom the person having
charge or care knows or has reasonable cause to believe has a dangerous,
contagious disease, shall recklessly fail to take reasonable measures to
protect others from exposure to the contagion, and to inform health authorities
of the existence of the contagion.
   (C)   No person, having charge of a public conveyance or place of public
accommodation, amusement, resort or trade, and knowing or having reasonable
cause to believe that persons using such conveyance or place have been or are
being exposed to a dangerous, contagious disease, shall negligently fail to
take reasonable measures to protect the public from exposure to the contagion,
and to inform health authorities of the existence of the contagion.
(ORC 3701.81)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
(ORC 3701.99(C))
§ 660.03 TRASH DEPOSITS.
   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit any dirt, paper, filth, ashes,
shavings, straw, wood, refuse matter or rubbish of any kind whatever onto any
street, lane, alley or public ground or place used as a street, lane, alley or
public ground.
   (B)   (1)   Every owner, occupant or person having charge or control of a
tenement, building, lot or land fronting upon any street, lane, alley or public
ground, or place used as a street, lane, alley or public ground, shall remove
from the entire width of the sidewalk in front of such premises, from curb to
lot line, any dirt, paper, filth, ashes, shavings, straw, wood, garbage or
refuse matter of any kind which, from any cause whatever, has accumulated or
may accumulate upon such sidewalk, within 24 hours after receiving notice from
the Sanitation Officer or the Building Commissioner.
      (2)   Upon failure to comply with such orders, the Sanitation Officer
and/or Building Commissioner shall contact a hauler to remove such refuse
matter, rubbish or garbage of any kind at the property owner’s expense. The fee
shall be determined by the amount of refuse matter, rubbish or garbage of any
kind to be removed, in increments of $30, $50, $70 or the price charged by the
hauler. Said bill will be placed with the water bill.
   (C)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 207-1958, passed 10-20-1958; Ord. 166-1990, passed 9-24-1990)
§ 660.04 NOXIOUS ODORS; FILTHY ACCUMULATIONS; POLLUTING AND DIVERTING
WATERCOURSES.
   (A)   No person shall erect, continue to use or maintain a building,
structure or place for the exercise of a trade, employment or business or for
keeping or feeding an animal which, by occasioning noxious exhalations or
noisome or offensive smells, becomes injurious to the health, comfort or
property of individuals or of the public.
   (B)   No person shall cause or allow offal, filth or noisome substances to
be collected or remain in any place to the damage or prejudice of others or of
the public.
   (C)   No person shall unlawfully obstruct or impede the passage of a
navigable river, harbor or collection of water, or corrupt or render
unwholesome or impure a watercourse, stream of water or unlawfully divert such
watercourse from its natural course or state to the injury or prejudice of
others.
   (D)   Persons who are engaged in agriculture-related activities, as
“agriculture” is defined in Ohio R.C. 519.01, and who are conducting those
activities outside the municipality, in accordance with generally accepted
agricultural practices, and in such a manner so as not to have a substantial,
adverse effect on the public health, safety or welfare, are exempt from
divisions (A) and (B) above and from any ordinances, resolutions, rules or
other enactments of the municipality that prohibit excessive noise.
(ORC 3767.13)
   (E)   No person shall deposit or permit to be deposited any garbage, refuse
matter, offal or animal carcass which may become offensive, noxious or
dangerous to the public health, on his or her own premises, or any premises
under his or her control, or deposit such garbage or refuse matter in any back
lot, public ground, vacant lot, park, alley, street or areaway, or in any other
place within the municipality, except as is otherwise provided by law.
   (F)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 660.05 LITTERING.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AIRCRAFT. Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or
designated for navigation or for flight in the air. AIRCRAFT includes
helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.
      AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE. A litter storage and collection receptacle
as required and authorized in the city.
      GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
      LITTER. Garbage, refuse and rubbish and all other waste material which,
if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public
health, safety and welfare.
      PARK. A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any
other public area in the city, owned or used by the city and devoted to active
or passive recreation.
      PRIVATE PREMISES. Any dwelling, house, building or other structure,
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously inhabited or vacant, and
includes any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox
belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
      REFUSE. All putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
      RUBBISH. Non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar
materials.
      VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.
   (B)   Litter in public places. No person shall throw or deposit litter in or
upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the city, except in
public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection or in
official city dumps.
   (C)   Placement of litter in receptacles so as to prevent scattering.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or
upon private property.
   (D)   Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited. No person shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city, the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the
sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.
   (E)   Merchants’ duty to keep sidewalks free of litter. No person owning or
occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street
or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any
building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk of driveway. Persons
owning or occupying places of business within the city shall keep the sidewalk
in front of their business premises free of litter.
   (F)   Litter thrown by persons in vehicles.
Editor’s note:
   Division (F) was repealed as part of the 1997 updating and revision of this
code of ordinances. See §
331.43 of the Traffic Code.
   (G)   Truck loads causing litter. No person shall drive or move any truck or
other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded
as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon
any street, alley or other public place, nor shall any person drive or move any
vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or
deposit in any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky
substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind.
   (H)   Litter in parks. No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park
within the city, except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the
litter will not be carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the
park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not
provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided
herein.
   (I)   Litter in lakes and fountains. No person shall throw or deposit litter
in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or any other body of water in a park
or elsewhere within the city.
   (J)   Dropping litter from aircraft. No person in an aircraft shall throw
out, drop or deposit within the city any litter, handbill or any other object.
   (K)   Litter on occupied private property. No person shall throw or deposit
litter on any occupied private property within the city, whether owned by such
person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property
may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner
that litter will not be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property.
   (L)   Owner to maintain premises free of litter.
      (1)   The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all
times maintain the premises free of litter. However, this division (L) shall
not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection.
      (2)   In addition to the penalties provided in this section for a
violation of this division (L)(2), the municipality may remove accumulations of
litter from private property and assess the cost thereof against the owner of
such lot or parcel of land, should the owner fail to remove said accumulation
of litter within 30 days of receiving written notice to do so from the
municipality. Said notice shall be either personally served on the owner of
record or delivered to him or her by certified mail with a return receipt.
      (3)   In the event that the owner fails to remove an accumulation of
litter after notice to do so from the municipality, the Director of Public
Service is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this
division (L)(3) and to cause said accumulation of litter to be removed and
properly disposed of. A statement indicating the cost of such removal shall
then be delivered to the owner of the property in the same manner as was the
notice to remove the litter. Should said amount not be paid to the municipality
within 30 days of delivery of said statement, then said amount shall be
certified to the County Auditor for collection of the same as other real
property taxes and assessments are collected.
   (M)   Litter on vacant lots. No person shall throw or deposit litter on any
open or vacant private property within the city, whether owned by such person
or not.
   (N)   Penalty. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957; Ord. 188-1968, passed 10-7-1968; Ord. 128-
1988, passed 6-27-1988)
§ 660.06 ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS AND AIRTIGHT CONTAINERS.
   (A)   No person shall abandon, discard or knowingly permit to remain on
premises under the person’s control, in a place accessible to children, any
abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-airtight
container which has a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more and an
opening of 50 square inches or more and which has a door or lid equipped with a
hinge, latch or other fastening device capable of securing such door or lid,
without rendering the equipment harmless to human life by removing such hinges,
latches or other hardware which may cause a person to be confined therein. This
section shall not apply to an icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-
airtight container located in that part of a building occupied by a dealer,
warehouse or repairer.
(ORC 3767.29)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(ORC 3767.99(B))
§ 660.07 NOTICE OF CONTAMINATION FROM THE ILLEGAL MANUFACTURE OF
METHAMPHETAMINE.
   (A)   In all transfers of all real property identified as illegal
methamphetamine manufacturing laboratory sites by a federal, Ohio, Summit
County or City of Barberton law enforcement agency, the transferor must
disclose to the transferee the prior or current existence of an illegal
methamphetamine manufacturing laboratory, a chemical dumpsite or any hazardous
wastes on the real property, of which the transferor has actual knowledge.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BOX LAB. Any illegal methamphetamine manufacturing laboratory that is
portable, including, but not limited to, motor vehicles used as an illegal
methamphetamine manufacturing laboratory.
      CHEMICAL DUMPSITE. Any place or area where chemicals or other waste
materials used in an illegal methamphetamine manufacturing laboratory have been
located.
      HAZARDOUS WASTES. Waste generated from an illegal methamphetamine
manufacturing laboratory.
      ILLEGAL METHAMPHETAMINE MANUFACTURING LABORATORY. Has the same meaning as
in Ohio R.C. 3745.13.
      ILLEGAL METHAMPHETAMINE MANUFACTURING LABORATORY SITE. Any place or area
where law enforcement has determined that the conditions associated with the
operation of an illegal methamphetamine manufacturing laboratory exist.
Conditions associated with the operation of an illegal methamphetamine
manufacturing laboratory include, but are not limited to, the existence of an
illegal methamphetamine manufacturing laboratory, a box lab or chemical
dumpsite, or the storage of chemicals used in the production of
methamphetamine. An ILLEGAL METHAMPHETAMINE MANUFACTURING LABORATORY SITE may
include dwellings, accessory buildings, accessory structures, commercial
buildings, motor vehicles or any land.
      METHAMPHETAMINE. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3745.13.
      TRANSFERS OF REAL PROPERTY. The transfer or conveyance of any interest in
real property by sale, lease, gift or land contract.
      REAL PROPERTY. Include any buildings or structures located on the real
property.
   (C)   All disclosures required in this section shall be made on a form
provided by the City Law Department.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as to abrogate any
disclosure required by or remedies provided in Ohio R.C. 5302.30. As used in
this section, RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY has the same meaning as used in Ohio
R.C. 5302.30(A).
   (E)   Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree, punishable by a maximum fine of $1,000 and up
to 180 days in jail.
(Ord. 101-2008, passed 6-23-2008)
§ 660.08 REGULATIONS FOR ICE CREAM VENDORS.
   (A)   No person shall peddle frozen desserts from a motor vehicle within the
city without the following:
      (1)   A completed FBI and BCI fingerprint check and proof of same on the
person selling such products to be presented to the Barberton Police Department
before a permit is issued. Such cost for the fingerprint criminal background
check shall be borne by the company and/or individual applying for the permit;
      (2)   A permit issued by the Barberton Police Department for the cost of
$50 per applicant;
      (3)   A validated Ohio driver’s license; and
      (4)   A State of Ohio mobile food vendor license issued by a county
health department.
   (B)   No person shall peddle frozen desserts within the city who has been
convicted of, or pled guilty to, any of the following criminal offenses:
      (1)   Any offense involving a minor;
      (2)   Any sexually oriented offense, including, but not limited to,
corruption of a minor, sexual imposition, importuning, voyeurism, public
indecency, procuring, soliciting, prostitution, loitering for the purpose of
engaging in prostitution, disseminating material harmful to juveniles,
deception to obtain material harmful to juveniles, possession of obscene
material involving a minor, possession of sexually oriented material involving
a minor, possession of nudity-oriented material involving a minor and
displaying matter harmful to juveniles;
      (3)   Any assault within seven years after service of sentence after
conviction or guilty plea; and
      (4)   Unlawful possession of weapons within five years after conviction
or guilty plea; and/or
      (5)   Any homicide offense in Ohio R.C. Ch. 2903 or any substantially
equivalent homicide offense under any municipal or state law.
   (C)   Any applicant applying for a permit to peddle frozen desserts under
this chapter shall complete the application in its entirety and shall provide
an affidavit stating that the applicant has not been convicted of or pled
guilty to any of the criminal offenses listed in division (B) above. Such
application shall be filed annually. Any employer applying for a permit to
peddle frozen desserts shall list the name, address, date of birth and Social
Security number of each employee or person who will be peddling frozen
desserts.
   (D)   The Police Chief or his or her designee, shall refuse to grant a
permit to peddle frozen desserts under this section, or shall revoke a permit
to peddle frozen desserts under this section, for anyone or more of the
following reasons:
      (1)   The applicant has been convicted of, or pled guilty to, any
criminal offense involving a minor or any other criminal offense listed in
division (B) above;
      (2)   The applicant fails to provide the information required by division
(A) above;
      (3)   The applicant makes or made a false statement in the permit
application;
      (4)   The applicant fails to report a conviction that occurs during the
permit period; and
      (5)   The applicant fails to pay the applicant permit fee.
   (E)   There shall be no peddling of frozen desserts after 9:00 p.m.
   (F)   No audible signal, music or amplified sound of any type shall be
permitted when the mobile vendor is in a stationary position.
   (G)   Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Ord. 182-2008, passed 10-13-2008; Ord. 53-2011, passed 5-9-2011)
§ 660.09 CLANDESTINE DRUG LABS.
   (A)   General provisions.
      (1)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to reduce public
exposure to health risks where trained law enforcement officers have determined
that hazardous chemicals from a suspected clandestine drug lab site or
associated dumpsite may exist. The City Council finds that such sites may
contain suspected chemicals and residues that place people, particularly
children or adults of child bearing age, at risk when exposed through
inhabiting or visiting the site, now and in the future. Such sites also can
incur cleanup costs and expenses that expend public dollars on private
property. This section seeks to minimize and mitigate those costs to public
moneys.
      (2)   Interpretation and application. The provisions of this section
shall be construed to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
         (a)   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this section
are either more or less restrictive than comparable provisions imposed by any
other law, ordinance, statute or regulation of any kind, the regulations which
are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall
prevail.
         (b)   Should any court of competent jurisdiction declare any section
or subpart of this section to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the section as a whole or any part thereof, other than the
provision declared invalid.
      (3)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         CHILD. Any person less than 18 years of age.
         CHEMICAL DUMPSITE. Any place or area where chemicals or other waste
materials used or produced in a clandestine drug lab have been located.
         CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB. The unlawful manufacture or attempt to
manufacture controlled substances. Only those labs which law enforcement
determine may contain residual contamination that could be harmful to the
occupants are subject to this section.
         CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITE. Any place or area where law enforcement has
determined that conditions associated with the operation of a clandestine drug
lab exist. A CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITE may include dwellings, accessory
buildings, accessory structures, motor vehicles, a chemical dumpsite or any
land.
         CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. A drug, substance or immediate precursor in
Schedules I through V of the Ohio R.C. 3719.41. The term does not include
distilled spirits, wine, malt beverages, intoxicating liquors or tobacco.
         HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTES. Waste generated from a clandestine drug
lab. Such wastes shall be treated, stored, transported or disposed of in a
manner consistent with all federal, state and local regulations.
         MANUFACTURE, IN PLACES OTHER THAN A PHARMACY OR A LICENSED
PHARMACEUTICAL MANUFACTURING FACILITY. The production, cultivation, quality
control, and standardization, by mechanical, physical, chemical or
pharmaceutical means, packing, repacking, tableting, encapsulating, labeling,
relabeling, filling, or by other process, of controlled substances.
         MOTOR VEHICLES. Has the same meaning as Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
         OWNER. Any person, firm or corporation who owns, in whole or in part,
the land, buildings or structures associated with a clandestine drug lab site
or chemical dumpsite.
         PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCE. Includes all dwellings, accessory structures
and buildings associated with a clandestine drug lab site that are potentially
unsafe due to health hazards.
   (B)   Administration.
      (1)   Law enforcement notice to other authorities. Law enforcement
authorities that identify conditions associated with a clandestine drug lab
site or chemical dump site that place neighbors, visiting public or present or
future occupants of the dwelling at risk for exposure to harmful contaminants
and other associated conditions shall promptly notify the appropriate
municipal, child protection and public health authorities of the property
location, property owner if known, and conditions found.
      (2)   Declaration of property as a public health nuisance. Any
clandestine drug lab site or chemical dumpsite identified by law enforcement
authorities is hereby declared to be a public health nuisance. Upon
identification of such a nuisance, the law enforcement authorities shall notify
the Building Commissioner or his or her designee.
      (3)   Notice of public health nuisance to concerned parties. Upon receipt
of the notification by law enforcement authorities, the Building Commissioner
or his or her designee shall promptly issue a declaration of public health
nuisance for the affected property and post a copy of the declaration at the
probable entrance to the dwelling or property. The Building Commissioner or his
or her designee shall also notify the owner of the property by mail and notify
the following parties:
         (a)   Occupants of the property;
         (b)   All adjacent property owners and any other neighbors at probable
risk;
         (c)   The City of Barberton Police Department;
         (d)   The primary mortgage holder; and
         (e)   Other federal, state and local authorities, and City Council
members which are known to have public and environmental protection
responsibilities that are applicable to the situation.
      (4)   Property owner’s responsibility to act. The Building Commissioner
or his or her designee shall also issue an order to abate the public health
nuisance, which shall comply with the rules and regulations attached to Ord.
101-2013 as Exhibit A and order the owner of the property to do the following:
         (a)   Cause the immediate vacation by all occupants of those portions
of the property, including building or structure interiors, which may place the
occupants or visitors at risk;
         (b)   Contract with appropriate environmental testing and cleaning
firms to conduct an on-site assessment, complete clean-up and remediation
testing and follow-up testing, and determine that the property risks are
sufficiently reduced to allow safe human occupancy of the dwelling. The city
shall promulgate criteria for the assessment and remediation process; and
         (c)   Provide the Building Commissioner or his or her designee with
written documentation of the clean-up process, including a signed, written
statement from the environmental testing and cleaning firm that the property is
safe for human occupancy and that the clean-up was conducted. The owner shall
complete the remediation and post remediation assessment within ninety days
from the date of the declaration of public health nuisance.
      (5)   Property owner’s responsibility for costs. The property owner shall
be responsible for all costs of clean-up of the site, including any
contractor’s fees and law enforcement/municipality costs associated with clean
up.
      (6)   City responsibilities and recovery of public costs.
         (a)   If, after service of notice of the declaration of public health
nuisance, the property owner fails to arrange appropriate assessment and clean-
up pursuant to the rules and regulations attached as Exhibit A, the Building
Commissioner or his designee is authorized to proceed in a prompt manner to
initiate the on- site assessment and clean-up.
         (b)   If the city is unable to locate the property owner within 14
days of the declaration of public health nuisance, the city is authorized to
proceed in a prompt manner to initiate the on-site assessment and clean-up.
         (c)   The city may abate the nuisance by removing the hazardous
structure or building, or otherwise, according to this section.
         (d)   The city shall be entitled to recover all costs of abatement of
the public nuisance. The City may recover costs by civil action against the
person or persons who own the property or by assessing such costs as a special
tax against the property in the manner as taxes and special assessments are
certified and collected pursuant to the Ohio Revised Code. Recovered city costs
shall be allocated back into the funds where initially expended.
      (7)   Authority of building commissioner to modify or remove declaration
of public health nuisance.
         (a)   The Building Commissioner is authorized to modify the
declaration conditions or remove the declaration of public health nuisance.
         (b)   Such modifications or removal of the declaration shall only
occur after documentation from a qualified environmental or cleaning firm
stating that the health and safety risks, including those to neighbors and
potential dwelling occupants, are sufficiently abated or corrected to allow
safe occupancy of the dwelling.
         (c)   Such modification or removal of the declaration shall only occur
after city costs involved in the cleanup, assessment and abatement have been
paid in full. Such moneys shall be allocated back into the funds that they were
expended from initially.
         (d)   Nothing herein shall prevent the Building Commissioner from
pursuing any remedy available pursuant to this section, including the
demolition of a building or structure.
   (C)   Disclosure to buyers and occupants.
      (1)   No person shall sell or lease real property, which has been the
subject of a declaration of a public health nuisance pursuant to this section
or has been the site of a known clandestine drug lab without disclosing such
declaration or knowledge to the buyer or tenant. Said disclosure shall be made
on a form provided by the Building Commissioner or his or her designee.
      (2)   Disclosure shall not be required once the Building Commissioner has
removed the declaration of public health nuisance from the property.
   (D)   Miscellaneous provisions.
      (1)   The Building Commissioner, with the advice of the Departments of
Police and Law, shall have the authority to promulgate any rules and
regulations to enforce this section, which are attached as Exhibit A to Ord.
101-2013.
      (2)   In the event that the state or federal government promulgate
cleanup guidelines that are more stringent or that pre-empt local regulation,
its cleanup guidelines shall prevail.
   (E)   Appeals. Any person adversely affected by any order of the Building
Commissioner pursuant to this section may request a hearing on the matter by
submitting a written request to the Board of Zoning Appeals within five days of
receipt thereof. The Board shall issue an order either affirming, reversing or
modifying the order of the Building Commissioner.
   (F)   Violations and penalties. Any person violating any provision of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. 149-2011, passed 10-24-2011; Ord. 101-2013, passed 7-8-2013)
§ 660.10 RESERVED FOR FUTURE LEGISLATION.
§ 660.11 RESERVED FOR FUTURE LEGISLATION.
§ 660.12 RESERVED FOR FUTURE LEGISLATION.
§ 660.13 BURNING RUBBER PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall burn rubber or other substances which, during the
process of combustion, emit unhealthful or otherwise offensive smoke or odors,
within the city. However, this section shall not apply to the burning of such
substances in incinerators or furnaces constructed in conformity with good
engineering practice and approved by the Building Commissioner.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 46-1937, passed 8-16-1937)
§ 660.14 SCAVENGING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall remove, burn, overturn or tamper with any rubbish,
garbage or the container therefor, when such rubbish, garbage or container is
set out on the public street or highway, sidewalk, alley or on private premises
and when such rubbish, garbage or container is placed there for the purpose of
collection. This provision shall not apply to any employee of the Department of
Public Service or any of its duly authorized agents or to a private person or
organization authorized to remove such rubbish, garbage or container.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ALLEY. Has the same meaning as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.01(WW).
      GARBAGE. Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
      PRIVATE PREMISES. All structures, and the lots or land upon which they
are located, owned by an individual, partnership, association, company, church
or corporation, whether occupied or not.
      RUBBISH. Combustible and non-combustible materials, except garbage. The
term shall include, but not be limited to, the following: wood; coal; coke and
other combustible materials and their residue; paper; rags; clothing; cartons;
boxes; excelsior; rubber; leather; tree branches; yard trimmings; tin cans;
glass; crockery; mineral matter; items containing any type of metal; stoves,
refrigerators, televisions, radios, household appliances and any other similar
items.
      SIDEWALK. Has the same meaning as defined in §
301.37 of the Traffic Code.
      STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every
way open to the use of the public as thoroughfare for purposes of vehicular
traffic.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 46-1937, passed 8-16-1937; Ord. 122-1976, passed 6-7-1976; Ord. 311-1978,
passed 11-6-1978)
§ 660.15 SPITTING.
   (A)   No person shall spit or expectorate on any sidewalk or other public
walk, or on the floor of any public building or on the floor of any public
vehicle.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. 251-1967, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 660.16 DANGEROUS, ABANDONED EXCAVATIONS OR BUILDINGS.
   (A)   No property owner, tenant or person having control of property within
the municipality shall directly or indirectly create or allow dangerous
conditions to exist on his or her premises.
   (B)   DANGEROUS CONDITIONS, as used in this section, means any open,
unguarded or unprotected excavation or building which when abandoned or left
open or otherwise unprotected will likely prove dangerous to life or limb, or
an abandoned, open, uncovered or otherwise unprotected well, cesspool, cistern
or catch basin.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 660.17 BARBED WIRE OR ELECTRICALLY CHARGED FENCES.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, no person shall construct,
erect, maintain or use, for any purpose, any barbed wire fence or any fence
charged with electrical current, without first obtaining a permit therefor from
the Director of Public Safety.
   (B)   No person shall construct or cause to be constructed a partition fence
from barbed wire unless written consent of the adjoining owner is first
obtained. Such consent is not necessary to the use of one or two barbed wires;
provided that, neither is less than 48 inches from the ground, and is placed on
the top of a fence other than a barbed wire fence.
(ORC 971.03(B))
   (C)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 660.18 IMPROPER DRAINAGE.
   (A)   No owner, occupant or person in charge of any lot or parcel of ground
shall cause or permit water to accumulate thereon and become stagnant, permit
culverts, drains or natural watercourses thereon to become obstructed, or cause
or permit any putrid or unsanitary substance to accumulate thereon.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 660.19 UNGUARDED SWIMMING PROHIBITED,
   (A)   No person shall swim in any lake, stream, canal or other outdoor body
of water within the city limits at any time unless a certain area within the
body of water has been designated by the proper city authorities as a public
swimming area and unless such area is properly guarded with regularly assigned
and qualified municipal lifeguards.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 660.20 OPEN BURNING.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AGRICULTURAL WASTE. Any matter generated by crop, horticultural or
livestock production practices, and includes such items as bags, cartons,
structural materials, and landscape wastes that are generated in agricultural
activities, but does not include land clearing waste; buildings; garbage; dead
animals; motor vehicles and parts thereof; nor economic poisons and containers
thereof, unless the manufacturer has identified open burning as a safe disposal
procedure.
      ECONOMIC POISONS. Include but are not restricted to pesticides such as
insecticides, fungicides, rodenticides, miticides, nematocides and fumigants;
herbicides; seed disinfectants; and defoliants.
      GARBAGE. Any matter resulting from the handling, processing, preparation,
cooking and consumption of food or food products.
      LANDSCAPE WASTE. Any plant matter, except garbage, including trees, tree
trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves, grass, shrubbery, yard
trimmings and crop residues.
      LAND CLEARING WASTE. Plant matter which is removed from land, including
plant matter removed from stream banks during projects involving more than one
property owner, for the purpose of rendering the land useful for residential,
commercial or industrial development.
      OPEN BURNING. The burning of any materials wherein air contaminants
resulting from combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without
passing through a stack or chimney. OPEN BURNING includes the burning of any
refuse or salvageable material in any device not subject to or designed
specifically to comply with the requirements of O.A.C. 3745-17-09 or 3745-17-
10.
      RESIDENTIAL WASTE. Any matter, including landscape wastes, generated on a
one-, two- or three- family residence as a result of residential activities,
but not including garbage.
   (B)   Relation to other laws.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any provision of this section or of O.A.C. Ch.3745-
19, no open burning shall be conducted in an area where an air alert, warning
or emergency under O.A.C. Ch. 3745-25 is in effect.
      (2)   No provision of this section or of O.A.C. Ch. 3745-19 permitting
open burning, and no permission to open burn granted by the Fire Division,
shall exempt any person from compliance with any section of the Ohio Revised
Code, or any regulation of any state department, or any local ordinance or
regulation dealing with open burning.
   (C)   Open burning within the city limits.
      (1)   No property owner or other person shall cause or allow open burning
within the city limits, except as provided in divisions (C)(2) to (C)(4) below
or in Ohio R.C. 3704.11.
      (2)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes without
notification to or permission from the Fire Division:
         (a)   Cooking for human consumption.
            1.   For a maximum of three hours per day, from 12:00 p.m. (noon)
until 10:00 p.m.;
            2.   The fire shall be no larger than three feet by three feet,
measured at the base;
            3.   The fire must not be smoldering;
            4.   Clean, dried, and chemically untreated wood must be used; no
trash;
            5.   The fire shall be located at least 20 feet from any structure
and 15 feet from a property line;
            6.   The fire must be attended by an adult at all times, until
extinguished;
            7.   Fire extinguishing equipment such as dirt, sand, water barrel,
garden hose or fire extinguisher with a minimum 4-A rating shall be on site and
available for immediate utilization;
            8.   If a larger fire is needed, or a fire is needed for a longer
duration, a permit must be obtained from the City Fire Marshal; and
            9.   If the officer in charge from the unit responding to a
complaint determines that a fire is unsafe or a nuisance, it shall be
immediately extinguished.
         (b)   Heating tar, welding, acetylene torches, highway safety flares,
heating for warmth of outdoor workers and strikers, smudge pots and similar
occupational needs. Fires allowed by divisions (C)(2)(a) and (C)(2)9b) of this
section shall not be used for waste disposal purposes and shall be the minimum
size sufficient for their intended purpose. The fuel shall be chosen to
minimize the generation and emission of air contaminants.
      (3)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes with prior
notification to the Fire Division and a permit from Ohio EPA (Akron Air
Quality):
         (a)   Prevention or control of disease or pests, with written or
verbal verification to the Fire Division from the local health department, the
cooperative extension service, the Ohio Department of Agriculture or the United
States Department of Agriculture, that open burning is the only appropriate
disposal method;
         (b)   Ceremonial fires; provided that, all of the following conditions
are met:
            1.   The ceremonial fires shall be less than five feet by five feet
in dimension and shall burn no longer than three hours;
            2.   The ceremonial fires shall not be used for waste disposal
purposes; and
            3.   The fuel shall be chosen so as to minimize the generation and
emission of air contaminants.
      (4)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes upon
receipt of written permission from the Fire Division; provided that, any
conditions specified in the permission are followed:
         (a)   Disposal of ignitable or explosive materials where the Fire
Division determines that there is no practical alternative method of disposal;
         (b)   Instruction in methods of fire fighting or for research in the
control of fires;
         (c)   In emergency or other extraordinary circumstances for any
purpose determined to be necessary by the Fire Division; and
         (d)   Recognized horticultural, silvicultural, range or wildlife
management practices.
   (D)   Permission to individuals and notification to the Fire Division.
      (1)   Permission.
         (a)   An application for permission to open burn shall be submitted in
writing at least ten days before the fire is to be set. It shall be in such
form and contain such information as required by the Fire Division.
         (b)   Such applications shall contain, at a minimum, information
regarding:
            1.   The purpose of the proposed burning;
            2.   The nature and quantities of material to be burned;
            3.   The date or dates when such burning will take place;
            4.   The location of the burning site, including a map showing
distances to residences, populated areas, roadways, air fields and other
pertinent landmarks; and
            5.   The methods or actions which will be taken to reduce the
emissions of air contaminants.
         (c)   Permission to open burn shall not be granted unless the
applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Fire Division that open
burning is necessary to the public interest; will be conducted in a time, place
and manner as to minimize the emission of air contaminants; and will have no
serious detrimental effect upon adjacent properties or the occupants thereof.
The Fire Division may impose such conditions as may be necessary to accomplish
the purpose of O.A.C. Ch. 3745-19.
         (d)   Permission to open burn must be obtained for each specific
project. In emergencies where public health or environmental quality will be
seriously threatened by delay while written permission is sought, the fire may
be set with the oral permission of the Fire Division.
         (e)   Violations of any of the conditions set forth by the Fire
Division in granting permission to open burn shall be grounds for revocation of
such permission and refusal to grant future permission, as well as for the
imposition of other sanctions provided by law.
      (2)   Notification.
         (a)   Notification shall be submitted in writing at least ten days
before the fire is to be set. It shall be in such form and contain such
information as shall be required by the Fire Division.
         (b)   Such notification shall inform the Fire Division regarding:
            1.   The purpose of the proposed burning;
            2.   The nature and quantities of materials to be burned;
            3.   The date or dates when such burning will take place; and
            4.   The location of the burning site.
         (c)   The Fire Division, after receiving notification, may determine
that the open burning is not allowed under O.A.C. Ch. 3745-19 and the Fire
Division shall notify the applicant to this effect.
   (E)   Penalty. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and shall be subject to the
penalty provided in §
698.02 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues. In addition, the offender
shall be required to pay the cost of proper disposal of the materials burned.
The cost of proper disposal of the materials burned shall be the amount it
would have cost to dispose of the materials in a manner that is consistent with
the air, water and solid waste laws, ordinances and regulations of the
municipality and the state.
(Ord. 164-1999, passed 7-12-1999; Ord. 63-2010, passed 5-10-2010)
Statutory reference:
   Similar regulatory provisions, see O.A.C. Rules 3745-19-01, 3745-19-02,
3745-19-03, 3745-19-04 and 3745-19-05
§ 660.21 SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BAR. Any establishment licensed by the Ohio Department of Liquor Control
to sell intoxicating beverages for consumption on the premises and in which the
service of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages.
      EATING ESTABLISHMENT. Any restaurant, coffee shop, cafeteria,
luncheonette, sandwich stand, soda fountain and any other establishment
(excluding bars) where cooked or otherwise prepared food is sold to members of
the general public for consumption on the premises.
      EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES. Any public or private institution providing
formal education, including day care centers.
      EMPLOYEE. Any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for
direct or indirect monetary wages or profit or as a volunteer.
      EMPLOYER. Any person who employs the services of an individual person or
any person in charge of a place of employment.
      ESTABLISHMENT. Any physical facility operated by a commercial enterprise,
non-profit entity, government agency or any other person.
      HEALTH-CARE FACILITY. Any hospital, rest home, nursing home, doctors’ or
dentists’ office, lab or other establishments involved in the provision of
health care.
      LOBBIES and WAITING AREAS. A hall, or waiting room at or near, but not
limited to, the entrance to a building, such as hotels, apartment houses or
theaters.
      NO SMOKING SIGN. The international “No smoking” symbol (consisting of a
pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a
red bar across it) which shall be used for signs indicating that smoking is
prohibited. The NO SMOKING SIGN shall be of sufficient size to be clearly
legible to one of normal vision throughout the area it is intended to mark.
      PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, organization or legal entity of any kind.
      PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. That portion of any enclosed, indoor area under the
control of a public or private employer which employees normally frequent
during the course of employment but to which members of the general public are
not normally invited, including, but not limited to, such areas in office
workplaces, factories, warehouses and laboratories.
      PROPRIETOR. The owner, manager, operator or other person in charge of a
public place.
      PUBLIC. The general public is invited, permitted or has access to the
site or event without regard to membership or association with a particular
organization or group.
      PUBLIC PLACE. That portion of any enclosed indoor area to which members
of the general public are invited or in which members of the general public are
permitted.
      RETAIL TOBACCO STORE. A retail store used primarily for the sale of
smoking materials and smoking accessories and in which the sale of other
products is incidental. RETAIL TOBACCO STORE does not include a tobacco
department of a retail store such as a department store, discount store or
supermarket.
      SMOKING MATERIAL. Any cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed, plant or other
smoking equipment in any form.
      TOBACCO VENDING MACHINES. Electro/mechanical devices dispensing tobacco
products to the general public.
   (B)   Restrictions on smoking in city buildings. Smoking or the possession
of lighted smoking material in any building, or portion thereof owned, leased
or controlled by the city or in any vehicle owned, leased or controlled by the
city is hereby prohibited. This prohibition is applicable to the public at
large and employees of the city.
   (C)   Restrictions on smoking in eating establishments.
      (1)   Within 90 days of the effective date of this section, each eating
establishment with a total of more than 30 seats shall designate an appropriate
area of the total seats, or portion thereof, as a no-smoking area. Signage that
designates smoking or non-smoking areas is required.
      (2)   When a table in a smoking section is within five feet of a non-
smoking table, or a non-smoking table actually abuts a smoking table, common
courtesy will apply, and anyone asked to extinguish smoking material will
politely do so upon request by a restaurant employee. The proprietor will
exercise his/her own discretion in resolving and dispute while considering the
health and comfort of any involved party.
      (3)   Nothing in this section or any other section of the law shall
prohibit a proprietor from voluntarily prohibiting smoking in all areas of an
establishment. Proprietors are encouraged to establish completely smoke free
establishments in an effort to provide more smoke free areas to citizens of the
city.
   (D)   Restrictions on smoking in public places.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided elsewhere in this legislation, the
possession and use of lighted smoking materials in any form is prohibited in
any public place in the city including, but not limited to, the following:
         (a)   Vehicles of public transportation such as trains, buses,
limousines for hire, taxicabs and courtesy vehicles. Limousines for hire or
taxicabs where the driver and all passengers affirmatively consent to smoking
in such vehicles are exempt from this prohibition;
         (b)   Enclosed theaters, auditoriums, concert halls, arenas and
meeting rooms;
         (c)   Healthcare facilities’ patients’ wards and rooms. Any private
room in a healthcare facility, or any semi-private room in a healthcare
facility, if both occupants have requested in writing to be placed in a room
where smoking is permitted, are exempt from this prohibition;
         (d)   Elevators, stairwells, escalators and hallways;
         (e)   Public restrooms;
         (f)   Gymnasiums, exercise rooms and health spas;
         (g)   Libraries and education facilities;
         (h)   Places of exhibition including, but not limited to, museums,
aquariums and galleries;
         (i)   Those portions of a private residence used as a child care or
health care facility or serving as a place of employment and, for purposes of
the within subsection, a private residence may qualify as a public place and/or
an establishment open to the public;
         (j)   Smoking shall be prohibited within 15 feet of the entrance and/
or exit of any public building; and
         (k)   Smoking shall be prohibited outside the main entrance to City
Hall on Park Avenue between the sidewalk and the door and all areas between the
sidewalk and each side of the Building.
      (2)   Places of employment. Within 90 days of the effective date of this
section, each employer of 25 or more employees shall adopt, implement and
maintain a written smoking policy pertaining to his or her place of employment
which addresses the needs of the smoker and non-smoker alike. The policy shall
designate both smoking and non-smoking areas which shall be communicated to all
present as well as new incoming employees. Private employers with fewer than 25
employees are strongly encouraged to adopt, implement and maintain a written
smoking and non-smoking policy addressing the needs of both smoking and non-
smoking employees.
      (3)   Exemptions. The following public places are exempt from the
restrictions set forth in division (D)(1) above:
         (a)   An entire room or hall which is being used for a private social
function; provided that, the seating arrangements are under the control of the
sponsor of the function and not of the proprietor;
         (b)   Retail tobacco stores;
         (c)   Bars;
         (d)   Bowling alleys and bingo halls;
         (e)   Hotel and motel sleeping rooms; and
         (f)   An eating establishment that seats fewer than 30 people.
(Provided that, a sign is posted at the entrance clearly stating that a “No
Smoking” section is not available.)
   (E)   Responsibility of proprietors. Proprietors of any eating
establishments or public places governed by divisions (C) or (D) above shall
take the following actions to ensure that the provisions of this section are
met with regard to such places:
      (1)   Signs indicating whether or not smoking is permitted shall be
clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted where smoking is regulated by
this section in such a manner as to give adequate notice to employees and
members of the public. Each section where smoking is prohibited as well as
permitted shall be clearly designated; and
      (2)   Smokers shall be affirmatively directed to designated smoking areas
and persons smoking in violation of this section shall be requested to stop.
   (F)   Relation to other laws. This section is intended to be the exclusive
set of public regulations governing smoking in public places and places of
employment in the city. However, this section shall not be interpreted or
construed to encourage or permit smoking, except as otherwise provided herein,
in any public place or place of employment. Nor shall this section be
interpreted to relieve any proprietor, employer or other responsible party from
any liability resulting from exposure to tobacco smoke.
   (G)   Severability. If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this
section or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held
invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application
of the provisions of this section which can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this section are
hereby declared to be severable.
   (H)   Violations and penalties.
      (1)   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or possess
lighted smoking material in any area restricted by the provisions of this
section.
         (b)   Any person who violates any provision of this section is guilty
of a minor misdemeanor.
         (c)   Each day on which a violation of any provision of this section
occurs is a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as such.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) above shall be fined as follows:
         (a)   Twenty-five dollars for the first offense;
         (b)   Fifty dollars for the second offense; and
         (c)   One hundred dollars for each offense thereafter.
(Ord. 25-2006, passed 2-27-2006)
CHAPTER 666: SEX RELATED OFFENSES
Section
666.01   Definitions.
666.02   Unlawful sexual conduct with a minor.
666.03   Sexual imposition.
666.04   Public indecency.
666.05   Voyeurism.
666.06   Polygraph examinations for victims: restrictions on use.
666.07   Procuring; engagement in sexual activity for hire.
666.08   Soliciting.
666.085   Loitering to engage in solicitation.
666.09   Prostitution.
666.10   Rules of evidence.
666.11   Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles.
666.115   Displaying matter harmful to juveniles.
666.12   Pandering obscenity. (Repealed)
666.125   Possession and viewing of obscene material involving a minor.
(Repealed)
666.13   Deception to obtain matter harmful to juveniles.
666.14   Presumptions; notice.
666.15   Declaratory judgment.
666.16   Injunction; abatement of nuisance.
666.17   Bathing in the nude prohibited.
666.18   Unlawful operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct.
666.19   Juveniles on the premises of adult entertainment establishments
prohibited.
666.20   Sexually oriented businesses; illegal operation and activity.
666.21   Unlawful advertising of massage.
666.99   Sentencing for sexually oriented offenses; sexual predators;
registration.
Cross-reference:
   Abusing or contributing to delinquency of a child, see GEN. OFF.
630.03
   Assistance to victims of sexual assault, see Ohio R.C. 2907.28 - 2907.30
   Child victim, disposition of, see Ohio R.C. 2945.481
   Definitions generally, see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Examination and treatment for venereal disease; HIV tests, see Ohio R.C.
2907.27
   Registration of sex offenders in cities and counties, see Ohio R.C. 2950.01
et seq.
   Sexually oriented businesses, see DEVELOPMENT CODE Ch. 1150
   Spreading contagion, see GEN. OFF.
660.02
§ 666.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HARMFUL TO JUVENILES. That quality of any material or performance describing
or representing nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sado-masochistic
abuse in any form to which all of the following apply:
      (1)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, appeals to
the prurient interest of juveniles in sex;
      (2)   The material or performance is patently offensive to prevailing
standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable
for juveniles; and
      (3)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, lacks
serious literary, artistic, political and scientific value for juveniles.
   JUVENILE. Any unmarried person under 18 years of age.
   MATERIAL. Any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print, picture,
figure, image, description, motion picture film, video cassette, laser disc,
phonograph record, cassette tape, compact disc or other tangible thing capable
of arousing interest through sight, sound or touch and includes an image or
text appearing on a computer monitor, television screen, liquid crystal display
or similar display device or an image or text recorded on a computer hard disk,
computer floppy disk, compact disk, magnetic tape or similar data storage
device.
   MENTAL HEALTH CLIENT OR PATIENT. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2305.51.
   MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONAL. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2305.115.
   MINOR. A person under the age of 18.
   NUDITY. The showing, representation or depiction of human male or female
genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a full, opaque covering or of a
female breast with less than a full, opaque covering of any portion thereof
below the top of the nipple, or of covered male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state.
   OBSCENE. When considered as a whole, and judged with reference to ordinary
adults or, if it is designed for sexual deviates or other specially susceptible
group, judged with reference to that group, any material or performance is
OBSCENE if any of the following apply:
      (1)   Its dominant appeal is to prurient interest;
      (2)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement or nudity in a way that tends
to represent human beings as mere objects of sexual appetite;
      (3)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
bestiality or extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty or brutality;
      (4)   Its dominant tendency is to appeal to scatological interest by
displaying or depicting human bodily functions of elimination in a way that
inspires disgust or revulsion in persons with ordinary sensibilities, without
serving any genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral or artistic
purpose; or
      (5)   It contains a series of displays or descriptions of sexual
activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, nudity, bestiality, extreme or
bizarre violence, cruelty or brutality, or human bodily functions of
elimination, the cumulative effect of which is a dominant tendency to appeal to
prurient or scatological interest, when the appeal to such an interest is
primarily for its own sake or for commercial exploitation, rather than
primarily for a genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral or
artistic purpose.
   PERFORMANCE. Any motion picture, preview, trailer, play, show, skit, dance
or other exhibition performed before an audience.
   PLACE WHERE A PERSON HAS A REASONABLE EXPECTATION OF PRIVACY. A place where
a reasonable person would believe that the person could fully disrobe in
private.
   PRIVATE AREA. The genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or female breast below the
top of the areola, where nude or covered by an undergarment.
   PROSTITUTE. A male or female who promiscuously engages in sexual activity
for hire, regardless of whether the hire is paid to the prostitute or to
another.
   SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person or the
condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained.
SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Sexual conduct or sexual contact, or both.
   SEXUAL CONDUCT. Vaginal intercourse between a male and female; anal
intercourse, fellatio and cunnilingus between persons regardless of sex; and,
without privilege to do so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of the
body or any instrument, apparatus or other object into the vaginal or anal
opening of another. Penetration, however slight, is sufficient to complete
vaginal or anal intercourse.
   SEXUAL CONTACT. Any touching of an erogenous zone of another, including
without limitation the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region or, if the person
is a female, a breast, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying
either person.
   SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals when in a
state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   SPOUSE. A person married to an offender at the time of an alleged offense;
except that, such person shall not be considered the spouse when any of the
following apply:
      (1)   When the parties have entered into a written separation agreement
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3103.06;
      (2)   When an action is pending between the parties for annulment,
divorce, dissolution of marriage or legal separation; or
      (3)   In the case of an action for legal separation, after the effective
date of the judgment for legal separation.
(ORC 2907.01)
§ 666.02 UNLAWFUL SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH A MINOR.
   (A)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in sexual
conduct with another who is not the spouse of the offender, when the offender
knows the other person is 13 years of age or older, but less than 16 years of
age, or the offender is reckless in that regard.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful sexual conduct
with a minor.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) below, unlawful
sexual conduct with a minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3) below, if the
offender is less than four years older than the other person, unlawful sexual
conduct with a minor is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.02, 2907.03 or 2907.04, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of former Ohio R.C. 2907.12, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, unlawful sexual conduct with
a minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2907.04)
§ 666.03 SEXUAL IMPOSITION.
   (A)   No person shall have sexual contact with another, not the spouse of
the offender; cause another, not the spouse of the offender, to have sexual
contact with the offender; or cause two or more other persons to have sexual
contact when any of the following applies:
      (1)   The offender knows that the sexual contact is offensive to the
other person, or one of the other persons, or is reckless in that regard;
      (2)   The offender knows that the other person's, or one of the other
person's ability to appraise the nature of or control the offender's or
touching person's conduct is substantially impaired;
      (3)   The offender knows that the other person, or one of the other
persons, submits because of being unaware of the sexual contact;
      (4)   The other person, or one of the other persons, is 13 years of age
or older but less than 16 years of age, whether or not the offender knows the
age of the person, and the offender is at least 18 years of age and four or
more years older than the other person; or
      (5)   The offender is a mental health professional, the other person or
one of the other persons is a mental health client or patient of the offender,
and the offender induces the other person who is the client or patient to
submit by falsely representing to the other person who is the client or patient
that the sexual contact is necessary for mental health treatment purposes.
   (B)   No person shall be convicted of a violation of this section solely
upon the victim's testimony unsupported by other evidence.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of sexual imposition, a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender has been convicted previously
of a violation of this section, Ohio R.C. 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05,
2907.06, former Ohio R.C. 2907.12, or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 2907.06)
Statutory reference:
   Gross sexual imposition, felony, see Ohio R.C. 2907.05
   Notice to licensing board or agency upon indictment, conviction or guilty
plea of mental health professional, see Ohio R.C. 2907.17 and 2907.18
§ 666.04 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   (A)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following, under
circumstances in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and
affront others who are in the person’s physical proximity and who are not
members of the person’s household:
      (1)   Expose the person’s private parts;
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct or masturbation; and/or
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following, under circumstances
in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and affront another
person who is a minor, who is not the spouse of the offender, and who resides
in the person’s household:
      (1)   Engage in masturbation;
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct;
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation; and
      (4)   Expose the person’s private parts with the purpose of personal
sexual arousal or gratification or to lure the minor into sexual activity.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public indecency and
shall be punished as provided in divisions (C)(2), (C)(3), (C)(4) and (C)(5)
below.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(2), a violation
of division (A)(1) above is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this
section or a substantially equivalent State law or municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (A)(1) above is a misdemeanor of the third degree or, if
any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the offender’s conduct
was a minor, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law municipal ordinance, a violation of division
(A)(1) above is a misdemeanor of the second degree or, if any person who was
likely to view and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of
division (A)(1) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if any person
who was likely to view and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor,
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(3), a violation
of divisions (A)(2) or (A)(3) above is a misdemeanor of the third degree. If
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of divisions (A)(2) or (A)(3) above is a misdemeanor of
the second degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by
the offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more
violations of this section or a substantially equivalent state law municipal
ordinance, a violation of divisions (A)(2) or (A)(3) above is a misdemeanor of
the first degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by
the offender’s conduct was a minor, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(4), a violation
of divisions (B)(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3) above is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a violation of divisions (B)(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3) above is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law municipal ordinance, a violation of
divisions (B)(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3) above is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(5), a violation
of division (B)(4) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (B)(4) above is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(ORC 2907.09)
   (D)   A mother is entitled to breast-feed her baby in any location of a
place of public accommodation, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4112.01, wherein the
mother otherwise is permitted.
(ORC 3781.55)
Statutory reference:
   Bail considerations for persons charged, see Ohio R.C. 2907.41
§ 666.05 VOYEURISM.
   (A)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying himself
or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the
privacy of another, to spy or eavesdrop upon another.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly commit trespass or otherwise secretly or
surreptitiously videotape, film, photograph, broadcast, stream, or otherwise
record another person, in a place where a person has a reasonable expectation
of privacy, for the purpose of viewing the private areas of that person.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly commit trespass or otherwise secretly or
surreptitiously videotape, film, photograph, broadcast, stream, or otherwise
record a minor, in a place where a person has a reasonable expectation of
privacy, for the purpose of viewing the private areas of the minor.
   (D)   No person shall secretly or surreptitiously videotape, film,
photograph, or otherwise record another person above, under, or through the
clothing being worn by that other person for the purpose of viewing the body
of, or the undergarments worn by, that other person.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of voyeurism.
      (1)   A violation of division (A) above is a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
      (2)   A violation of division (B) above is a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (D) above is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (4)   A violation of division (C) above is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2907.08)
§ 666.06 POLYGRAPH EXAMINATIONS FOR VICTIMS: RESTRICTIONS ON USE.
   (A)   (1)   A peace officer, prosecutor, other public official, defendant,
defendant's attorney, alleged juvenile offender, or alleged juvenile offender's
attorney shall not ask or require a victim of an alleged sex offense to submit
to a polygraph examination as a condition for proceeding with the investigation
or prosecution of the alleged sex offense.
      (2)   The refusal of the victim of an alleged sex offense to submit to a
polygraph examination shall not prevent the investigation of the alleged sex
offense, the filing of criminal charges with respect to the alleged sex offense
or the prosecution of the alleged perpetrator of the alleged sex offense.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ALLEGED JUVENILE OFFENDER. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2930.01.
      PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2921.51.
      POLYGRAPH EXAMINATION. Any mechanical or electrical instrument or device
of any type used or allegedly used to examine, test or question an individual
for the purpose of determining the individual’s truthfulness.
      PROSECUTION. The prosecution of criminal charges in a criminal
prosecution or the prosecution of a delinquent child complaint in a delinquency
proceeding.
      PROSECUTOR. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2935.01.
      PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 117.01.
      SEX OFFENSE. A violation of any provision of §§
666.02 to
666.05 of this chapter or Ohio R.C. 2907.02 to 2907.09.
(ORC 2907.10)
§ 666.07 PROCURING; ENGAGEMENT IN SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE.
   (A)   Procuring.
      (1)   No person, knowingly and for gain, shall do either of the
following:
         (a)   Entice or solicit another to patronize a prostitute or brothel;
         (b)   Procure a prostitute for another to patronize, or take or direct
another at the other's request to any place for the purpose of patronizing a
prostitute.
      (2)   No person, having authority or responsibility over the use of
premises, shall knowingly permit the premises to be used for the purpose of
engaging in sexual activity for hire.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(1)(a) or (A)(1)(b) of this section is
guilty of procuring. Except as otherwise provided in this division, procuring
is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the prostitute who is procured,
patronized, or otherwise involved in a violation of division (A)(1)(b) of this
section is under 18 years of age at the time of the violation, regardless of
whether the offender who violates division (A)(1)(b) of this section knows the
prostitute's age, or if a prostitute who engages in sexual activity for hire in
premises used in violation of division (A)(2) of this section is under 18 years
of age at the time of the violation, regardless of whether the offender who
violates division (A)(2) of this section knows the prostitute's age, procuring
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2907.23)
   (B)   Engagement in sexual activity for hire.
      (1)   As used in this division (b):
         (a)   "Person with a developmental disability." Has the same meaning
as in Ohio R.C. 2905.32.
         (b)   "Sexual activity for hire." An implicit or explicit agreement to
provide sexual activity in exchange for anything of value paid to the person
engaging in such sexual activity, to any person trafficking that person, or to
any person associated with either such person.
      (2)   No person shall recklessly induce, entice, or procure another to
engage in sexual activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything
of value to the other person.
      (3)   No person shall recklessly induce, entice, or procure another to
engage in sexual activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything
of value to the other person if the other person is a person with a
developmental disability and the offender knows or has reasonable cause to
believe that the other person is a person with a developmental disability.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) of this section is guilty of
engaging in prostitution, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates
division (B)(3) of this section is guilty of engaging in prostitution with a
person with a developmental disability, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. In sentencing an offender under this division for a
violation of division (B)(2) of this section, the court shall require the
offender to attend an education or treatment program aimed at preventing
persons from inducing, enticing, or procuring another to engage in sexual
activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything of value to the
other person. Notwithstanding the fine specified in Ohio R.C. 2929.28(A)(2)(a)
for a misdemeanor of the first degree, in sentencing an offender under this
division for a violation of division (B)(2) of this section, the court may
impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $1,500.
(ORC 2907.231)
§ 666.08 SOLICITING.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly solicit another to engage in sexual activity
for hire in exchange for the person receiving anything of value from the other
person.
   (B)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in conduct in violation of division (A) of this section.
   (C)   As used in division (A) of this section, "sexual activity for hire"
means an implicit or explicit agreement to provide sexual activity in exchange
for anything of value paid to the person engaging in such sexual activity, to
any person trafficking that person, or to any person associated with either
such person.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
soliciting. Soliciting is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of engaging
in solicitation after a positive HIV test, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.24)
Statutory reference:
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see Ohio R.C. 2907.27
§ 666.085 LOITERING TO ENGAGE IN SOLICITATION.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to solicit another to engage in sexual
activity for hire and while in or near a public place, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Beckon to, stop or attempt to stop another;
      (2)   Engage or attempt to engage another in conversation;
      (3)   Stop or attempt to stop the operator of a vehicle or approach a
stationary vehicle;
      (4)   If the offender is the operator of or a passenger in a vehicle,
stop, attempt to stop, beckon to, attempt to beckon to or entice another to
approach or enter the vehicle of which the offender is the operator or in which
the offender is the passenger; or
      (5)   Interfere with the free passage of another.
   (B)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in conduct in violation of division (a) of this section.
   (C)   As used in division (A) of this section:
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any of the following:
         (a)   A street, road, highway, thoroughfare, bikeway, walkway,
sidewalk, bridge, alley, alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot or
transportation facility;
         (b)   A doorway or entrance way to a building that fronts on a place
described in division (a) of this definition; and
         (c)   A place not described in divisions (a) or (b) above that is open
to the public.
      VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of loitering to engage
in solicitation, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
loitering to engage in solicitation after a positive HIV test, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.241)
Statutory reference:
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see Ohio R.C. 2907.27
§ 666.09 PROSTITUTION.
   (A)   No person shall engage in sexual activity for hire.
   (B)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in sexual activity for hire.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
prostitution, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of engaging
in prostitution after a positive HIV test, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.25)
Statutory reference:
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see Ohio R.C. 2907.27
§ 666.10 RULES OF EVIDENCE.
   (A)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a place is a
brothel, evidence as to the reputation of such place and as to the reputation
of the persons who inhabit or frequent it is admissible on the question of
whether such place is or is not a brothel.
   (B)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a person is a
prostitute, evidence as to the reputation of such person is admissible on the
question of whether such person is or is not a prostitute.
   (C)   In any prosecution for a violation of §§
666.07 to
666.09 of this chapter, proof of a prior conviction of the accused of any such
offense or substantially equivalent offense is admissible in support of the
charge.
   (D)   The prohibition contained in Ohio R.C. 2317.02(D) against testimony by
a husband or wife concerning communications between them does not apply, and
the accused's spouse may testify concerning any such communication in any of
the following cases:
      (1)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of §
666.07 of this chapter and the spouse testifying was the prostitute involved in
the offense or the person who used the offender's premises to engage in sexual
activity for hire; or
      (2)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of §§
666.08 or
666.09 of this chapter.
(ORC 2907.26)
§ 666.11 DISSEMINATING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (A)   No person, with knowledge of its character or content, shall
recklessly do any of following:
      (1)   Directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit,
rent or present to a juvenile any material or performance that is obscene or
harmful to juveniles;
      (2)   Offer or agree to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide,
exhibit, rent or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles;
or
      (3)   While in the physical proximity of the juvenile or law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, allow any juvenile or law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile to review or peruse any material or view any live
performance that is harmful to juveniles.
   (B)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section
that involves material or a performance that is harmful to juveniles but not
obscene:
      (1)   The defendant is the parent, guardian or spouse of the juvenile
involved;
      (2)   The juvenile involved, at the time of the conduct in question, was
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian who, with knowledge of its
character, consented to the material or performance being furnished or
presented to the juvenile; and
      (3)   The juvenile exhibited to the defendant or his or her agent or
employee a draft card, driver's license, birth record, marriage license or
other official or apparently official document purporting to show that the
juvenile was 18 years of age or over or married, and the person to whom the
document was exhibited did not otherwise have reasonable cause to believe that
the juvenile was under the age of 18 and unmarried.
   (C)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section,
involving material or a performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles,
that the material or performance was furnished or presented for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, governmental, judicial or other proper
purpose, by a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher,
librarian, clergy, prosecutor, judge or other proper person.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) above, mistake of age is not
a defense to a charge under this section.
   (D)   (1)   A person directly sells, delivers, furnishes, disseminates,
provides, exhibits, rents or presents or directly offers or agrees to sell,
deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent or present material or a
performance to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section by means of an electronic method of
remotely transmitting information if the person knows or has reason to believe
that the person receiving the information is a juvenile or the group of persons
receiving the information are juveniles.
      (2)   A person remotely transmitting information by means of a method of
mass distribution does not directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate,
provide, exhibit, rent or present or directly offer or agree to sell, deliver,
furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent or present the material or
performance in question to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section if either of the following applies:
         (a)   The person has inadequate information to know or have reason to
believe that a particular recipient of the information or offer is a juvenile;
or
         (b)   The method of mass distribution does not provide the person the
ability to prevent a particular recipient from receiving the information.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disseminating matter
harmful to juveniles.
      (2)   If the material or performance involved is harmful to juveniles
except as otherwise provided in this division (E), a violation of this section
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If the material or performance involved is obscene, violation of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2907.31)
§ 666.115 DISPLAYING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (A)   No person who has custody, control or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character or content of the material
involved, shall display at the establishment any material that is harmful to
juveniles and that is open to view by juveniles as part of the invited general
public.
   (B)   It is not a violation of division (A) above if the material in
question is displayed by placing it behind “blinder racks” or similar devices
that cover at least the lower two-thirds of the material, if the material in
question is wrapped or placed behind the counter, or if the material in
question otherwise is covered or located so that the portion that is harmful to
juveniles is not open to the view of juveniles.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of displaying matter harmful
to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day during which the
offender is in violation of this section constitutes a separate offense.
(ORC 2907.311)
§ 666.12 PANDERING OBSCENITY. (REPEALED)
Editor's note:
   Section 666.12 was repealed as part of the 1997 updating and revision of
this code of ordinances because a violation of substantially equivalent state
law (Ohio R.C. 2907.32) was made a felony by the Ohio General Assembly by Am.
Sub. S.B. No. 2, effective 7-1-1996.
§ 666.125 POSSESSION AND VIEWING OF OBSCENE MATERIAL INVOLVING A MINOR.
(REPEALED)
Editor's note:
   Section 666.125 was repealed as part of the 1997 updating and revision of
this code of ordinances because a violation of substantially equivalent state
law (Ohio R.C. 2907.322 and 2907.323) was made a felony by the Ohio General
Assembly by Am. Sub. S.B. No. 2, effective 7-1-1996.
§ 666.13 DECEPTION TO OBTAIN MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (A)   No person, for the purpose of enabling a juvenile to obtain any
material or gain admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles,
shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is the parent, guardian, or spouse
of the juvenile; or
      (2)   Furnish the juvenile with any identification or document purporting
to show that the juvenile is 18 years of age or over or married.
   (B)   No juvenile, for the purpose of obtaining any material or gaining
admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles, shall do either of
the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is 18 years of age or over or
married; or
      (2)   Exhibit any identification or document purporting to show that he
or she is 18 years of age or over or married.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of deception to obtain matter
harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the second degree. A juvenile who
violates division (B) above shall be adjudged an unruly child, with the
disposition of the case as may be appropriate under Ohio R.C. Ch. 2151.
(ORC 2907.33)
§ 666.14 PRESUMPTIONS; NOTICE.
   (A)   An owner or manager, or agent or employee of an owner or manager, of a
bookstore, newsstand, theater or other commercial establishment engaged in
selling material or exhibiting performances, who, in the course of business
does any of the acts prohibited by §
666.11 of this chapter is presumed to have knowledge of the character of the
material or performance involved if the owner, manager or agent or employee of
the owner or manager has actual notice of the nature of such material or
performance, whether or not the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the
owner or manager has precise knowledge of its contents.
   (B)   Without limitation on the manner in which such notice may be given,
actual notice of the character of material or a performance may be given in
writing by the chief legal officer of the municipality. Such notice, regardless
of the manner in which it is given, shall identify the sender, identify the
material or performance involved, state whether it is obscene or harmful to
juveniles and bear the date of such notice.
   (C)   Section 666.11 does not apply to a motion picture operator or
projectionist acting within the scope of his or her employment as an employee
of the owner or manager of the theater or other place for the showing of motion
pictures to the general public, and having no managerial responsibility or
financial interest in his or her place of employment, other than wages.
   (D)   (1)   The provisions of §§
666.11, 666.115 and 666.13(a) do not apply to a person solely because the
person provided access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person's control, including
having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access or
connection to or from and that do not include the creation of the content of
the material that is the subject of the access or connection.
      (2)   Division (D)(1) above does not apply to a person who conspires with
an entity actively involved in the creation or knowing distribution of material
in violation of §§
666.11,
666.115 or
666.13 or who knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.
      (3)   Division (D)(1) above does not apply to a person who provides
access or connection to an electronic method of remotely transferring
information that is engaged in the violation of §§
666.11,
666.115 or
666.13 and that contain content that person has selected and introduced into
the electronic method of remotely transferring information or content over
which that person exercises editorial control.
   (E)   An employer is not guilty of a violation of §§
666.11,
666.115 or
666.13 of this chapter based on the actions of an employee or agent of the
employer unless the employee's or agent's conduct is within the scope of the
employee’s or agent’s employment or agency, and the employer does either of the
following:
      (1)   With knowledge of the employee's or agent's conduct, the employer
authorizes or ratifies the conduct; or
      (2)   The employer recklessly disregards the employee's or agent's
conduct.
   (F)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under §§
666.11 or
666.115 as the section applies to an image transmitted through the internet or
other electronic method of remotely transmitting information that the person
charged with violating the section has taken, in good faith, reasonable,
effective and appropriate actions under the circumstances to restrict or
prevent access by juveniles to material that is harmful to juveniles, including
any method that is feasible under available technology.
(ORC 2907.35)
§ 666.15 DECLARATORY JUDGMENT.
   (A)   Without limitation on the persons otherwise entitled to bring an
action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to Ohio R.C. Ch. 2721, involving the
same issue, the following persons have standing to bring a declaratory judgment
action to determine whether particular materials or performances are obscene or
harmful to juveniles:
      (1)   The chief legal officer of the municipality if and when there is
reasonable cause to believe that Ohio R.C. 2907.31 or Ohio R.C. 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be
violated;
      (2)   Any person who, pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2907.35(B) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, has received notice in writing from the chief
legal officer stating that particular materials or performances are obscene or
harmful to juveniles.
   (B)   Any party to an action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to division
(A) above is entitled, upon the party's request, to trial on the merits within
five days after joinder of the issues, and the court shall render judgment
within five days after trial is concluded.
   (C)   An action for a declaratory judgement pursuant to division (A) above
shall not be brought during the pendency of any civil action or criminal
prosecution when the character of the particular materials or performances
involved is at issue in the pending case, and either of the following applies:
      (1)   Either of the parties to the action for a declaratory judgment is a
party to the pending case; or
      (2)   A judgment in the pending case will necessarily constitute res
judicata as to the character of the materials or performances involved.
   (D)   A civil action or criminal prosecution in which the character of
particular materials or performances is at issue, brought during the pendency
of an action for a declaratory judgment involving the same issue, shall be
stayed during the pendency of the action for a declaratory judgment.
   (E)   The fact that a violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.31 or Ohio R.C. 2907.32,
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, occurs prior to a judicial
determination of the character of the material or performance involved in the
violation does not relieve the offender of criminal liability for the
violation, even though prosecution may be stayed pending the judicial
determination.
(ORC 2907.36)
§ 666.16 INJUNCTION; ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   (A)   Where it appears that Ohio R.C. 2907.31 or Ohio R.C. 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be
violated, the chief legal officer of the Municipality may bring an action to
enjoin the violation. The defendant, upon his or her request, is entitled to
trial on the merits within five days after the joinder of the issues, and the
court shall render judgment within five days after the trial is concluded.
   (B)   Premises used or occupied for repeated violations of Ohio R.C. 2907.31
or Ohio R.C. 2907.32, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
constitute a nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to Ohio R.C. Ch. 3767.
(ORC 2907.37)
§ 666.17 BATHING IN THE NUDE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall bathe or swim in any lake, stream, canal or other
outdoor body of water within the city limits at any time unless he or she is
dressed in a proper bathing suit.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 666.18 UNLAWFUL OPERATION OF VIEWING BOOTHS DEPICTING SEXUAL CONDUCT.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. An entity that is open to the public and to
which either of the following applies:
         (a)   It has a substantial or significant portion of its stock in
trade of the sale, rental or viewing of visual materials or performances
depicting sexual conduct; or
         (b)   It has as a principal business purpose the sale, rental or
viewing of visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct.
      VISUAL MATERIALS OR PERFORMANCES. Films, videos, CD-ROM discs, streaming
video, or other motion pictures.
   (B)   No person who has custody, control or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character of the visual material or
performance involved, shall knowingly permit the use of, or offer the use of,
viewing booths, stalls, or partitioned portions of a room located in the
commercial establishment for the purpose of viewing visual materials or
performances depicting sexual conduct unless both of the following apply.
      (1)   The inside of each booth, stall or partitioned room is visible
from, and at least one side of each booth, stall, or partitioned room is open
to, a continuous and contiguous main aisle or hallway that is open to the
public areas of the commercial establishment and is not obscured by any
curtain, door, or other covering or enclosure.
      (2)   No booth, stall, or partitioned room is designed, constructed,
pandered, or allowed to be used for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating
nudity or sexual activity on the part of or between patrons or members of the
public, and no booth, stall or partitioned room has any aperture, hole, or
opening for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating nudity or sexual
activity.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that
either of the following applies to the involved visual materials or
performances:
      (1)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct are
disseminated or presented for a bona fide medical, scientific, educational,
religious, governmental, judicial, or other proper purpose and by or to a
physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher, person pursuing bona
fide studies or research, librarian, member of the clergy, prosecutor, judge,
or other person having a proper interest in the visual materials or
performances.
      (2)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct,
taken as a whole, would be found by a reasonable person to have serious
literary, artistic, political or scientific value or are presented or
disseminated in good faith for a serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific purpose and are not pandered for their prurient appeal.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting unlawful
operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(ORC 2907.38)
§ 666.19 JUVENILES ON THE PREMISES OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ADULT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited in
which coin-operated, slug-operated, or electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other
image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or
fewer persons per machine at any one time, and in which the images so displayed
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting or
describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE.
         (a)   A commercial establishment that, for any form of consideration,
has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade in, derives a
significant or substantial portion of its revenues from, devotes a significant
or substantial portion of its interior business or advertising to, or maintains
a substantial section of its sales or display space for the sale or rental of
any of the following:
            1.   Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or
other visual representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the
exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas; or
            2.   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for
use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of self or others.
         (b)   Includes a commercial establishment as defined in Ohio R.C.
2907.38. An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do
not involve the offering for sale, rental or viewing of materials exhibiting or
describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still
be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store.
The existence of other principal business purposes does not exempt an
establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes
is offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, such materials
that exhibit or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
      ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle club or
similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are
served, that regularly features any of the following:
         (a)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity;
         (b)   Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities;
         (c)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT. The sale, rental or exhibition, for any form of
consideration, of books, films, video cassettes, magazines, periodicals or live
performances that are characterized by an emphasis on the exposure or display
of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activity.
      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT. An adult arcade, adult bookstore,
adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion picture
theater, adult theater, nude or seminude model studio or sexual encounter
establishment. An establishment in which a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in
medically approved and recognized therapy, including, but not limited to,
massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4731.15, is not an “adult
entertainment establishment”.
      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions
that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are
regularly shown for any form of consideration.
      ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial
establishment that, for any form of consideration, regularly features persons
who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity or live performances that are
characterized by their emphasis upon the exposure of specified anatomical areas
or specified sexual activities.
      DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY THEIR EMPHASIS UPON. The dominant or
principal character and theme of the object described by this phrase. For
instance, when the phrase refers to films “that are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas”, the films so described are
those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the exhibition or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      NUDE OR SEMINUDE MODEL STUDIO. Any place where a person, who regularly
appears in a state of nudity or seminudity, is provided for money or any other
form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed or similarly depicted by other persons. A MODELING CLASS OR STUDIO
is not a nude or seminude model studio and is not subject to this chapter if it
is operated in any of the following ways:
         (a)   By a college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation;
         (b)   By a private college or university that maintains and operates
educational programs, the credits for which are transferable to a college or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
         (c)   In a structure that has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising indicating that a person appearing in a
state of nudity or seminudity is available for viewing, if in order to
participate in a class in the structure, a student must enroll at least three
days in advance of the class and if not more than one nude or seminude model is
on the premises at any one time.
      NUDITY, NUDE or STATE OF NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a
fully opaque covering; or the showing of the female breasts with less than a
fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple.
      REGULARLY FEATURES or REGULARLY SHOWN. A consistent or substantial course
of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a
substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the
ongoing business of the adult entertainment establishment.
      SEMINUDE or STATE OF SEMINUDITY. A state of dress in which opaque
clothing covers not more than the genitals, pubic region, and nipple of the
female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or
devices.
      SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT.
         (a)   A business or commercial establishment that, as one of its
principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration a place where
either of the following occur:
            1.   Two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort for
the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities; or
            2.   Two or more persons appear nude or seminude for the purpose of
displaying their nude or seminude bodies for their receipt of consideration or
compensation in any type or form.
         (b)   An establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in
medically approved and recognized therapy, including, but not limited to,
massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4731.15, is not a “sexual
encounter establishment”.
      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. The cleft of the buttocks, anus, male or
female genitals, or the female breast.
      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Any of the following:
         (a)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, or actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy;
         (b)   Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of
the activities described in division A. of this definition.
   (B)   No person knowingly shall allow an individual, including, but not
limited to, a patron, customer, or employee, who is under 18 years of age on
the premises of an adult entertainment establishment.
   (C)   No individual who is under 18 years of age knowingly shall show or
give false information concerning the individual’s name or age, or other false
identification, for the purpose of gaining entrance to an adult entertainment
establishment.
   (D)   A person shall not be found guilty of a violation of division (B)
above if the person raises as an affirmative defense and if the jury or, in a
non-jury trial, the court finds the person has established by a preponderance
of the evidence, all of the following:
      (1)   The individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment
establishment exhibited to an operator, employee, agent or independent
contractor of the adult entertainment establishment a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card issued under Ohio R.C. 4507.50 and
4507.52 showing that the individual was then at least 18 years of age.
      (2)   The operator, employee, agent or independent contractor made a bona
fide effort to ascertain the true age of the individual gaining entrance to the
adult entertainment establishment by checking the identification presented, at
the time of entrance, to ascertain that the description on the identification
compared with the appearance of the individual and that the identification had
not been altered in any way.
      (3)   The operator, employee, agent or independent contractor had reason
to believe that the individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment
establishment was at least 18 years of age.
   (E)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense described in
division (d) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or the
Deputy Registrar who issued a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card under Ohio R.C. 4507.50 and 4507.52 shall be permitted to
submit certified copies of the records, in the Registrar’s or Deputy
Registrar’s possession, of the issuance of the license or identification card
in question, in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles in the action.
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of permitting a
juvenile on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, a misdemeanor
of the first degree. Each day a person violates this division constitutes a
separate offense.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) above is guilty of use by a juvenile
of false information to enter an adult entertainment establishment, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if committed by
an adult.
(ORC 2907.39)
§ 666.20 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES; ILLEGAL OPERATION AND ACTIVITY.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. A commercial establishment that has
as a significant or substantial portion of its stock in trade or inventory in,
derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues from, devotes a
significant or substantial portion of its interior business or advertising to,
or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display space for the sale
or rental, for any form of consideration, of books, magazines, periodicals or
other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
compact discs, slides or other visual representations, that are characterized
by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
      ADULT CABARET. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2907.39.
      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions
that are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown to more than five
individuals for any form of consideration.
      CHARACTERIZED BY. Describing the essential character or quality of an
item.
      EMPLOYEE. Any individual who performs any service on the premises of a
sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis,
regardless of whether the individual is denominated an employee, independent
contractor, agent or otherwise, but does not include an individual exclusively
on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery
of goods to the premises.
      NUDITY, NUDE or STATE OF NUDITY. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2907.39.
      OPERATOR. Any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented business
who causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in operation the
business or who is authorized to manage the business or exercise overall
operational control of the business premises.
      PATRON. Any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented business,
except for any of the following:
         (a)   An operator or an employee of the sexually oriented business;
         (b)   An individual who is on the premises exclusively for repair or
maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises; and
         (c)   A public employee or a volunteer firefighter emergency medical
services worker acting within the scope of the public employee’
      PREMISES. The real property on which the sexually oriented business is
located and all appurtenances to the real property, including, but not limited,
to the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways and parking
lots or parking garages adjacent to the real property under the ownership,
control or supervision of the owner or operator of the sexually oriented
business.
      REGULARLY. Consistently or repeatedly.
      SEMINUDE or STATE OF SEMINUDITY. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2907.39.
      SEXUAL DEVICE. Any three-dimensional object designed and marketed for
stimulation of the male or female human genitals or anus or female breasts or
for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others, including, but not
limited to, dildos, vibrators, penis pumps and physical representations of the
human genital organs, but not including devices primarily intended for
protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy.
      SEXUAL DEVICE SHOP. A commercial establishment that regularly features
sexual devices, but not including any pharmacy, drug store, medical clinic or
establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare products
or services, and not including any commercial establishment that does not
restrict access to its premises by reason of age.
      SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. A business or commercial enterprise that, as one
of its principal business purposes, purports to offer for any form of
consideration physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
individuals of the opposite sex when one or more of the individuals is nude or
seminude.
      SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult bookstore, adult video store, adult
cabaret, adult motion picture theater, sexual device shop or sexual encounter
center, but does not include a business solely by reason of its showing,
selling or renting materials that may depict sex.
      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Includes human genitals, pubic region and
buttocks and the human female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.
      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Sexual intercourse, oral copulation,
masturbation or sodomy, or excretory functions as a part of or in connection
with any of these activities.
   (B)   No sexually oriented business shall be or remain open for business
between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day; except that, a sexually
oriented business that holds a liquor permit pursuant to Ohio R.C. Ch. 4303 may
remain open until the hour specified in that permit if it does not conduct,
offer or allow sexually oriented entertainment activity in which the performers
appear nude.
   (C)   (1)   No patron who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family
shall knowingly touch any employee while that employee is nude or seminude or
touch the clothing of any employee while that employee is nude or seminude.
      (2)   No employee who regularly appears nude or seminude on the premises
of a sexually oriented business, while on the premises of that sexually
oriented business and while nude or seminude, shall knowingly touch a patron
who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who
is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or the clothing of a patron
who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who
is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or allow a patron who is not
a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who is not a
member of the employee’s immediate family to touch the employee or the clothing
of the employee.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of illegally operating a
sexually oriented business, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (E)   Whoever violates division (C) above is guilty of illegal sexually
oriented activity in a sexually oriented business. If the offender touches a
specified anatomical area of the patron or employee, or the clothing covering a
specified anatomical area, a violation of division (C) above is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the offender does not touch a specified anatomical area
of the patron or employee, or the clothing covering a specified anatomical
area, a violation of division (C) above is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 2907.40)
Statutory reference:
   State indemnification for certain municipal liability stemming from local
adult business regulations, see Ohio R.C. 715.55
§ 666.21 UNLAWFUL ADVERTISING OF MASSAGE.
   (A)   No person, by means of a statement, solicitation or offer in a print
or electronic publication, sign, placard, storefront display or other medium,
shall advertise massage, relaxation massage, any other massage technique or
method or any related service, with the suggestion or promise of sexual
activity.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful advertising of
massage, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (C)   Nothing in this section prevents the municipality from enacting any
regulation of the advertising of massage further than and in addition to the
provisions of divisions (A) and (B) above.
   (D)   As used in this section, SEXUAL ACTIVITY has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 2907.01.
(ORC 2927.17)
§ 666.99 SENTENCING FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED OFFENSES; SEXUAL PREDATORS;
REGISTRATION.
   (A)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented offense or
child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after 1-1-
1997, and the offender is a tier III sex offender/child-victim offender
relative to the offense or the offense is any offense listed in Ohio R.C.
2901.07(D)(1) to (D)(3), the judge shall include in the offender’s sentence a
statement that the offender is a tier III sex offender/child-victim offender,
shall comply with the requirements of Ohio R.C. 2950.03, and shall require the
offender to submit to a DNA specimen collection procedure pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2901.07.
   (B)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented offense or a
child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after 1-1-
1997, the judge shall include in the sentence a summary of the offender’s
duties imposed under Ohio R.C. 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05 and 2950.06, and the
duration of the duties. The judge shall inform the offender, at the time of
sentencing, of those duties and of their duration. If required under Ohio R.C.
2950.03(A)(2), the judge shall perform the duties specified in that section or,
if required under Ohio R.C. 2950.03(A)(6), the judge shall perform the duties
specified in that division.
(ORC 2929.23)
CHAPTER 668: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
668.01   Cleaning and repairing sidewalks.
668.02   Sidewalks to be cleaned of ice and snow.
668.03   Unloading on streets and sidewalks.
668.04   Trash on sidewalks.
668.05   Materials on streets and sidewalks.
668.06   Protecting sidewalks.
668.07   Merchandise displays.
668.08   Barricades and warning lights.
Cross-reference:
   Blocking sidewalks or streets, see GEN. OFF.
648.11
   Dropping, sifting and leading loads, see TRAF.
339.05
   Littering, see GEN. OFF.
660.05
   Obstruction and special uses of public ways, see TRAF. Ch.
311
   Trash deposits, see GEN. OFF.
660.03
§ 668.01 CLEANING AND REPAIRING SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   No owner of any lot or land abutting upon any street shall refuse,
fail or neglect to repair or maintain, or to keep free from nuisance and
obstruction, the sidewalk in front of said lot or land, or any trees in the
street lawn causing damage to the sidewalk.
   (B)   If, upon inspection, the Director of Public Service finds that the
sidewalks abutting any land are in need of repair, the city shall physically
mark the sidewalk pad in need of repair. Thereafter, the Director shall mail to
the property owner a notice directing the owner to make repairs in accordance
with the standards established by the Engineering Department.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, a sidewalk shall be considered to be
defective for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Any block having multiple cracks or any single crack larger than
one-fourth of an inch wide;
      (2)   Adjoining sections of a block, or portion thereof, whose edges
differ vertically by three-fourths of an inch or more;
      (3)   Blocks having a transverse slope in excess of three-fourths of an
inch per horizontal foot towards the street;
      (4)   Blocks having a reverse slope (toward the property) that impounds
water to a depth of one-half of an inch or more;
      (5)   Blocks having depressions that impound water to a depth of one-half
of an inch or more; and
      (6)   Blocks having disintegrated or deteriorated areas.
   (D)   Within 30 days from the receipt of a notice from the Director, the
property owner of the abutting land shall repair the damaged sidewalk himself
or herself or hire a private contractor. If the damaged sidewalk is not
repaired within this time period, the Director shall repair the sidewalk(s) and
shall, thereafter, mail an invoice to the property owner requesting payment at
a rate established each year by Council, which may be less than the actual cost
of the repairs per square foot due to Council's desire to encourage and assist
property owners in repairing damaged sidewalks abutting their property. The
property owner shall pay in full the invoice within 30 days after receiving it.
If the property owner does not pay the invoice in the office of the Director of
Finance within the 30-day period, then the Director of Public Service shall
certify the unpaid invoice/ assessment to the County Auditor to be placed on
the tax duplicate and collected in accordance with the assessment schedule
posted in the Finance Director's office.
   (E)   Upon providing the notice set forth in division (C) above, the
Director of Public Service shall also mail a copy of this section to the
property owner, with instructions for the city's sidewalk replacement program
established by this section.
(Ord. 9-1995, passed 2-27-1995)
§ 668.02 SIDEWALKS TO BE CLEANED OF ICE AND SNOW.
   (A)   No owner of any parcel of real estate in the municipality abutting
upon any sidewalk shall fail to keep such sidewalk abutting his or her premises
free and clear of snow and ice, and to remove therefrom all snow and ice
accumulated thereon within a reasonable time, which will ordinarily not exceed
12 hours after the abatement of any storm during which such snow and ice may
have accumulated.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 668.03 UNLOADING ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   No person shall unload any heavy material in any street of the
municipality by throwing or letting the same fall upon the pavement of any
street, sidewalk or other public way, without first placing some sufficient
protection over the pavement.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 668.04 TRASH ON SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   No person shall sweep, place, suffer to be placed, allow or permit any
dirt, rubbish, paper, ashes or any other debris upon any sidewalk in the city.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 17-1944, passed 3-20-1944)
§ 668.05 MATERIALS ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   No person shall encumber any street or sidewalk or, being the owner,
occupant or person having care of any building or lot of land bordering on any
street or sidewalk, permit the same to be encumbered with barrels, boxes, cans,
yard waste, grass deposits, grass clippings, leaves, leaf deposits (unless part
of a city authorized and scheduled leaf collection program) articles or
substances of any kind, so as to interfere with the free and unobstructed use
thereof.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957; Ord. 135-2017, passed 10-23-2017)
§ 668.06 PROTECTING SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   In the transportation of any goods, materials or equipment across any
sidewalk in the municipality, efficient temporary planking shall be used to
protect the sidewalks from breakage and such temporary planking shall be
removed at the close of each working day and the surface of the sidewalk
immediately cleaned and left in a passable condition.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 668.07 MERCHANDISE DISPLAYS.
   (A)   No person shall use any street or sidewalk area, including the lateral
strip area between the street and sidewalk, for the display of merchandise or
for any advertising display without the written permission of the Mayor.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 668.08 BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.
   (A)   No person shall, unless properly authorized to do so, remove red or
amber lanterns, barricades or other means placed on the streets and on
construction projects, public or private, in the municipality as a warning or
protection for the public, nor shall any person, without proper authority,
purposely, knowingly, recklessly or negligently destroy or injure such lanterns
or barricades.
   (B)   No person who is aware that he or she has removed or damaged any
barrier, light or other warning device referred to in this section, or who has
extinguished any light referred to herein, shall fail to stop and immediately
replace such barrier or other warning device, or relight such light, if
extinguished, or in lieu thereof to immediately notify the Police Division that
such barrier light or other warning device has been damaged, removed or
extinguished.
   (C)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
CHAPTER 670: TREES, SHRUBS, BUSHES, GRASSES, AND WEEDS
Section
670.01   Trees, shrubs, bushes, grasses, and weeds nuisance.
670.02   Abatement of declared nuisance - trees, shrubs, bushes, grasses, and
weeds.
670.03   Assessment of costs by city of declared nuisances.
Cross-reference:
   Injuring vines, bushes, trees or crops, see GEN. OFF.
642.06
   Municipal weed control procedure, see Ohio R.C. 731.51 et seq.
§ 670.01 TREES, SHRUBS, BUSHES, GRASSES, AND WEEDS NUISANCE.
   (A)   Nuisance defined. The following acts, items, things, and conditions
done or existing within this city on private property are declared to
constitute nuisances:
      (1)   Any weeds that are growing, spreading, or maturing into seeds, or
about to do so, including, but not limited to, ragweed, goldenrod, poison ivy,
poison oak, or any other noxious, poisonous, or invasive weeds, vines, or plant
species.
      (2)   Any grass, lawn, turf, or sod in excess of eight inches in height,
measured from the tip of the grass blade to the base of the plant on the ground
surface.
      (3)   Any roots, limbs, branches, or leaves of trees that obstruct any
portion of a sewer located on city property or within city easements.
      (4)   Any shrubs or bushes located within 20 feet of the intersection of
two or more streets and abutting either sidewalk or the normal sidewalk
location if the shrubs or bushes exceed two feet in height above the surface of
either the sidewalk or the normal sidewalk location.
      (5)   Any tree, plant, bush, shrub, or woody plant, or the branches or
trunk of any tree, plant, bush, shrub, or woody plant that obstructs or impedes
the normal and ordinary use of a public right-of-way. Branches overhanging
within nine feet of the surface of any sidewalk or within 15½ feet of the
surface of any street or right-of-way shall be deemed a prima facie nuisance to
obstruct or impede the normal and ordinary traffic thereon.
      (6)   Any tree, plant, bush, shrub, or woody plant, or the branches or
trunk of any tree, plant, bush, shrub, or woody plant that obstructs or impedes
a clear and unobstructed view of traffic from all directions at any street
intersection.
      (7)   Any tree or branch of any tree that is in danger of falling due to
decay, unsoundness, death, rot, parasitic infection, viral infection, fungus
infection, or any other reason, or any tree that contains any disease or
insects that render the tree unsound or that can be communicated to other
trees.
      (8)   Any tree that has fallen or is in such a condition as is likely to
fall, as determined by visual inspection of the Director of Public Service or
their designees, on any public or private property, including the property upon
which it is situated.
   (B)   Prohibition. No person being the owner, occupant, or person in control
of any lot or parcel of land (owner) within the city shall permit a nuisance as
herein defined to exist or continue thereupon.
   (C)   Notice for grasses and weeds. 
      (1)   The city shall cause an annual notice to be posted the last full
week of March on the city’s website informing the owners of the requirements
set forth herein. Said notice shall substantially state the following:
         (a)   “All properties within the City shall keep their property free
of noxious weeds and high grass pursuant to Section
670.01 of the Codified Ordinances. Should the Owner of the property fail to
comply with Section
670.01, the City will cut the high grasses or abate the noxious vegetation at
the Owner’s expense.”
         (b)   Include contact information of the applicable city department.
      (2)   The above notice shall be the only notice of any violation given to
an owner. Failure to read the notice shall not constitute a defense to, nor
waive liability imposed by the assessment to property taxes.
      (3)   The Director of Public Service, or their designee, may cause a
written notice of violation to be served upon the owner, lessees, tenants or
other persons or entities having charge or care of the property, notifying them
that the grass has exceeded eight inches and/or noxious weeds are growing on
the property and ordering that such grass and/or noxious weeds be cut within
five days of service of the notice of violation. Only one written notice of
violation per calendar year is required to be served by the city in order to
cause abatement of grass or noxious weeds by the city. If, after one notice of
violation has been served, the Director of Public Service, or their designee,
determines that one or more subsequent violations have occurred on the property
during the calendar year, the city may proceed to immediately abate such
violations as provided herein.
   (D)   Notice of declared nuisance. The city shall conduct periodic
inspections of all properties to ensure that a nuisance does not exist. If,
upon inspection or from information obtained from the public, the city
determines that a nuisance exists on a property and that the owner has failed
to abate the nuisance (as defined in division (A) of this section), then the
Director of Public Service shall authorize inspectors to post a written notice
of the declared nuisance that shall require the owner to take action to abate
the declared nuisance within 30 days of the posting of such notice. This site-
specific written notice may be affixed to the structure or may be fixed to a
stake, tree, or fence on the property that provides reasonable notice to the
owner of the declared nuisance. The notice shall state the date of posting.
   (E)   Service. Any notice required in this chapter will be considered served
and/or received by the owner when the Director of Public Service, or their
designee, one or more of the following occurs:
      (1)   The city personally delivers the notice to the owner or occupant of
the property of suitable age and discretion;
      (2)   The city leaves the notice with a person of suitable age and
discretion at the usual residence of the person served;
      (3)   The city posts a copy of the notice in a visible location on the
property, including but not limited to, a doorway; and/or
      (4)   The city sends the notice, via regular mail, to the owner at the
last known address as appearing in the records of the Summit County Fiscal
Office; the owner’s tax mailing address as indicated on the county tax
duplicate; or the owner at the owner’s address as determined by an examination
of the public records of Summit County or the State of Ohio.
   (F)   Failure to take corrective action. If, after the posting of a notice
of a declared nuisance, an owner fails to take abatement actions within 30 days
of the posting of such notice, the Director of Public Service shall cause the
abatement of the declared nuisance in accordance with §
670.02. The Director of Public Service and their designees may continue to take
further action to abate recurring nuisances on any property that continues to
have declared nuisances, and such corrective action may be taken on the same
property without additional written notice being given. Any owner who violates
the provisions of this chapter will be given one notice of a declared nuisance
per growing season, and the city shall be authorized to respond to additional
declared nuisances without additional written notices being given.
   (G)   Penalties. In addition to the remedies set forth in this section, §
670.02 and §
670.03, any owner who violates or fails to abate any declared nuisance of the
provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues. Not only shall the city abate the nuisance, as
defined herein, penalties are also set forth in the city’s Development Code §
1350.03, Enforcement. In addition, any costs incurred by the city in abating
the nuisance on the property shall be charged to the violator by the court as
calculated pursuant to §
670.02(B).
(Ord. 151-2025, passed 10-13-2025)
§ 670.02 ABATEMENT OF DECLARED NUISANCE - TREES, SHRUBS, BUSHES, GRASSES, AND
WEEDS.
   (A)   Abatement. If, after posting a notice of a declared nuisance under §
670.01(C), an owner fails to take abatement action within 30 days of the
posting of such notice, the Director of Public Service shall cause the
abatement of the declared nuisance. The Director of Public Service may employ
the necessary labor to perform such work or cause it to be done by the
appropriate city division.
   (B)   Cost. The cost of the work, plus administrative fees, shall be charged
at a rate of $200 per hour per person for the abatement of any tree, tree
branches, brush, shrubs, or woody plants declared as nuisance; $150 per hour
per person for the abatement of weeds, roots, leaves, or tall grass; $100 for
each piece of equipment used to abate the nuisance; $200 per property
administration and processing fee, and shall be billed and/or assessed to the
owner in accordance with the procedures set forth in §
670.03. The same costs shall be billed to the owner for any additional work
that may be performed by the city on any property that has recurring declared
nuisances as defined in §
670.03.
(Ord. 151-2025, passed 10-13-2025)
§ 670.03 ASSESSMENT OF COSTS BY CITY OF DECLARED NUISANCES.
   (A)   Invoice. Upon the completion of any work performed upon any property
under §
670.01 and §
670.02, the city shall prepare an invoice that sets forth the dates of each
corrective action taken by the city, and the amount of charges owed by the
owner under §
670.02 for each abatement action. The city shall mail a copy of such invoice to
the owner at the tax mailing address maintained by the Summit County Fiscal
Office for the property.
   (B)   Appeal. If the owner wants to contest any of the charges imposed under
§
670.02, the owner shall submit a written appeal to the Board of Zoning and
Building Appeals within 20 days of the date of the mailing of the invoice by
the city.
   (C)   Failure to appeal. If, after 30 days of the date of mailing, a timely
appeal has not been filed, and the total amount of the charges remains unpaid,
the Director of Public Service shall certify the total amount of the charges
owed, the name of the owner, and a sufficient description of the premises to
the Summit County Fiscal Office, to be entered on the tax duplicate to be a
lien on the land from the date of entry and to be collected as are other taxes
and assessments and returned to the city, pursuant to R.C. § 731.54. Such
remedy shall be in addition to the penalty provided in §
670.02.
(Ord. 151-2025, passed 10-13-2025)
CHAPTER 672: WEAPONS AND EXPLOSIVES
Section
672.01   Definitions.
672.02   Carrying concealed weapons.
672.025   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention.
672.03   Using weapons while intoxicated.
672.04   Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle.
672.05   Unlawful possession of dangerous ordnance. (Repealed)
672.06   Immunity from prosecution. (Repealed)
672.07   License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance.
672.08   Failure to secure dangerous ordnance.
672.09   Unlawful transactions in weapons.
672.10   Improperly furnishing firearms to a minor. (Repealed)
672.105   Underage purchase of a firearm or handgun.
672.11   Sale of explosives to minors. (Repealed)
672.12   Fireworks.
672.13   Fireworks display permits. (Repealed)
672.14   Slingshot, bow and arrow and air rifle.
672.15   Discharging firearms.
672.16   Removal of serial numbers.
672.17   Possessing criminal tools.
672.18   Possession of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school
safety zone.
672.19   Concealed handgun licenses; possession of a revoked or suspended
license; additional restrictions; posting of signs prohibiting possession.
672.20   Defaced firearms.
Cross-reference:
   Arson, see GEN. OFF.
642.09
   Definitions generally, see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Hunting, see GEN. OFF.
618.16
   Posting firearm warning signs, see GEN. OFF.
612.06
   Prohibiting sales of firearms and explosives in riot areas, see Ohio R.C.
3761.16
   Reporting gunshot wounds, see GEN. OFF.
606.12
   Return of surrendered firearms by law enforcement, see Ohio R.C. 2923.163
   See section histories for similar state law
   Shooting birds, see GEN. OFF.
618.14
   Vehicles transporting explosives, see TRAF.
339.06
§ 672.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTIVE DUTY. Has the same meaning as defined in 10 U.S.C. § 101.
   ALIEN REGISTRATION NUMBER. The number issued by the United States
Citizenship and Immigration Services Agency that is located on the alien’s
permanent resident card and may also be commonly referred to as the “USCIS
number” or the “alien number”.
   AUTOMATIC FIREARM. Any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a
succession of cartridges with a single function of the trigger.
   BALLISTIC KNIFE. A knife with a detachable blade that is propelled by a
spring-operated mechanism.
   CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE or LICENSE TO CARRY A CONCEALED HANDGUN.
      (1)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, a license or temporary
emergency license to carry a concealed handgun issued under Ohio R.C. 2923.125
or 2923.1213 or a license to carry a concealed handgun issued by another state
with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity agreement under
Ohio R.C. 109.69.
      (2)   A reference in any provision of this Code to a concealed handgun
license issued under Ohio R.C. 2923.125 or a license to carry a concealed
handgun issued under Ohio R.C. 2923.125 means only a license of the type that
is specified in that section. A reference in any provision of this code to a
concealed handgun license issued under Ohio R.C. 2923.1213, a license to carry
a concealed handgun issued under Ohio R.C. 2923.1213, or a license to carry a
concealed handgun on a temporary emergency basis means only a license of the
type that is specified in Ohio R.C. 2923.1213. A reference in any provision of
this code to a concealed handgun license issued by another state or a license
to carry a concealed handgun issued by another state means only a license
issued by another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a
reciprocity agreement under Ohio R.C. 109.69.
   DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
      (1)   Any of the following, except as provided in division (2) of this
definition:
         (a)   Any automatic or sawed-off firearm, zip-gun or ballistic knife;
         (b)   Any explosive device or incendiary device;
         (c)   Nitroglycerin, nitrocellulose, nitrostarch, PETN, cyclonite,
TNT, picric acid and other high explosives; amatol, tritonal, tetrytol,
pentolite, pecretol, cyclotol and other high explosive compositions; plastic
explosives; dynamite, blasting gelatin, gelatin dynamite, sensitized ammonium
nitrate, liquid-oxygen blasting explosives, blasting powder and other blasting
agents; and any other explosive substance having sufficient brisance or power
to be particularly suitable for use as a military explosive, or for use in
mining, quarrying, excavating or demolitions;
         (d)   Any firearm, rocket launcher, mortar, artillery piece, grenade,
mine, bomb, torpedo or similar weapon, designed and manufactured for military
purposes and the ammunition for that weapon;
         (e)   Any firearm muffler or suppressor; and
         (f)   Any combination of parts that is intended by the owner for use
in converting any firearm or other device into a dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   DANGEROUS ORDNANCE does not include any of the following:
         (a)   Any firearm, including a military weapon and the ammunition for
that weapon, and regardless of its actual age, that employs a percussion cap or
other obsolete ignition system, or that is designed and safe for use only with
black powder;
         (b)   Any pistol, rifle or shotgun, designed or suitable for sporting
purposes, including a military weapon as issued or as modified, and the
ammunition for that weapon, unless the firearm is an automatic or sawed-off
firearm;
         (c)   Any cannon or other artillery piece that, regardless of its
actual age, is of a type in accepted use prior to 1887, has no mechanical,
hydraulic, pneumatic or other system for absorbing recoil and returning the
tube into battery without displacing the carriage, and is designed and safe for
use only with black powder;
         (d)   Black powder, priming quills and percussion caps possessed and
lawfully used to fire a cannon of a type defined in division (2)(c) of this
definition during displays, celebrations, organized matches or shoots, and
target practice, and smokeless and black powder, primers, and percussion caps
possessed and lawfully used as a propellant or ignition device in small-arms or
small-arms ammunition;
         (e)   Dangerous ordnance that is inoperable or inert and cannot
readily be rendered operable or activated, and that is kept as a trophy,
souvenir, curio or museum piece; and
         (f)   Any device that is expressly excepted from the definition of a
destructive device pursuant to the Gun Control Act of 1968, 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)
(4), as amended, and regulations issued under that Act.
   DEADLY WEAPON. Any instrument, device or thing capable of inflicting death,
and designed or specially adapted for use as a weapon, or possessed, carried or
used as a weapon.
   EXPLOSIVE. Any chemical compound, mixture or device, the primary or common
purpose of which is to function by explosion. EXPLOSIVE includes all materials
that have been classified as division 1.1, division 1.2, division 1.3 or
division 1.4 explosives by the United States Department of Transportation in
its regulations and includes, but is not limited to, dynamite, black powder,
pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps, electric blasting caps,
safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant fuses, instantaneous
fuses, and igniter cords and igniters. EXPLOSIVES does not include “fireworks”,
as defined in Ohio R.C. 3743.01, or any substance or material otherwise meeting
the definition of explosive set forth in this section that is manufactured,
sold, possessed, transported, stored or used in any activity described in Ohio
R.C. 3743.80, provided the activity is conducted in accordance with all
applicable laws, rules, and regulations, including, but not limited to, the
provisions of Ohio R.C. 3743.80 and the rules of the Fire Marshal adopted
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3737.82.
   EXPLOSIVE DEVICE. Any device designed or specially adapted to cause physical
harm to persons or property by means of an explosion, and consisting of an
explosive substance or agency and a means to detonate it. EXPLOSIVE DEVICE
includes without limitation any bomb, any explosive demolition device, any
blasting cap or detonator containing an explosive charge and any pressure
vessel that has been knowingly tampered with or arranged so as to explode.
   FIREARM.
      (1)   Any deadly weapon capable of expelling or propelling one or more
projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible propellant. FIREARM
includes an unloaded firearm, and any firearm that is inoperable, but that can
readily be rendered operable.
      (2)   When determining whether a firearm is capable of expelling or
propelling one or more projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible
propellant, the trier of fact may rely upon circumstantial evidence, including,
but not limited to, the representations and actions of the individual
exercising control over the firearm.
   HANDGUN. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm that has a short stock and is designed to be held and
fired by the use of a single hand;
      (2)   Any combination of parts from which a firearm of a type described
in division (1) of this definition can be assembled.
   INCENDIARY DEVICE. Any firebomb, and any device designed or specially
adapted to cause physical harm to persons or property by means of fire, and
consisting of an incendiary substance or agent and a means to ignite it.
   MISDEMEANOR PUNISHABLE BY IMPRISONMENT FOR A TERM EXCEEDING ONE YEAR. The
phrase does not include any of the following:
      (1)   Any federal or state offense pertaining to antitrust violations,
unfair trade practices, restraints of trade or other similar offenses relating
to the regulation of business practices; or
      (2)   Any misdemeanor offense punishable by a term of imprisonment of two
years or less.
   SAWED-OFF FIREARM. A shotgun with a barrel less than 18 inches long, or a
rifle with a barrel less than 16 inches long, or a shotgun or rifle less than
26 inches long overall.
   SEMI-AUTOMATIC FIREARM. Any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a
single cartridge and automatically chamber a succeeding cartridge ready to
fire, with a single function of the trigger.
   VALID CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE or VALID LICENSE TO CARRY A CONCEALED
HANDGUN. A concealed handgun license that is currently valid, that is not under
a suspension under Ohio R.C. 2923.128(A)(1), under Ohio R.C. 2923.1213, or
under a suspension provision of the state other than this state in which the
license was issued, and that has not been revoked under Ohio R.C. 2923.128(B)
(1), under Ohio R.C. 2923.1213, or under a revocation provision of the state
other than the state in which the license was issued.
   ZIP-GUN. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm of crude and extemporized manufacture;
      (2)   Any device, including without limitation a starter's pistol, not
designed as a firearm, but that is specially adapted for use as a firearm; or
      (3)   Any industrial tool, signaling device or safety device, not
designed as a firearm, but that as designed is capable of use as such, when
possessed, carried or used as a firearm.
(ORC 2923.11)
§ 672.02 CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly carry or have, concealed on the person's
person or concealed ready at hand, any of the following:
      (1)   A deadly weapon other than a handgun;
      (2)   A handgun other than a dangerous ordnance; or
      (3)   A dangerous ordnance.
   (B)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license shall do any
of the following:
      (1)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, before or at the time a law enforcement officer
asks if the person is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to disclose
that the person then is carrying a concealed handgun, provided that it is not a
violation of this division if the person fails to disclose that fact to an
officer during the stop and the person already has notified another officer of
that fact during the same stop;
      (2)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in
plain sight at any time after any law enforcement officer begins approaching
the person while stopped and before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless
the failure is pursuant to and in accordance with directions given by a law
enforcement officer;
      (3)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose, if the
person is carrying a concealed handgun, and if the person is approached by any
law enforcement officer while stopped, knowingly remove or attempt to remove
the loaded handgun from the holster, pocket or other place in which the person
is carrying it, knowingly grasp or hold the loaded handgun, or knowingly have
contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with the person’s hands or
fingers at any time after the law enforcement officer begins approaching and
before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the person removes, attempts
to remove, grasps, holds or has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to and
in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer; or
      (4)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any
lawful order of any law enforcement officer given while the person is stopped,
including, but not limited to, a specific order to the person to keep the
person’s hands in plain sight.
   (C)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   An officer, agent or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or to a law enforcement officer, who is authorized to carry
concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry handguns and
is acting within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s or employee’s duties;
         (b)   Any person who is employed in this State, who is authorized to
carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry
handguns, and who is subject to and in compliance with the requirements of Ohio
R.C. 109.801, unless the appointing authority of the person has expressly
specified that the exemption provided in this division (C)(1)(b) does not apply
to the person;
         (c)   A person’s transportation or storage of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in Ohio R.C. 2923.11(G) to (M), in a motor vehicle for any
lawful purpose if the firearm is not on the actor’s person; or
         (d)   A person’s storage or possession of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in Ohio R.C. 2923.11(G) to (M), in the actor’s own home for
any lawful purpose.
      (2)   Division (A)(2) of this section does not apply to any person who
has been issued a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time of the
alleged carrying or possession of a handgun or who, at the time of the alleged
carrying or possession of a handgun, is an active duty member of the armed
forces of the United States and is carrying a valid military identification
card and documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets
or exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), unless
the person knowingly is in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(1) above
of carrying or having control of a weapon other than a handgun and other than a
dangerous ordnance, that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by law from
having the weapon, and that any of the following applies:
      (1)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in or was going to or from the
actor's lawful business or occupation, which business or occupation was of a
character or was necessarily carried on in a manner or at a time or place as to
render the actor particularly susceptible to criminal attack, such as would
justify a prudent person in going armed;
      (2)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in a lawful activity and had
reasonable cause to fear a criminal attack upon the actor, a member of the
actor's family, or the actor's home, such as would justify a prudent person in
going armed; or
      (3)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for any
lawful purpose and while in the actor's own home.
   (E)   (1)   No person who is charged with a violation of this section shall
be required to obtain a concealed handgun license as a condition for the
dismissal of the charge.
      (2)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to, or
has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B)(1) of this section as it
existed prior to June 13, 2022, the person may file an application under Ohio
R.C. 2953.35 requesting the expungement of the record of conviction.
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of carrying concealed
weapons. Except as otherwise provided in this division (F) or divisions (F)(2),
(F)(6) and (F)(7) below, carrying concealed weapons in violation of division
(A) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Except as otherwise provided in
this division (F)(1) or divisions (F)(2), (F)(6) and (F)(7) below, if the
offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance or of any offense of
violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for
which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is
dangerous ordnance, carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (A)
above is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Except as
otherwise provided in divisions (F)(2), (F)(6) and (F)(7) below, if the offense
is committed aboard an aircraft, or with purpose to carry a concealed weapon
aboard an aircraft, regardless of the weapon involved, carrying concealed
weapons in violation of division (A) above is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   A person shall not be arrested for a violation of division (A)(2)
of this section solely because the person does not promptly produce a valid
concealed handgun license. If a person is arrested for a violation of division
(A)(2) of this section and is convicted of or pleads guilty to the violation,
the offender shall be punished as follows:
         (a)   The offender shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor if both of
the following apply:
            1.   Within ten days after the arrest, the offender presents a
concealed handgun license, which license was valid at the time of the arrest to
the law enforcement agency that employs the arresting officer; and
            2.   At the time of the arrest, the offender was not knowingly in a
place described in Ohio R.C. 2923.126(B).
         (b)   The offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined
$500 if all of the following apply:
            1.   The offender previously had been issued a concealed handgun
license, and that license expired within the two years immediately preceding
the arrest;
            2.   Within 45 days after the arrest, the offender presents a
concealed handgun license to the law enforcement agency that employed the
arresting officer, and the offender waives in writing the offender's right to a
speedy trial on the charge of the violation that is provided in Ohio R.C.
2945.71; and
            3.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
not knowingly in a place described in Ohio R.C. 2923.126(B).
         (c)   If divisions (F)(2)(a) and (F)(2)(b) and (F)(6) below do not
apply, the offender shall be punished under divisions (F)(1) or (F)(7) of this
section.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (F)(3), carrying
concealed weapons in violation of division (B)(1) above is a misdemeanor of the
first degree, and, in addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a
violation of division (B)(1) above, the offender’s concealed handgun license
shall be suspended pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2923.128(A)(2). If, at the time of the
stop of the offender for a law enforcement purpose that was the basis of the
violation, any law enforcement officer involved with the stop had actual
knowledge that the offender has been issued a concealed handgun license,
carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (B)(1) above is a minor
misdemeanor, and the offender’s concealed handgun license shall not be
suspended pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2923.128(A)(2).
      (4)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of divisions (B)(2) or (B)
(4) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of divisions (B)(2) or
(B)(4) above or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In addition to any other
penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation of divisions (B)(2) or
(B)(4) above, the offender’s concealed handgun license shall be suspended
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2923.128(A)(2).
      (5)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (B)(3) above is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (6)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division (A)(2) above
is an active duty m ember of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in Ohio R.C. 2923.125(G)(1), and if at the time of the violation the
person was not knowingly in a place described in Ohio R.C. 2923.126(B), the
officer shall not arrest the person for a violation of that division. If the
person is not able to promptly produce a valid military identification card and
documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets or
exceeds the training requirements described in Ohio R.C. 2923.125(G)(1) and if
the person is not in a place described in Ohio R.C. 2923.126(B), the officer
shall issue a citation and the offender shall be assessed a civil penalty of
not more than $500. The citation shall be automatically dismissed and the civil
penalty shall not be assessed if both of the following apply:
         (a)   Within ten days after the issuance of the citation, the offender
presents a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in Ohio R.C. 2923.125(G)(1), which were both valid at the time of the
issuance of the citation to the law enforcement agency that employs the citing
officer; and
         (b)   At the time of the citation, the offender was not knowingly in a
place described in Ohio R.C. 2923.126(B).
      (7)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division (A)(2) above
is knowingly in a place described in Ohio R.C. 2923.126(B)(5) and is not
authorized to carry a handgun or have a handgun concealed on the person’s
person or concealed ready at hand under that division, the penalty shall be as
follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (F)(7)(a), if the
person produces a valid concealed handgun license within ten days after the
arrest and has not previously been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation
of division (A)(2) above or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a minor misdemeanor;
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (F)(7)(b), if the
person has previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (A)(2) above or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
         (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (F)(7)(c), if the
person has previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of
division (A)(2) above or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree; and
         (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (F)(7)(d), if the
person has previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more
violations of division (A)(2) above or any substantially equivalent state law
or municipal ordinance, or convicted of or pleaded guilty to any offense of
violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for
which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is a
dangerous ordnance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (G)   If a law enforcement officer stops a person to question the person
regarding a possible violation of this section, for a traffic stop, or for any
other law enforcement purpose, if the person surrenders a firearm to the
officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the officer,
and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this section
or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise prohibited by
law from possessing the firearm and the firearm is not contraband, the officer
shall return the firearm to the person at the termination of the stop. If a
court orders a law enforcement officer to return a firearm to a person pursuant
to the requirement set forth in this division (G), Ohio R.C. 2923.163(B)
applies.
   (H)   For purposes of this section, "deadly weapon" or "weapon" does not
include any knife, razor, or cutting instrument if the instrument was not used
as a weapon.
(R.C. § 2923.12)
Statutory reference:
   Carrying concealed handguns, licensing through county sheriff, see Ohio R.C.
2923.124 et seq.
   Concealed carry by a qualifying adult, see R.C. § 2923.111
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance on school
premises, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2923.122
   Conveyance, possession, or control of deadly weapon or dangerous ordinance
in a courthouse, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2923.123
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offense, see Ohio
R.C. 2923.131
   Possession of firearm in liquor permit premises, felony offense, see Ohio
R.C. 2923.121
§ 672.025 POSSESSION OF DEADLY WEAPON WHILE UNDER DETENTION.
   (A)   DETENTION and DETENTION FACILITY have the same meanings as in Ohio
R.C. 2921.01.
   (B)   No person under detention at a detention facility shall possess a
deadly weapon.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possession of a deadly
weapon while under detention.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2) below, possession
of a deadly weapon while under detention is a felony to be prosecuted under
state law.
      (2)   If the offender, at the time of the commission of the offense, was
under detention as an alleged or adjudicated delinquent child or unruly child
and if at the time the offender commits the act for which the offender was
under detention it would not be a felony if committed by an adult, possession
of a deadly weapon while under detention is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2923.131)
Statutory reference:
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offenses, see Ohio
R.C. 2923.131
§ 672.03 USING WEAPONS WHILE INTOXICATED.
   (A)   No person, while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse,
shall carry or use any firearm or dangerous ordnance.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using weapons while
intoxicated, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2923.15)
§ 672.04 IMPROPERLY HANDLING FIREARMS IN A MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly discharge a firearm while in or on a motor
vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded firearm in a
motor vehicle in such a manner that the firearm is accessible to the operator
or any passenger without leaving the vehicle.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a firearm in a motor
vehicle, unless the person may lawfully possess that firearm under applicable
law of this state or the United States, the firearm is unloaded and the firearm
is carried in one of the following ways:
      (1)   In a closed package, box or case;
      (2)   In a compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle;
      (3)   In plain sight and secured in a rack or holder made for the
purpose; or
      (4)   If the firearm is at least 24 inches in overall length as measured
from the muzzle to the part of the stock furthest from the muzzle and if the
barrel is at least 18 inches in length, either in plain sight with the action
open or the weapon stripped or, if the firearm is of a type on which the action
will not stay open or which cannot easily be stripped, in plain sight.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded handgun in a
motor vehicle if, at the time of that transportation or possession, any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse or a
combination of them; and/or
      (2)   The person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine
contains a concentration of alcohol, a listed controlled substance or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance prohibited for persons operating a
vehicle, as specified in Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), regardless of whether the person
at the time of the transportation or possession as described in this division
is the operator of or a passenger in the motor vehicle.
   (E)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license or who is an
active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is carrying a
valid military identification card and documentation of successful completion
of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described
in Ohio R.C. 2923.125(G)(1), who is the driver or an occupant of a motor
vehicle that is stopped as a result of a traffic stop or a stop for another law
enforcement purpose or is the driver or an occupant of a commercial motor
vehicle that is stopped by an employee of the motor carrier enforcement unit
for the purposes defined in Ohio R.C. 5503.34, and who is transporting or has a
loaded handgun in the motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle in any manner,
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Before or at the time a law enforcement officer asks if the person
is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to disclose that the person
then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle, provided that it
is not a violation of this division if the person fails to disclose that fact
to an officer during the stop and the person already has notified another
officer of that fact during the same stop;
      (2)   Before or at the time an employee of the motor carrier enforcement
unit asks if the person is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to
disclose that the person then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the
commercial motor vehicle, provided that it is not a violation of this division
if the person fails to disclose that fact to an employee of the unit during the
stop and the person already has notified another employee of the unit of that
fact during the same stop;
      (3)   Knowingly fail to remain in the motor vehicle while stopped, or
knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in plain sight at any time after any
law enforcement officer begins approaching the person while stopped and before
the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the failure is pursuant to and in
accordance with directions given by a law enforcement officer;
      (4)   Knowingly have contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with
the person’s hands or fingers in the motor vehicle at any time after the law
enforcement officer begins approaching and before the law enforcement officer
leaves, unless the person has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to and
in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer; or
      (5)   Knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any lawful order of any
law enforcement officer given while the motor vehicle is stopped, including but
not limited to a specific order to the person to keep the person’s hands in
plain sight.
   (F)   (1)   Divisions (A), (B), (C) and (E) above do not apply to any of the
following:
         (a)   An officer, agent or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, when authorized to carry or have
loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles and acting within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s or employee’s duties;
         (b)   Any person who is employed in the state, who is authorized to
carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles, and who is
subject to and in compliance with the requirements of Ohio R.C. 109.801, unless
the appointing authority of the person has expressly specified that the
exemption provided in this division (F)(1)(b) does not apply to the person.
      (2)   Division (A) above does not apply to a person if all of the
following circumstances apply:
         (a)   The person discharges a firearm from a motor vehicle at a coyote
or groundhog, the discharge is not during the deer gun hunting season as set by
the Chief of the Division of Wildlife of the Department of Natural Resources,
and the discharge at the coyote or groundhog, but for the operation of this
section, is lawful;
         (b)   The motor vehicle from which the person discharges the firearm
is on real property that is located in an unincorporated area of a township and
that is either zoned for agriculture or is used for agriculture;
         (c)   The person owns the real property described in division (F)(2)
(b) above, is the spouse or a child of another person who owns that real
property, is a tenant of another person who owns that real property, or is the
spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real property; or
         (d)   The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the
following manners:
            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse or
alcohol and a drug of abuse;
            2.   In the direction of a street, highway or other public or
private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or
temporary habitation; or
            4.   In the commission of any violation of law, including but not
limited to a felony that includes, as an essential element, purposely or
knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or physical harm to
another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
      (3)   Division (A) above does not apply to a person if all of the
following apply:
         (a)   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle permit issued
under Ohio R.C. 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife;
         (b)   The person discharges a firearm at a wild quadruped or game bird
as defined in Ohio R.C. 1531.01 during the open hunting season for the
applicable wild quadruped or game bird;
         (c)   The person discharges a firearm from a stationary all-purpose
vehicle as defined in Ohio R.C. 1531.01 from private or publicly owned lands or
from a motor vehicle that is parked on a road that is owned or administered by
the Division of Wildlife; and
         (d)   The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the
following manners:
            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse or
alcohol and a drug of abuse;
            2.   In the direction of a street, a highway or other public or
private property that is used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or
temporary habitation; or
            4.   In the commission of any violation of law, including, but not
limited to, a felony that includes, as an essential element, purposely or
knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or physical harm to
another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
      (4)   Divisions (B) and (C) above do not apply to a person if all of the
following circumstances apply:
         (a)   At the time of the alleged violation of either of those
divisions, the person is the operator of or a passenger in a motor vehicle;
         (b)   The motor vehicle is on real property that is located in an
unincorporated area of a township and that is either zoned for agriculture or
is used for agriculture;
         (c)   The person owns the real property described in division (F)(4)
(b) above, is the spouse or a child of another person who owns that real
property, is a tenant of another person who owns that real property, or is the
spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real property;
and
         (d)   The person, prior to arriving at the real property described in
division (F)(4)(b) above, did not transport or possess a firearm in the motor
vehicle in a manner prohibited by divisions (B) or (C) above while the motor
vehicle was being operated on a street, highway or other public or private
property used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking.
      (5)   Divisions (B) and (C) above do not apply to a person who transports
or possesses a handgun in a motor vehicle if, at the time of that
transportation or possession, both of the following apply:
         (a)   The person transporting or possessing the handgun has been
issued a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         (b)   The person transporting or possessing the handgun is not
knowingly in a place described in Ohio R.C. 2923.126(B).
      (6)   Divisions (B) and (C) above do not apply to a person if all of the
following apply:
         (a)   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle permit issued
under Ohio R.C. 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife;
         (b)   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as defined in Ohio
R.C. 1531.01 or a motor vehicle during the open hunting season for a wild
quadruped or game bird.; and
         (c)   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as defined in Ohio
R.C. 1531.01 on private or publicly owned lands or on or in a motor vehicle
that is parked on a road that is owned or administered by the Division of
Wildlife.
   (G)   (1)   The affirmative defenses authorized in Ohio R.C. 2923.12(D)(1)
and (D)(2) are affirmative defenses to a charge under divisions (B) or (C)
above that involves a firearm other than a handgun.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under divisions (B) or (C)
above of improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle that the actor
transported or had the firearm in the motor vehicle for any lawful purpose and
while the motor vehicle was on the actor's own property; provided that, this
affirmative defense is not available unless the person, immediately prior to
arriving at the actor's own property, did not transport or possess the firearm
in a motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by divisions (B) or (C) above while
the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway or other public or
private property used by the public for vehicular traffic.
   (H)   (1)   No person who is charged with a violation of divisions (B), (C)
or (D) above shall be required to obtain a concealed handgun as a condition for
the dismissal of the charge.
      (2)   (a)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty
to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E) of this section as it
existed prior to September 30, 2011, and the conduct that was the basis of the
violation no longer would be a violation of division (E) of this section on or
after September 30, 2011, or if a person is convicted of, was convicted of,
pleads guilty to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E)(1) or
(E)(2) of this section as it existed prior to June 13, 2022, the person may
file an application under R.C. § 2953.35 requesting the expungement of the
record of conviction.
         (b)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to,
or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B) or (C) of this section as
the division existed prior to September 30, 2011 and if the conduct that was
the basis of the violation no longer would be a violation of division (B) or
(C) of this section on or after September 30, 2011 due to the application of
division (F)(5) of this section as it exists on and after September 30, 2011,
the person may file an application under R.C. § 2953.35 requesting the
expungement of the record of conviction.
   (I)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of improperly handling
firearms in a motor vehicle. A violation of division (A) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division
(C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A violation of
division (D) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law and, if the loaded handgun is concealed on the person's person, it is
also a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of
division (E)(1) or (E)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (E)(4) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division (E)(3) or (E)
(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(E)(3) or (E)(5) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In
addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of division (E)(3) or (E)(5) of this section, the offender’s concealed handgun
license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2). A violation of
division (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (J)   If a law enforcement officer stops a motor vehicle for a traffic stop
or any other purpose, if any person in the motor vehicle surrenders a firearm
to the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the
officer, and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this
section or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise
prohibited by law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not
contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to the person at the
termination of the stop. If a court orders a law enforcement officer to return
a firearm to a person pursuant to the requirement set forth in this division,
Ohio R.C. 2923.163(B) applies.
   (K)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AGRICULTURE. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 519.01.
      COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4506.25
(A).
      MOTOR CARRIER ENFORCEMENT UNIT. The Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit in the
Department of Public Safety, Division of State Highway Patrol, that is created
by Ohio R.C. 5503.34.
      MOTOR VEHICLE, STREET and HIGHWAY. Have the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
4511.01.
      OCCUPIED STRUCTURE. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2909.01.
      TENANT. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1531.01.
      UNLOADED.
         (a)   With respect to a firearm other than a firearm described in
division (d) of this definition, means that no ammunition is in the firearm in
question, no magazine or speed loader containing ammunition is inserted into
the firearm, and one of the following applies:
            1.   There is no ammunition in a magazine or speed loader that is
in the vehicle in question and that may be used with the firearm in question;
or
            2.   Any magazine or speed loader that contains ammunition and that
may be used with the firearm in question is stored in a compartment within the
vehicle in question that cannot be accessed without leaving the vehicle or is
stored in a container that provides complete and separate enclosure.
         (b)   For the purposes of division (a)2. of this definition, a
“container that provides complete and separate enclosure” includes, but is not
limited to, any of the following:
            1.   A package, box or case with multiple compartments, as long as
the loaded magazine or speed loader and the firearm in question either are in
separate compartments within the package, box or case or, if they are in the
same compartment, the magazine or speed loader is contained within a separate
enclosure in that compartment that does not contain the firearm and that closes
using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop closing mechanism, or other
fastener that must be opened to access the contents or the firearm is contained
within a separate enclosure of that nature in that compartment that does not
contain the magazine or speed loader; or
            2.   A pocket or other enclosure on the person of the person in
question that closes using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop
closing mechanism, or other fastener that must be opened to access the
contents.
         (c)   For the purposes of divisions (a) and (b) of this definition,
ammunition held in stripper-clips or in en-bloc clips is not considered
ammunition that is loaded into a magazine or speed loader.
         (d)   UNLOADED means, with respect to a firearm employing a percussion
cap, flintlock or other obsolete ignition system, when the weapon is uncapped
or when the priming charge is removed from the pan.
   (L)   Divisions A. and B. of the definition of “unloaded” in division (K) of
this section do not affect the authority of a person who has been issued a
concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question to have one or
more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a vehicle,
without being transported as described in those divisions, as long as no
ammunition is in a firearm, other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as
permitted under any other provision of this chapter. A person who has been
issued a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question may
have one or more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a
vehicle without further restriction, as long as no ammunition is in a firearm,
other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as permitted under any
provision of this chapter.
(R.C. § 2923.16)
Statutory reference:
   Return of surrendered firearms by law enforcement, see Ohio R.C. 2923.163
§ 672.05 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF DANGEROUS ORDNANCE. (REPEALED)
Editor's note:
   Section 672.05 was repealed as part of the 1983 updating and revision of
this code of ordinances because a violation of substantially equivalent state
law (Ohio R.C. 2923.17) was made a felony by the Ohio General Assembly by Am.
H.B. No. 728, effective 8-22-1978.
§ 672.06 IMMUNITY FROM PROSECUTION. (REPEALED)
Editor's note:
   Section 672.06 was repealed by implication by the repeal of §
672.05 of this chapter, which was made a felony by Am. H.B. No. 728, effective
8-22-1978.
§ 672.07 LICENSE OR PERMIT TO POSSESS DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
   (A)   Upon application to the Sheriff of the County or Safety Director or
Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant resides or has his or her
principal place of business, and upon payment of the fee specified in division
(B) below, a license or temporary permit shall be issued to qualified
applicants to acquire, possess, carry or use a dangerous ordnance for the
following purposes:
      (1)   Contractors, wreckers, quarry workers, mine operators and other
persons regularly employing explosives in the course of a legitimate business,
with respect to explosives and explosive devices acquired, possessed, carried
or used in the course of such business;
      (2)   Farmers, with respect to explosives and explosive devices acquired,
possessed, carried or used for agricultural purposes on lands farmed by them;
      (3)   Scientists, engineers and instructors, with respect to a dangerous
ordnance acquired, possessed, carried or used in the course of bona fide
research or instruction;
      (4)   Financial institutions and armored car company guards, with respect
to automatic firearms lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or used by any such
person while acting within the scope of his or her duties; and
      (5)   In the discretion of the issuing authority, any responsible person,
with respect to a dangerous ordnance lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or
used for a legitimate research, scientific, educational, industrial or other
proper purpose.
   (B)   Application for a license or temporary permit under this section shall
be in writing under oath to the Sheriff of the county or Safety Director or
Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant resides or has his or her
principal place of business. The application shall be accompanied by an
application fee of $50 when the application is for a license, and an
application fee of $5 when the application is for a temporary permit. The fees
shall be paid into the General Revenue Fund of the county or municipality. The
application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name, age, address, occupation and business address of the
applicant, if he or she is a natural person, or the name, address and principal
place of business of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation;
      (2)   A description of the dangerous ordnance for which a permit is
requested;
      (3)   A description of the places where and the manner in which the
dangerous ordnance is to be kept, carried and used;
      (4)   A statement of the purposes for which the dangerous ordnance is to
be acquired, possessed, carried or used; and
      (5)   Such other information as the issuing authority may require in
giving effect to this section.
   (C)   Upon investigation, the issuing authority shall issue a license or
temporary permit only if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The applicant is not otherwise prohibited by law from acquiring,
having, carrying or using a dangerous ordnance;
      (2)   The applicant is 21 years of age or over, if the applicant is a
natural person;
      (3)   It appears that the applicant has sufficient competence to safely
acquire, possess, carry or use the dangerous ordnance, and that proper
precautions will be taken to protect the security of the dangerous ordnance and
ensure the safety of persons and property; and
      (4)   It appears that the dangerous ordnance will be lawfully acquired,
possessed, carried and used by the applicant for a legitimate purpose.
   (D)   The license or temporary permit shall identify the person to whom it
is issued, identify the dangerous ordnance involved and state the purposes for
which the license or temporary permit is issued, state the expiration date, if
any, and list such restrictions on the acquisition, possession, carriage or use
of the dangerous ordnance as the issuing authority considers advisable to
protect the security of the dangerous ordnance and ensure the safety of persons
and property.
   (E)   A temporary permit shall be issued for the casual use of explosives
and explosive devices, and other consumable dangerous ordnance, and shall
expire within 30 days of its issuance. A license shall be issued for the
regular use of a consumable dangerous ordnance, which license need not specify
an expiration date, but the issuing authority may specify such expiration date,
not earlier than one year from the date of issuance, as it considers advisable
in view of the nature of the dangerous ordnance and the purposes for which the
license is issued.
   (F)   The dangerous ordnance specified in a license or temporary permit may
be obtained by the holder anywhere in the state. Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2923.18
(F), the holder of a license may use such dangerous ordnance anywhere in the
state. The holder of a temporary permit may use such dangerous ordnance only
within the territorial jurisdiction of the issuing authority.
   (G)   The issuing authority shall forward to the State Fire Marshal a copy
of each license or temporary permit issued pursuant to this section, and a copy
of each record of a transaction in a dangerous ordnance and of each report of a
lost or stolen dangerous ordnance, given to the local law enforcement authority
as required by R.C. § 2923.20(A)(6) and (A)(7) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. The State Fire Marshal will keep a permanent file of all
licenses and temporary permits issued pursuant to this section, and of all
records of transactions in, and losses or thefts of a dangerous ordnance
forwarded by local law enforcement authorities pursuant to this section.
(R.C. § 2923.18)
§ 672.08 FAILURE TO SECURE DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
   (A)   No person, in acquiring, possessing, carrying, or using any dangerous
ordnance, shall negligently fail to take proper precautions:
      (1)   To secure the dangerous ordnance against theft, or against its
acquisition or use by any unauthorized or incompetent person; and
      (2)   To ensure the safety of persons and property.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to a secure
dangerous ordnance, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(ORC 2923.19)
§ 672.09 UNLAWFUL TRANSACTIONS IN WEAPONS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Recklessly sell, lend, give or furnish any firearm to any person
prohibited by R.C. § 2923.13 or 2923.15, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, from acquiring or using any firearm, or recklessly sell,
lend, give or furnish any dangerous ordnance to any person prohibited by R.C. §
2923.13, 2923.15 or 2923.17, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
from acquiring or using any dangerous ordnance;
      (2)   Possess any firearm or dangerous ordnance with purpose to dispose
of it in violation of division (a)(1) of this section;
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section,
knowingly solicit, persuade, encourage, or entice a federally licensed firearms
dealer or private seller to transfer a firearm or ammunition to any person in a
manner prohibited by state or federal law;
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section, with
an intent to deceive, knowingly provide materially false information to a
federally licensed firearms dealer or private seller;
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section,
knowingly procure, solicit, persuade, encourage, or entice a person to act in
violation of division (A)(3) or (A)(4) of this section;
      (6)   When transferring any dangerous ordnance to another, negligently
fail to require the transferee to exhibit the identification, license or permit
showing the transferee to be authorized to acquire dangerous ordnance pursuant
to R.C. § 2923.17, or negligently fail to take a complete record of the
transaction and forthwith forward a copy of the record to the Sheriff of the
county or Safety Director or Police Chief of the municipality where the
transaction takes place;
      (7)   Knowingly fail to report to law enforcement authorities forthwith
the loss or theft of any firearm or dangerous ordnance in the person's
possession and under his or her control.
   (B)   Divisions (A)(3), (A)(4), and (A)(5) of this section do not apply to
any of the following:
      (1)   A law enforcement officer who is acting within the scope of the
officer's duties;
      (2)   A person who is acting in accordance with directions given by a law
enforcement officer described in division (B)(1) of this section.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful transactions in
weapons. A violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A
violation of division (A)(6) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (A)(7) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (D)   As used in this section:
      AMMUNITION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.401.
      FEDERALLY LICENSED FIREARMS DEALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5502.63.
      MATERIALLY FALSE INFORMATION. Means information regarding the transfer of
a firearm or ammunition that portrays an illegal transaction as legal or a
legal transaction as illegal.
      PRIVATE SELLER. Means a person who sells, offers for sale, or transfers a
firearm or ammunition and who is not a federally licensed firearms dealer.
(R.C. § 2923.20)
§ 672.10 IMPROPERLY FURNISHING FIREARMS TO A MINOR. (REPEALED)
Editor's note:
   Section 672.10 was repealed as part of the 1996 updating and revision of
this code of ordinances because a violation of substantially equivalent state
law (Ohio R.C. 2923.21) was made a felony by the Ohio General Assembly by Sub.
H.B. No. 4, effective 11-9-1995.
§ 672.105 UNDERAGE PURCHASE OF A FIREARM OR HANDGUN.
   (A)   No person under 18 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase
a firearm.
   (B)   No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase
a handgun; provided that, this division (B) does not apply to the purchase or
attempted purchase of a handgun by a person 18 years of age or older and under
21 years of age, if either of the following applies:
      (1)   The person is a law enforcement officer and has received firearms
training approved by the Ohio Peace Officer Training Council or equivalent
firearms training; or
      (2)   The person is an active or reserve member of the armed services of
the United States or the Ohio National Guard, or was honorably discharged from
military service in the active or reserve armed services of the United States
or the Ohio National Guard, and the person has received firearms training from
the armed services or the national guard or equivalent firearms training.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of underage purchase of
a firearm, a delinquent act that would be a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if it could be committed by an adult. Whoever violates
division (B) above is guilty of underage purchase of a handgun, a misdemeanor
of the second degree.
(ORC 2923.211)
§ 672.11 SALE OF EXPLOSIVES TO MINORS. (REPEALED)
Editor's note:
   Section 672.11 was repealed as part of the 1988 updating and revision of
this code of ordinances because substantially equivalent state law (Ohio R.C.
3743.02 was repealed by the Ohio General Assembly by H.B. No. 590, effective 7-
1-1979.
§ 672.12 FIREWORKS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      1.3G FIREWORKS. Display fireworks consistent with regulations of the
United States Department of Transportation as expressed using the designation
“Division 1.3” in C.F.R. Title 49.
      1.4G FIREWORKS. Consumer fireworks consistent with regulations of the
United States Department of Transportation as expressed using the designation
“Division 1.4” in C.F.R. Title 49.
      BEER and INTOXICATING LIQUOR. Have the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
4301.01.
      BOOBY TRAP. A small tube that has a string protruding from both ends that
has a friction-sensitive composition and that is ignited by pulling the ends of
the string.
      CIGARETTE LOAD. A small wooden peg that is coated with a small quantity
of explosive composition and that is ignited in a cigarette.
      CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3719.01.
      DISCHARGE SITE. An area immediately surrounding the mortars used to fire
aerial shells.
      EXPLOSIVE. Any chemical compound, mixture or device, the primary or
common purpose of which is to function by explosion. EXPLOSIVE includes all
materials that have been classified as division 1.1, division 1.2, division 1.3
or division 1.4 explosives by the United States Department of Transportation in
its regulations and includes, but is not limited to, dynamite, black powder,
pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps, electric blasting caps,
safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant fuses, instantaneous
fuses and igniter cords and igniters. EXPLOSIVES does not include “fireworks,”
as defined in Ohio R.C. 3743.01, or any substance or material otherwise meeting
the definition of explosive set forth in this section that is manufactured,
sold, possessed, transported, stored or used in any activity described in Ohio
R.C. 3743.80, provided the activity is conducted in accordance with all
applicable laws, rules, and regulations, including, but not limited to, the
provisions of Ohio R.C. 3743.80 and the rules of the Fire Marshal adopted
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3737.82.
(ORC 2923.11)
      FIREWORKS. Any composition or device prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, deflagration or
detonation, except ordinary matches and except as provided in Ohio R.C.
3743.80.
      FIREWORKS INCIDENT. Any action or omission that occurs at a fireworks
exhibition that results in injury or death, or a substantial risk of injury or
death, to any person, and that involves either of the following:
         (a)   The handling or other use, or the results of the handling or
other use, of fireworks or associated equipment or other materials; or
         (b)   The failure of any person to comply with any applicable
requirement imposed by this section or Ohio R.C. Ch. 3743, or any applicable
rule adopted under this section or Ohio R.C. Ch. 3743.
      FIREWORKS INCIDENT SITE. A discharge site or other location at a
fireworks exhibition where a fireworks incident occurs, a location where an
injury or death associated with a fireworks incident occurs, or a location
where evidence of a fireworks incident or an injury or death associated with a
fireworks incident is found.
      FIREWORKS PLANT. All buildings and other structures in which the
manufacturing of fireworks, or the storage or sale of manufactured fireworks by
a manufacturer, takes place.
      FOUNTAIN DEVICE. Means a specific type of 1.4G firework that meets all of
the following criteria:
      (1)   It is nonaerial and nonreport producing.
      (2)   It is recognized and manufactured in accordance with sections 3.1.1
and 3.5 of APA standard 87-1 (2001 edition).
      (3)   It is a ground-based or hand- held sparkler with one or more tubes
containing a nonexplosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks
upon ignition, with or without additional effects that may include a colored
flame, audible crackling effect, audible whistle effect, or smoke.
      (4)   It contains not more than 75 grams of the nonexplosive pyrotechnic
mixture in any individual tube and not more than 500 grams or less for multiple
tubes.
      HIGHWAY. Any public street, road, alley, way, lane or other public
thoroughfare.
      LICENSED BUILDING. A building on the licensed premises of a licensed
manufacturer or wholesaler of fireworks that is approved for occupancy by the
building official having jurisdiction.
      LICENSED EXHIBITOR OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED EXHIBITOR. A person licensed
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.50 through 3743.55.
      LICENSED FOUNTAIN DEVICE RETAILER or LICENSED RETAILER. Means a person
licensed pursuant to R.C. § 3743.26.
      LICENSED MANUFACTURER OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED MANUFACTURER. A person
licensed pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.02 through 3743.08.
      LICENSED PREMISES. The real estate upon which a licensed manufacturer or
wholesaler of fireworks conducts business.
      LICENSED WHOLESALER OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED WHOLESALER. A person
licensed pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.15 through 3743.21.
      MANUFACTURING OF FIREWORKS. The making of fireworks from raw materials,
none of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, or the processing of
fireworks.
      NOVELTIES and TRICK NOISEMAKERS.
         (a)   Devices that produce a small report intended to surprise the
user, including but not limited to booby traps, cigarette loads, party poppers
and snappers;
         (b)   Snakes or glow worms;
         (c)   Smoke devices; and
         (d)   Trick matches.
      PARTY POPPER. A small plastic or paper item that contains not more than
16 milligrams of friction- sensitive explosive composition that is ignited by
pulling a string protruding from the item, and from which paper streamers are
expelled when the item is ignited.
      PROCESSING OF FIREWORKS. The making of fireworks from materials all or
part of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, but does not include
the mere packaging or repackaging of fireworks.
      RAILROAD. Any railway or railroad that carries freight or passengers for
hire, but does not include auxiliary tracks, spurs and sidings installed and
primarily used in serving a mine, quarry or plant.
      RETAIL SALE or SELL AT RETAIL. A sale of fireworks to a purchaser who
intends to use the fireworks and not to resell them.
      SMOKE DEVICE. A tube or sphere that contains pyrotechnic composition
that, upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the primary effect.
      SNAKE or GLOW WORM. A device that consists of a pressed pellet of
pyrotechnic composition that produces a large snake-like ash upon burning,
which ash expands in length as the pellet burns.
      SNAPPER. A small paper-wrapped item that contains a minute quantity of
explosive composition coated on small bits of sand and that, when dropped,
implodes.
      STORAGE LOCATION. A single parcel or contiguous parcels of real estate
approved by the Ohio Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. § 3743.04(I) or 3743.17(F)
that are separate from a licensed premises containing a retail showroom, and
which parcel or parcels a licensed manufacturer or wholesaler of fireworks may
use only for the distribution, possession and storage of fireworks in
accordance with this chapter.
      TRICK MATCH. A kitchen or book match that is coated with a small quantity
of explosive composition and that, upon ignition, produces a small report or a
shower of sparks.
      WHOLESALE SALE or SELL AT WHOLESALE. A sale of fireworks to a purchaser
who intends to resell the fireworks so purchased.
      WIRE SPARKLER. A sparkler consisting of a wire or stick coated with a
nonexplosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks upon ignition
and that contains no more than 100 grams of this mixture.
(ORC 3743.01)
   (B)   Manufacturing.
      (1)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall knowingly fail to
comply with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to Ohio R.C.
3743.05 or the requirements of Ohio R.C. 3743.06.
      (2)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall fail to maintain
complete inventory, wholesale sale and retail records as required by Ohio R.C.
3743.07, or to permit an inspection of these records or the premises of a
fireworks plant or the wholesaler pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.08.
      (3)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.08(B)(1)
within the specified period of time.
      (4)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.08(B)(2)
until the non-conformities are eliminated, corrected or otherwise remedied or
the 72-hour period specified in those divisions has expired, whichever occurs
first.
      (5)   No person shall smoke or shall carry a pipe, cigarette or cigar, or
a match, lighter, other flame- producing item, or open flame on, or shall carry
a concealed source of ignition into, the premises of a fireworks plant, except
as smoking is authorized in specified lunchrooms or restrooms by a manufacturer
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.06(C).
      (6)   No person shall have possession or control of, or be under the
influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer or controlled substance while on
the premises of a fireworks plant.
      (7)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall negligently fail to
furnish a safety pamphlet to a purchaser of 1.4G fireworks as required by R.C.
§ 3743.47(A).
      (8)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall negligently fail to
have safety glasses available for sale as required by R.C. § 3743.47(B).
(ORC 3743.60(E) - (L))
   (C)   Wholesaling.
      (1)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall knowingly fail to comply
with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.18
or the requirements of Ohio R.C. 3743.19.
      (2)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall fail to maintain complete
inventory, wholesale sale and retail records as required by Ohio R.C. 3743.20,
or to permit an inspection of these records or the premises of a fireworks
plant or the wholesaler pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.21.
      (3)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.21(B)(1)
within the specified period of time.
      (4)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.21(B)(2)
until the non-conformities are eliminated, corrected or otherwise remedied or
the 72-hour period specified in those divisions has expired, whichever occurs
first.
      (5)   No person shall smoke or shall carry a pipe, cigarette or cigar, or
a match, lighter, other flame- producing item, or open flame on, or shall carry
a concealed source of ignition into, the premises of a wholesaler of fireworks,
except as smoking is authorized in specified lunchrooms or restrooms by a
wholesaler pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.19(D).
      (6)   No person shall have possession or control of, or be under the
influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer or controlled substance while on
the premises of a wholesaler of fireworks.
(ORC 3743.61(E) - (J))
   (D)   Purchasing and transporting.
      (1)   No person who purchases fireworks in this municipality shall obtain
possession of the fireworks in this municipality unless the person complies
with R.C. §§ 3743.44 to 3743.46.
      (2)   Except for the purchase of 1.4G fireworks made under R.C. §
3743.45, no person who resides in another state and who purchases fireworks in
this state shall obtain possession of fireworks in this state other than from a
licensed manufacturer or wholesaler, or fail, when transporting 1.3G fireworks,
to transport them directly out of this state within 72 hours after the time of
their purchase.
      (3)   No person who purchases fireworks in this state under R.C. §
3743.45 shall give or sell to any other person in this municipality fireworks
that the person has acquired in this state.
(R.C. § 3743.63)
   (E)   Prohibited activities by exhibitors.
      (1)   An exhibitor of fireworks licensed under Ohio R.C. 3743.50 through
3743.55 who wishes to conduct a public fireworks exhibition shall apply for
approval to conduct the exhibition to the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer
and to the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the
designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
having jurisdiction over the premises.
      (2)   The approval required by division (E)(1) above shall be evidenced
by the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or
similar chief law enforcement officer, signing a permit for the exhibition. Any
exhibitor of fireworks who wishes to conduct a public fireworks exhibition may
obtain a copy of the form from the State Fire Marshal or, if available, from
the Fire Chief, a fire prevention officer, the Police Chief or other similar
chief law enforcement officer or a designee of the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer.
      (3)   Before a permit is signed and issued to a licensed exhibitor of
fireworks, the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in consultation with the
Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of
the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, shall inspect
the premises on which the exhibition will take place and shall determine that,
in fact, the applicant for the permit is a licensed exhibitor of fireworks.
Each applicant shall show his or her license as an exhibitor of fireworks to
the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer.
      (4)   The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and the Police Chief or
other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police
Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, shall give approval to
conduct a public fireworks exhibition only if satisfied, based on the
inspection, that the premises on which the exhibition will be conducted allow
the exhibitor to comply with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.53(B) and (E) and that the applicant is, in fact, a
licensed exhibitor of fireworks. The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in
consultation with the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement
officer or with the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, may inspect the premises immediately prior to the
exhibition to determine if the exhibitor has complied with the rules, and may
revoke a permit for non-compliance with the rules.
      (5)   If the Council has prescribed a fee for the issuance of a permit
for a public fireworks exhibition, the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer
and Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or their
designee, shall not issue a permit until the exhibitor pays the requisite fee.
      (6)   Each exhibitor shall provide an indemnity bond in the amount of at
least one million dollars with surety satisfactory to the Fire Chief or fire
prevention officer and to the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief
law enforcement officer, conditioned for the payment of all final judgments
that may be rendered against the exhibitor on account of injury, death or loss
to person or property emanating from the fireworks exhibitor, or proof of
insurance coverage of at least $1,000,000 for liability arising from injury,
death or loss of persons or property emanating from the fireworks exhibition.
The Council may require the exhibitor to provide an indemnity bond or proof of
insurance coverage in amounts greater than those required by this division (E)
(6). The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or their designee, shall not issue a
permit until the exhibitor provides the bond or proof of the insurance coverage
required by this division (E)(6) or by the Council.
      (7)   Each permit for a fireworks exhibition issued by the Fire Chief or
fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief
law enforcement officer, shall contain a distinct number, designate the
municipality, and identify the certified fire safety inspector, Fire Chief or
fire prevention officer who will be present before, during and after the
exhibition, where appropriate. A copy of each permit issued shall be forwarded
by the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or designee of the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, issuing it to the State Fire Marshal. A
permit is not transferable or assignable.
      (8)   The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or designee of the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, shall keep a record of issued permits
for fireworks exhibitions. In this list, the Fire Chief, fire prevention
officer, Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or
designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
shall list the name of the exhibitor, his or her license number, the premises
on which the exhibition will be conducted, the date and time of the exhibition
and the number and political subdivision designation of the permit issued to
the exhibitor for the exhibition.
      (9)   The Council shall require that a certified fire safety inspector,
Fire Chief or fire prevention officer be present before, during and after the
exhibition, and shall require the certified fire safety inspector, Fire Chief
or fire prevention officer to inspect the premises where the exhibition is to
take place and determine whether the exhibition is in compliance with this
section and Ohio R.C. Ch. 3743.
(ORC 3743.54)
      (10)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall fail to comply with the
applicable requirements of the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 3743.53(B) and (E) or to comply with Ohio R.C. 3743.53(C) and (D).
      (11)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall conduct a fireworks
exhibition unless a permit has been secured for the exhibition pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 3743.54 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or if a permit
so secured is revoked by a Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in
consultation with a Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement
officer, or with a designee of a Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, pursuant to those sections.
      (12)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall acquire fireworks for use
at a fireworks exhibition other than in accordance with Ohio R.C. 3743.54 and
3743.55, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (13)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks or other person associated with
the conduct of a fireworks exhibition shall have possession or control of, or
be under the influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer or controlled
substance while on the premises on which the exhibition is being conducted.
      (14)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall permit an employee to
assist the licensed exhibitor in conducting fireworks exhibitions unless the
employee is registered with the State Fire Marshal under Ohio R.C. 3743.56.
(ORC 3743.64)
   (F)   Possession, sale, discharge and advertising; falsification.
      (1)   No person shall possess fireworks in this municipality or shall
possess for sale or sell fireworks in this municipality, except a licensed
manufacturer of fireworks as authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.02 to 3743.08, a
licensed wholesaler of fireworks as authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.15 to 3743.21, a
shipping permit holder as authorized by R.C. § 3743.40, a licensed fountain
device retailer as authorized by R.C. § 3743.27, a person as authorized by R.C.
§§ 3743.44 and 3743.45, or a licensed exhibitor of fireworks as authorized by
R.C. §§ 3743.50 to 3743.55, or as authorized by any municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to any of these statutes, and except as provided in
R.C. § 3743.80 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (F)(8), R.C. §§ 3743.45 and 3743.80
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and except for licensed
exhibitors of fireworks authorized to conduct a fireworks exhibition pursuant
to R.C. §§ 3743.50 through 3743.55 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, no person shall discharge, ignite, or explode any fireworks in this
municipality.
      (3)   No person shall use in a theater or public hall what is technically
known as fireworks showers, or a mixture containing potassium chlorate and
sulphur.
      (4)   No person shall sell fireworks of any kind to a person under 18
years of age. No person under 18 years of age shall enter a fireworks sales
showroom unless that person is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or other
responsible adult. No person under 18 years of age shall touch or possess
fireworks on a licensed premises without the consent of the licensee. A
licensee may eject any person from a licensed premises that is in any way
disruptive to the safe operation of the premises.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. 3743.44, no person, other
than a licensed manufacturer, licensed wholesaler, licensed exhibitor or
shipping permit holder shall possess 1.3G fireworks in the municipality.
      (6)   No person shall negligently discharge, ignite, or explode fireworks
while in possession or control of, or under the influence of, any intoxicating
liquor, beer, or controlled substance.
      (7)   No person shall negligently discharge, ignite, or explode fireworks
on the property of another person without that person’s permission to use
fireworks on that property
(ORC 3743.65(A) - (E), (G), (H))
      (8)   Purchase, use, and local regulation of consumer-grade fireworks.
         A.   Any person who intends to obtain possession in this state of 1.4G
fireworks purchased in this state shall obtain possession of the 1.4G fireworks
only from a licensed retailer, licensed manufacturer, or licensed wholesaler
and shall be subject to this division (F)(8).
         B.   Any person authorized under this division (F)(8) to possess 1.4G
fireworks in this state may discharge, ignite, or explode those fireworks on
private property, with authorization from the property owner, on the following
days each year:
            1.   January 1st;
            2.   Chinese new year’s day;
            3.   May 5th;
            4.   The last Monday in May, and the Saturday and Sunday
immediately preceding that day;
            5.   June 19th;
            6.   July 3rd, 4th, and 5th;
            7.   The first Friday, Saturday, and Sunday before and after July
4th;
            8.   The first Monday of September, and the Saturday and Sunday
immediately preceding that day;
            9.   Diwali;
            10.   December 31st.
         C.   Fireworks discharged, ignited, or exploded pursuant to this
division (F)(8) shall not be considered a public exhibition.
         D.   The municipality may do either of the following:
            (a)   Restrict the dates and times a person may discharge, ignite,
or explode fireworks purchased pursuant to this division (F)(8).
            (b)   Ban the discharge, ignition, or explosion of fireworks
purchased pursuant to this division (F)(8).
         E.   This division (F)(8) does not limit the enforcement of any
ordinance, resolution, or statute that regulates noise, disturbance of the
peace, or disorderly conduct.
(R.C. § 3743.45)
   (G)   Transporting and shipping.
      (1)   No person shall transport fireworks in the municipality except in
accordance with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 3743.58.
      (2)   As used in this division, “fireworks” includes only 1.3G and 1.4G
fireworks. No person shall ship fireworks into the municipality by mail, parcel
post, or common carrier unless the person possesses a valid shipping permit
issued under Ohio R.C. 3743.40, and the fireworks are shipped directly to the
holder of a license issued under Ohio R.C. 3743.03, 3743.16 or 3743.51.
      (3)   No person shall ship fireworks within the municipality by mail,
parcel post or common carrier unless the fireworks are shipped directly to the
holder of a license issued under Ohio R.C. 3743.01, 3743.16 or 3743.51.
(ORC 3743.66)
   (H)   Exceptions. This section does not prohibit or apply to the following:
      (1)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
in emergency situations of pyrotechnic signaling devices and distress signals
for marine, aviation or highway use;
      (2)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of fusees, torpedoes or other signals necessary for the safe operation of
railroads;
      (3)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of blank cartridges in connection with theaters or shows, or in connection with
athletics as signals for ceremonial purposes;
      (4)   The manufacture for, the transportation, storage, possession or use
by, or the sale to the armed forces of the United States and the militia of
this state, as recognized by the Adjutant General of Ohio, of pyrotechnic
devices;
      (5)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or plastic
caps containing 0.25 grains or less of explosive material are used; provided
that, they are constructed so that a hand cannot come into contact with a cap
when it is in place for explosion, or apply to the manufacture, sale,
possession, transportation, storage or use of those caps;
      (6)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of novelties and trick noisemakers, auto burglar alarms or model rockets and
model rocket motors designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling
recoverable aero models;
      (7)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of wire sparklers; and
      (8)   The conduct of radio-controlled special effect exhibitions that use
an explosive black powder charge of not more than one-quarter pound per charge,
and that are not connected in any manner to propellant charges; provided, that
the exhibition complies with all of the following:
         (a)   No explosive aerial display is conducted in the exhibition;
         (b)   The exhibition is separated from spectators by not less than 200
feet; and
         (c)   The person conducting the exhibition complies with regulations
of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms of the United States Department
of the Treasury and the United States Department of Transportation with respect
to the storage and transport of the explosive black powder used in the
exhibition.
(ORC 3743.80)
   (I)   Forfeiture and disposal. Fireworks manufactured, sold, possessed,
transported or used in violation of this section shall be forfeited by the
offender. The Fire Marshal's office or certified fire safety inspector's office
shall dispose of seized fireworks pursuant to the procedures specified in Ohio
R.C. 2981.11 to 2981.13 for the disposal of forfeited property by law
enforcement agencies, and the Fire Marshal or that office is not liable for
claims for the loss of or damages to the seized fireworks.
(ORC 3743.68(B))
   (J)   Penalty.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (J)(2) or (J)(3) below,
whoever violates any provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of Ohio R.C. 3743.60(I) or Ohio R.C. 3743.61(I), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a violation of divisions (B)(5)
or (C)(5) above is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (E)(10) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to any other penalties that may be
imposed on a licensed exhibitor of fireworks under this division and unless the
third sentence of this division applies, the person's license as an exhibitor
of fireworks or as an assistant exhibitor of fireworks shall be suspended. If
the violation of division (E)(10) of this section results in serious physical
harm to persons or serious physical harm to property, the person's license as
an exhibitor of fireworks or as an assistant exhibitor of fireworks shall be
revoked.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (F)(6) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, a
person may be convicted at the same trial or proceeding of a violation of
division (F)(6) and a violation of R.C. § 2917.11(B), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that constitutes the basis of the charge of the
violation of division (F)(6).
      (5)   Whoever violates division (B)(7), (B)(8), (C)(7), or (C)(8) is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (F)(7) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3743.99(C), (D), (F) - (H))
§ 672.13 FIREWORKS DISPLAY PERMITS. (REPEALED)
Editor's note:
   Section 672.13 was repealed as part of the 1988 updating and revision of
this code of ordinances because substantially equivalent state law (Ohio R.C.
3743.33) was repealed by Am. S.B. No. 61, effective 5-30-1986, 12-1-1986 and 1-
1-1987. See §
672.12 of this chapter.
§ 672.14 SLINGSHOT, BOW AND ARROW AND AIR RIFLE.
   (A)   No person shall purposely or recklessly throw, shoot, cast or sling by
hand, or by means of a slingshot, bow or an air gun, or otherwise, any stone,
arrow, pellet or other missile.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 672.15 DISCHARGING FIREARMS.
   (A)   No person shall discharge a loaded firearm within the corporate limits
of the city.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawfully discharging a
firearm, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to those discharging firearms for rodent,
animal or pest control and for recreational purposes, including, but not
limited to, turkey and skeet shooting, on a parcel of land consisting of ten
acres or more annexed to the city by Ord. 20-1997, passed 1-10-1997, which
annexed 499.5366 acres from Franklin Township, approved by Summit County
Council on or about 11-18-1996; provided that, such discharge occurs more than
500 feet from a residence or occupied building or structure.
(Ord. 161-1997, passed 11-24-1997)
§ 672.16 REMOVAL OF SERIAL NUMBERS.
   (A)   No person shall receive, possess, sell, lease or otherwise transfer
any firearm from which the manufacturer's serial numbers or letters have been
removed.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(Ord. 120-1988, passed 6-13-1988)
§ 672.17 POSSESSING CRIMINAL TOOLS.
   (A)   No person shall possess or have under his or her control any
substance, device, instrument or article, with purpose to use it criminally.
   (B)   Each of the following constitutes prima facie evidence of criminal
purpose:
      (1)   Possession or control of any dangerous ordnance, or the materials
or parts for making a dangerous ordnance, in the absence of circumstances
indicating the dangerous ordnance, materials or parts are intended for a
legitimate use;
      (2)   Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument or
article designed or specially adapted for criminal use; and
      (3)   Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument or
article commonly used for criminal purposes, under circumstances indicating the
item is intended for criminal use.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing criminal tools.
Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), possessing criminal tools is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the circumstances indicate that the
substance, device, instrument or article involved in the offense was intended
for use in the commission of a felony, possessing criminal tools is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2923.24)
§ 672.18 POSSESSION OF AN OBJECT INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM A FIREARM IN A SCHOOL
SAFETY ZONE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly possess an object in a school safety zone if
both of the following apply:
      (1)   The object is indistinguishable from a firearm, whether or not the
object is capable of being fired; and
      (2)   The person indicates that the person possesses the object and that
it is a firearm, or the person knowingly displays or brandishes the object and
indicates that it is a firearm.
   (B)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States who is authorized to carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance
and is acting within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s duties;
         (b)   A law enforcement officer who is authorized to carry deadly
weapons or dangerous ordnance;
         (c)   A security officer employed by a board of education or governing
body of a school during the time that the security officer is on duty pursuant
to that contract of employment;
         (d)   1.   Any person not described in divisions (B)(1)(a) to (B)(1)
(c) of this section who has written authorization from the board of education
or governing body of a school to convey deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance
into a school safety zone or to possess a deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance
in a school safety zone and who conveys or possesses the deadly weapon or
dangerous ordnance in accordance with that authorization, provided both of the
following apply:
               A.   Either the person has successfully completed the
curriculum, instruction, and training established under R.C. § 5502.703, or the
person has received a certificate of having satisfactorily completed an
approved basic peace officer training program or is a law enforcement officer;
               B.   The board or governing body has notified the public, by
whatever means the affected school regularly communicates with the public, that
the board or governing body has authorized one or more persons to go armed
within a school operated by the board or governing authority.
            2.   A district board or school governing body that authorizes a
person under division (B)(1)(d) of this section shall require that person to
submit to an annual criminal records check conducted in the same manner as R.C.
§ 3319.39 or R.C. § 3319.391.
         (e)   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance, and who is subject to and in
compliance with the requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless the appointing
authority of the person has expressly specified that the exemption provided in
division (B)(1)(e) of this section does not apply to the person.
      (2)   This section does not apply to premises upon which home schooling
is conducted. This section also does not apply to a school administrator,
teacher or employee who possesses an object that is indistinguishable from a
firearm for legitimate school purposes during the course of employment, a
student who uses an object that is indistinguishable from a firearm under the
direction of a school administrator, teacher or employee or any other person
who, with the express prior approval of a school administrator, possesses an
object that is indistinguishable from a firearm for a legitimate purpose,
including the use of the object in a ceremonial activity, a play, re-enactment
or other dramatic presentation, school safety training or a ROTC activity or
another similar use of the object.
      (3)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or attempts to
convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety zone if, at
the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance or possession of the handgun,
all of the following apply:
         (a)   The person does not enter into a school building or onto school
premises and is not at a school activity;
         (b)   The person has been issued a concealed handgun license that is
valid at the time of the conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         (c)   The person is in the school safety zone in accordance with 18
U.S.C. § 922(q)(2)(B); and
         (d)   The person is not knowingly in a place described in Ohio R.C.
2923.126(B)(1) or (B)(3) to (B)(8).
      (4)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or attempts to
convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety zone if at
the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance or possession of the handgun
all of the following apply:
         (a)   The person has been issued a concealed handgun license that is
valid at the time of the conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         (b)   The person leaves the handgun in a motor vehicle;
         (c)   The handgun does not leave the motor vehicle; and
         (d)   If the person exits the motor vehicle, the person locks the
motor vehicle.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal possession of an
object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone. Except as
otherwise provided in this division (C), illegal possession of an object
indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of this section, illegal possession of an object indistinguishable from a
firearm in a school safety zone is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (D)   (1)   In addition to any other penalty imposed upon a person who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section, and subject to
division (D)(2) of this section, if the offender has not attained 19 years of
age, regardless of whether the offender is attending or is enrolled in a school
operated by a board of education or for which the Director of Education and
Workforce prescribes minimum standards under Ohio R.C. 3301.07, the court shall
impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender's probationary
driver's license, restricted license, driver's license, commercial driver's
license, temporary instruction permit or probationary commercial driver's
license that then is in effect from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)
(4) and shall deny the offender the issuance of any permit or license of that
type during the period of the suspension. If the offender is not a resident of
this state, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the nonresident
operating privilege of the offender from the range specified in Ohio R.C.
4510.02(A)(4).
      (2)   If the offender shows good cause why the court should not suspend
or revoke one of the types of licenses, permits or privileges specified in
division (D)(1) above or deny the issuance of one of the temporary instruction
permits specified in division (D)(1) above, the court in its discretion may
choose not to impose the suspension, revocation or denial required in division
(D)(1) above, but the court, in its discretion, instead may require the
offender to perform community service for a number of hours determined by the
court.
   (E)   As used in this section, OBJECT THAT IS INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM A
FIREARM means an object made, constructed or altered so that, to a reasonable
person without specialized training in firearms, the object appears to be a
firearm.
(ORC 2923.122(C) - (G))
Statutory reference:
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance in a school
safety zone, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2923.122(A), (B)
§ 672.19 CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSES: POSSESSION OF A REVOKED OR SUSPENDED
LICENSE; ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS; POSTING OF SIGNS PROHIBITING POSSESSION.
   (A)   Possession of a revoked or suspended concealed handgun license.
      (1)   No person, except in the performance of official duties, shall
possess a concealed handgun license that was issued and that has been revoked
or suspended.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of possessing a
revoked or suspended concealed handgun license, a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(ORC 2923.1211(B), (C))
   (B)   Additional restrictions. Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2923.126:
      (1)   A concealed handgun license that is issued under R.C. § 2923.125
shall expire five years after the date of issuance. A licensee who has been
issued a license under that section shall be granted a grace period of 30 days
after the licensee’s license expires during which the licensee’s license
remains valid. Except as provided in divisions (B)(2) and (B)(3) of this
section, a licensee who has been issued a concealed handgun license under R.C.
§ 2923.125 or 2923.1213 may carry a concealed handgun anywhere in this state if
the license is valid when the licensee is in actual possession of a concealed
handgun. The licensee shall give notice of any change in the licensee’s
residence address to the sheriff who issued the license within 45 days after
that change.
      (2)   A valid concealed handgun license does not authorize the licensee
to carry a concealed handgun in any manner prohibited under Ohio R.C. 2923.12
(B) or in any manner prohibited under Ohio R.C. 2923.16. A valid license does
not authorize the licensee to carry a concealed handgun into any of the
following places:
         (a)   A police station, Sheriff’s office or state highway patrol
station, premises controlled by the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation; a state correctional institution, jail, workhouse or other
detention facility; any area of an airport passenger terminal that is beyond a
passenger or property screening checkpoint or to which access is restricted
through security measures by the airport authority or a public agency; or an
institution that is maintained, operated, managed and governed pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 5119.14(A) or Ohio R.C. 5123.03(A)(1);
         (b)   A school safety zone if the licensee’s carrying the concealed
handgun is in violation of Ohio R.C. 2923.122;
         (c)   A courthouse or another building or structure in which a
courtroom is located, in violation of Ohio R.C. 2923.123;
         (d)   Any premises or open air arena for which a D permit has been
issued under Ohio R.C. Ch. 4303 if the licensee’s carrying the concealed
handgun is in violation of Ohio R.C. 2923.121;
         (e)   Any premises owned or leased by any public or private college,
university or other institution of higher education, unless the handgun is in a
locked motor vehicle or the licensee is in the immediate process of placing the
handgun in a locked motor vehicle or unless the licensee is carrying the
concealed handgun pursuant to a written policy, rule or other authorization
that is adopted by the institution’s board of trustees or other governing body
and that authorizes specific individuals or classes of individuals to carry a
concealed handgun on the premises;
         (f)   Any church, synagogue, mosque or other place of worship, unless
the church, synagogue, mosque or other place of worship posts or permits
otherwise;
         (g)   Any building that is a government facility of this state or a
political subdivision of the state and that is not a building that is used
primarily as a shelter, restroom, parking facility for motor vehicles or rest
facility and is not a courthouse or other building or structure in which a
courtroom is located that is subject to division (b)(2)(c) above, unless the
governing body with authority over the building has enacted a statute,
ordinance or policy that permits a licensee to carry a concealed handgun into
the building; and
         (h)   A place in which federal law prohibits the carrying of handguns.
      (3)   (a)   Nothing in this division (B) shall negate or restrict a rule,
policy or practice of a private employer that is not a private college,
university or other institution of higher education concerning or prohibiting
the presence of firearms on the private employer's premises or property,
including motor vehicles owned by the private employer. Nothing in this
division (B) shall require a private employer of that nature to adopt a rule,
policy or practice concerning or prohibiting the presence of firearms on the
private employer's premises or property, including motor vehicles owned by the
private employer.
         (b)   1.   A private employer shall be immune from liability in a
civil action for any injury, death or loss to person or property that allegedly
was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto the premises or
property of the private employer, including motor vehicles owned by the private
employer, unless the private employer acted with malicious purpose. A private
employer is immune from liability in a civil action for any injury, death or
loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by or related to the
private employer's decision to permit a licensee to bring, or prohibit a
licensee from bringing, a handgun onto the premises or property of the private
employer.
            2.   A political subdivision shall be immune from liability in a
civil action, to the extent and in the manner provided in Ohio R.C. Ch. 2744,
for any injury, death or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused
by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto any premises or property
owned, leased or otherwise under the control of the political subdivision. As
used in this division (B)(3)(b)2., POLITICAL SUBDIVISION has the same meaning
as in Ohio R.C. 2744.01.
            3.   An institution of higher education shall be immune from
liability in a civil action for any injury, death or loss to person or property
that allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto
the premises of the institution, including motor vehicles owned by the
institution, unless the institution acted with malicious purpose. An
institution of higher education is immune from liability in a civil action for
any injury, death or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by or
related to the institution’s decision to permit a licensee or class of
licensees to bring a handgun onto the premises of the institution.
            4.   A nonprofit corporation shall be immune from liability in a
civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that
allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto the
premises of the nonprofit corporation, including any motor vehicle owned by the
nonprofit corporation, or to any event organized by the nonprofit corporation,
unless the nonprofit corporation acted with malicious purpose. A nonprofit
corporation is immune from liability in a civil action for any injury, death,
or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by or related to the
nonprofit corporation's decision to permit a licensee to bring a handgun onto
the premises of the nonprofit corporation or to any event organized by the
nonprofit corporation.
         (c)   1.   a.   Except as provided in division (B)(3)(c)2. below, the
owner or person in control of private land or premises, and a private person or
entity leasing land or premises owned by the state, the United States, or a
political subdivision of the state or the United States, may post a sign in a
conspicuous location on that land or on those premises prohibiting persons from
carrying firearms or concealed firearms on or onto that land or those premises.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, a person who knowingly violates
a posted prohibition of that nature is guilty of criminal trespass in violation
of Ohio R.C. 2911.21(A)(4) and is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If a person knowingly violates a posted prohibition of that nature and the
posted land or premises primarily was a parking lot or other parking facility,
the person is not guilty of criminal trespass under Ohio R.C. 2911.21 or under
any other criminal law of the state or criminal law, ordinance or resolution of
a political subdivision of the state, and instead is subject only to a civil
cause of action for trespass based on the violation.
               b.   If a person knowingly violates a posted prohibition of the
nature described in this division and the posted land or premises is a child
care center, type A family child care home, or type B family child care home,
unless the person is a licensee who resides in a type A family child care home
or type B family child care home, the person is guilty of aggravated trespass
in violation of Ohio R.C. 2911.211. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
person previously has been convicted of a violation of this division or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any offense of
violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for
which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is
dangerous ordnance, the offender is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
            2.   A landlord may not prohibit or restrict a tenant who is a
licensee and who on or after 9-9-2008 enters into a rental agreement with the
landlord for the use of residential premises, and the tenant’s guest while the
tenant is present, from lawfully carrying or possessing a handgun on those
residential premises.
            3.   As used in this division (B)(3)(c):
               LANDLORD, TENANT and RENTAL AGREEMENT. Have the same meanings as
in Ohio R.C. 5321.01.
               RESIDENTIAL PREMISES. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
5321.01, except RESIDENTIAL PREMISES does not include a dwelling unit that is
owned or operated by a college or university.
      (4)   A person who holds a valid concealed handgun license issued by
another state that is recognized by the Attorney General pursuant to a
reciprocity agreement entered into pursuant to R.C. § 109.69 or a person who
holds a valid concealed handgun license under the circumstances described in
R.C. § 109.69(B) has the same right to carry a concealed handgun in this state
as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license under R.C. § 2923.125
and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to a person who has been
issued a license under that section that is valid at the time in question.
      (5)   (a)   A peace officer has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in the state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license
under Ohio R.C. 2923.125. For purposes of reciprocity with other States, a
peace officer shall be considered to be a licensee in the state.
         (b)   An active duty member of the armed forces of the United States
who is carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of
successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training
requirements described in Ohio R.C. 2923.125(G)(1) has the same right to carry
a concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed
handgun license under Ohio R.C. 2923.125 and is subject to the same
restrictions as specified in this division (B).
         (c)   A tactical medical professional who is qualified to carry
firearms while on duty under Ohio R.C. 109.771 has the same right to carry a
concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun
license under Ohio R.C. 2923.125.
      (6)   (a)   A qualified retired peace officer who possesses a retired
peace officer identification card issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(b) of this
section and a valid firearms requalification certification issued pursuant to
division (B)(6)(c) of this section has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license
under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to a
person who has been issued a license issued under that section that is valid at
the time in question. For purposes of reciprocity with other states, a
qualified retired peace officer who possesses a retired peace officer
identification card issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(b) of this section and a
valid firearms requalification certification issued pursuant to division (B)(6)
(c) of this section shall be considered to be a licensee in this state.
         (b)   1.   Each public agency of the state or of a political
subdivision of the state that is served by one or more peace officers shall
issue a retired peace officer identification card to any person who retired
from service as a peace officer with that agency, if the issuance is in
accordance with the agency’s policies and procedures and if the person, with
respect to the person’s service with that agency, satisfies all of the
following:
               a.   The person retired in good standing from service as a peace
officer with the public agency, and the retirement was not for reasons of
mental instability;
               b.   Before retiring from service as a peace officer with that
agency, the person was authorized to engage in or supervise the prevention,
detection, investigation or prosecution of, or the incarceration of any person
for, any violation of law and the person had statutory powers of arrest;
               c.   At the time of the person’s retirement as a peace officer
with that agency, the person was trained and qualified to carry firearms in the
performance of the peace officer’s duties; and
               d.   Before retiring from service as a peace officer with that
agency, the person was regularly employed as a peace officer for an aggregate
of 15 years or more or, in the alternative, the person retired from service as
a peace officer with that agency, after completing any applicable probationary
period of that service, due to a service-connected disability, as determined by
the agency.
            2.   A retired peace officer identification card issued to a person
under division (B)(6)(b)1. above shall identify the person by name, contain a
photograph of the person, identify the public agency of the state or of the
political subdivision of the state from which the person retired as a peace
officer and that is issuing the identification card, and specify that the
person retired in good standing from service as a peace officer with the
issuing public agency and satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (B)(6)
(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. above. In addition to the required content specified
in this division (B)(6)(b)2., a retired peace officer identification card
issued to a person under division (B)(6)(b)1. above may include the firearms
requalification certification described in division (B)(6)(c) below, and if the
identification card includes that certification, the identification card shall
serve as the firearms requalification certification for the retired peace
officer. If the issuing public agency issues credentials to active law
enforcement officers who serve the agency, the agency may comply with division
(B)(6)(b)1. above by issuing the same credentials to persons who retired from
service as a peace officer with the agency and who satisfy the criteria set
forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. above; provided that, the
credentials so issued to retired peace officers are stamped with the word
“RETIRED”.
            3.   A public agency of the state or of a political subdivision of
the state may charge persons who retired from service as a peace officer with
the agency a reasonable fee for issuing to the person a retired peace officer
identification card pursuant to division (B)(6)(b)1. above.
         (c)   1.   If a person retired from service as a peace officer with a
public agency of the state or of a political subdivision of the state and the
person satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)
(b)1.d. above, the public agency may provide the retired peace officer with the
opportunity to attend a firearms requalification program that is approved for
purposes of firearms requalification required under Ohio R.C. 109.801. The
retired peace officer may be required to pay the cost of the course.
            2.   If a retired peace officer who satisfies the criteria set
forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. above attends a firearms
requalification program that is approved for purposes of firearms
requalification required under Ohio R.C. 109.801, the retired peace officer’s
successful completion of the firearms requalification program requalifies the
retired peace officer for purposes of this division (B)(6) for five years from
the date on which the program was successfully completed, and the
requalification is valid during that five-year period. If a retired peace
officer who satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)
(6)(b)1.d. above satisfactorily completes such a firearms requalification
program, the retired peace officer shall be issued a firearms requalification
certification that identifies the retired peace officer by name, identifies the
entity that taught the program, specifies that the retired peace officer
successfully completed the program, specifies the date on which the course was
successfully completed, and specifies that the requalification is valid for
five years from that date of successful completion. The firearms
requalification certification for a retired peace officer may be included in
the retired peace officer identification card issued to the retired peace
officer under division (B)(6)(b) above.
            3.   A retired peace officer who attends a firearms requalification
program that is approved for purposes of firearms requalification required
under Ohio R.C. 109.801 may be required to pay the cost of the program.
      (7)   As used in division (B)(6) above:
         GOVERNING BODY. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 154.01.
         GOVERNMENT FACILITY OF THIS STATE or A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OF THIS
STATE. Any of the following:
            1.   A building or part of a building that is owned or leased by
the government of the state or a political subdivision of the state and where
employees of the government of the state or the political subdivision regularly
are present for the purpose of performing their official duties as employees of
the State or political subdivision; and
            2.   The office of a deputy registrar serving pursuant to Ohio R.C.
Ch. 4503 that is used to perform deputy registrar functions.
         NONPROFIT CORPORATION. Means any private organization that is exempt
from federal income taxation pursuant to subsection 501(a) and described in
subsection 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         QUALIFIED RETIRED PEACE OFFICER. A person who satisfies all of the
following:
            1.   The person satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (B)
(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. above;
            2.   The person is not under the influence of alcohol or another
intoxicating or hallucinatory drug or substance; and
            3.   The person is not prohibited by federal law from receiving
firearms.
         RETIRED PEACE OFFICER IDENTIFICATION CARD. An identification card that
is issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(b) above to a person who is a retired
peace officer.
         TACTICAL MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL. Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
109.71.
(ORC 2923.126)
   (C)   Posting of signs prohibiting possession. Pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2923.1212:
      (1)   The following persons, boards and entities, or designees, shall
post in the following locations a sign that contains a statement in
substantially the following form: “Unless otherwise authorized by law, pursuant
to the Ohio Revised Code, no person shall knowingly possess, have under the
person's control, convey or attempt to convey a deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance onto these premises.”
         (a)   The Director of Public Safety or the person or board charged
with the erection, maintenance, or repair of police stations, municipal jails
and the municipal courthouse and courtrooms in a conspicuous location at all
police stations, municipal jails and municipal courthouses and courtrooms;
         (b)   The Sheriff or Sheriff's designee who has charge of the
Sheriff's office in a conspicuous location in that office;
         (c)   The Superintendent of the State Highway Patrol or the
Superintendent's designee in a conspicuous location at all state highway patrol
stations;
         (d)   Each Sheriff, Chief of Police or person in charge of every
county, multi-county, municipal, municipal-county or multi-county/municipal
jail or workhouse, community-based correctional facility, halfway house,
alternative residential facility, or other local or state correctional
institution or detention facility within the state, or that person's designee,
in a conspicuous location at that facility under that person's charge;
         (e)   The board of trustees of a regional airport authority, chief
administrative officer of an airport facility or other person in charge of an
airport facility in a conspicuous location at each airport facility under that
person's control;
         (f)   The officer or officer's designee who has charge of a courthouse
or the building or structure in which a courtroom is located in a conspicuous
location in that building or structure;
         (g)   The Superintendent of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation or the Superintendent's designee in a conspicuous location in all
premises controlled by that Bureau;
         (h)   The owner, administrator or operator of a child day-care center,
a type A family day-care home, or a type B family day-care home;
         (i)   The officer of the state or of a political subdivision of the
state, or the officer’s designee, who has charge of a building that is a
government facility of the state or the political subdivision of the state, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 2923.126, and that is not a building that is used
primarily as a shelter, restroom, parking facility for motor vehicles, or rest
facility and is not a courthouse or other building or structure in which a
courtroom is located that is subject to Ohio R.C. 2923.126(B)(3).
      (2)   The following boards, bodies and persons, or designees, shall post
in the following locations a sign that contains a statement in substantially
the following form: “Unless otherwise authorized by law, pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2923.122, no person shall knowingly possess, have under the person's control,
convey, or attempt to convey a deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance into a
school safety zone.”
         (a)   A board of education of a city, local, exempted village, or
joint vocational school district or that board's designee in a conspicuous
location in each building and on each parcel of real property owned or
controlled by the board;
         (b)   A governing body of a school for which the State Board of
Education prescribes minimum standards under Ohio R.C. 3301.07 or that body's
designee in a conspicuous location in each building and on each parcel of real
property owned or controlled by the school;
         (c)   The principal or chief administrative officer of a nonpublic
school in a conspicuous location on property owned or controlled by that non-
public school.
(ORC 2923.1212)
§ 672.20 DEFACED FIREARMS.
   (A)   No person shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Change, alter, remove or obliterate the name of the manufacturer,
model, manufacturer’s serial number, or other mark of identification on a
firearm;
      (2)   Possess a firearm knowing or having reasonable cause to believe
that the name of the manufacturer, model, manufacturer’s serial number or other
mark of identification on the firearm has been changed, altered, removed or
obliterated.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) above is guilty of defacing
identification marks of a firearm. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, defacing identification marks of a firearm is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (A)(1) above, defacing identification marks
of a firearm is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) above is guilty of possessing a
defaced firearm. Except as otherwise provided in this division, possessing a
defaced firearm is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(A)(2) above, possessing a defaced firearm is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate State law.
   (C)   Division (A) above does not apply to any firearm on which no
manufacturer's serial number was inscribed at the time of its manufacture.
(ORC 2923.201)
CHAPTER 674: CRIMINAL ACTIVITY NUISANCES
Section
674.01   Nuisances enumerated.
674.02   Notice.
674.03   Board of nuisance abatement.
674.04   Costs of abatement.
674.05   Legal action by city.
Cross-reference:
   Nuisances ,see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3767
§ 674.01 NUISANCES ENUMERATED.
   The following activities occurring on residential property, and engaged in
by an owner, occupant or invitee of the owner or occupant of residential
property, are hereby declared to be public nuisances:
   (A)   Any animal violations under §§
618.01,
618.03 (killing or injuring animals),
618.05 (cruelty to animals), or
618.18 (dangerous animals) of the Codified Ordinances and similar statutes of
the State of Ohio;
   (B)   Any disorderly conduct, disturbance of the peace, noise or other
violation of
Ch. 648 (Peace Disturbances) and
Ch. 635 (Noise Abatement) of this code of ordinances Codified Ordinances and
similar statutes of the State of Ohio;
   (C)   Any drug abuse violation under
Ch. 624 of this code of ordinances and similar statutes of the State of Ohio
and any felony violation under Ohio R.C. Ch. 2925;
   (D)   Any gambling violation under
Ch. 630 of this code of ordinances and similar statutes of the State of Ohio;
   (E)   Any health, safety or sanitation violation under
Ch. 660 of this code of ordinances and similar statutes of the State of Ohio;
   (F)   Any violation under
Ch. 632 (Junk Cars) of this code of ordinances and similar statutes of the
State of Ohio;
   (G)   Any obstruction of official business violation under §
606.14 of this code of ordinances and similar statutes of the State of Ohio;
   (H)   Any alcohol violation under
Ch. 612 of this code of ordinances and similar statutes of the State of Ohio;
   (I)   Any sex offense under §§
666.04 (public indecency),
666.07 (procuring),
666.08 (soliciting), or
666.08 of this code of ordinances and any prostitution provisions of this code
of ordinances and similar statutes of the State of Ohio;
   (J)   Any offense against another person under §§
636.02 (assault),
636.03 (negligent assault),
636.04 (aggravated menacing),
636.05 (menacing),
634.01 (endangering children),
634.03 (contributing to the unruliness and delinquency of a child) or
636.14 (threatening or harassing telecommunications) of the Codified Ordinances
and similar statutes of the State of Ohio;
   (K)   Any offense against property under §§
642.10 (criminal damaging or endangering) or
642.11 (criminal mischief) of this code of ordinances and similar statutes of
the State of Ohio;
   (L)   Any littering or deposit of waste under §
660.05 of this code of ordinances and similar statute of the State of Ohio or
similar statutes of the State of Ohio;
   (M)   Any theft violation under §§
642.02 (theft) and
642.22 above (receiving stolen property) of this code of ordinances and similar
statutes of the State of Ohio including felonies;
   (N)   Any weapons, explosives, firearm or handgun violation under
Ch. 672 of this code of ordinances and similar statutes of the State of Ohio;
   (O)   Any fireworks violation under §
672.12 of this code of ordinances and similar statutes of the State of Ohio;
   (P)   Any open burning or recreational fires in violation of §
660.20 of this code of ordinances and similar statutes of the State of Ohio;
   (Q)   Any curfew violation under §
634.04 of this code of ordinances and similar statutes of the State of Ohio;
   (E)   Any arrest, incorrigible and unruly children and acts of violence not
specifically stated, excluding victims of domestic violence;
   (F)   Any activity engaged in by a person under 18 years of age which would
constitute a violation of an offense listed in this section if committed by an
adult.
(Ord. 189-2005, passed 12-19-2005; Ord. 84-2006, passed 5-22-2006; Ord. 133-
2016, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 674.02 NOTICE.
   (A)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee, upon finding that three or
more nuisance activities declared in § 674.01 of this code of ortdiances have
occurred at a dwelling within any 12 month period, shall cause a written notice
and order to be served on the owner of the property declaring that such
property is a nuisance property. The notice and order shall set forth the
nature of the nuisances, the costs to respond to and abate a similar future
nuisance, and state that the owner may avoid being charged the costs of
response and abatement by taking steps to prevent any further nuisance
activities as set forth in this chapter. The notice shall further state that if
a fourth or subsequent nuisance activity as declared in § 674.01 of this code
of ordinances occurs within the 12 months of the dates of the earliest of the
first three activities, the city may abate the nuisance by responding to the
activities using administrative and law enforcement actions and the costs of
such abatement shall be assessed on the nuisance property. Notice shall be
served on the owner personally or by certified mail or regular mail to the
person's residence, regular place of business or last known address. If the
certified or regular mail is returned undelivered, a copy shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in or on the person's residence, regular place of business,
last known address, orthe property affected. The underlying nuisance activity
need not have been charged, nor is there a need for a previous finding of
guilt, before there can be a finding that a nuisance activity had occurred.
   (B)   If, within 12 months after the first of the three nuisances referred
to in division (A) above has occurred, a fourth or successive nuisance activity
as declared in §
674.01 of this chapter, the city may abate the nuisance by responding to the
activities using administrative and law enforcement action and the costs of
such abatement shall be assessed on the nuisance property. The costs of such
response and abatement shall be calculated as set forth in §
674.04 of this chapter. Any further nuisance activity that occurs within 12
months of a nuisance activity for which the owner has been given notice of
assessment may be charged to the owner.
   (C)   The Chief of Police shall provide notice to the owner of the nuisance
property of the city's intent to assess the costs of response and abatement
against the owner's property. Such notice shall contain a description of the
nuisance activity that is the basis for the notice of intent to assess the
property, and the cost to abate. Notice shall be served as set forth in
division (A) above.
   (D)   The owner of a nuisance property who receives a notice the Chief of
Police or his or her designee pursuant to divisions (A) or (C) above may appeal
such notice by submitting a written request for reconsideration to the Chief of
Police within 30 days of the date of the notice. If the Chief of Police finds
that the facts presented do not support the declaration of a nuisance, the
Chief shall rescind the notice. Otherwise the Chief shall deny request and
refer the appeal for hearing by the Board of Nuisance Abatement. Any such
appeal shall not stay any actions by the city to abate any nuisance activity.
(Ord. 189-2005, passed 12-19-2905; Ord. 84-2006, passed 5-22-2006; Ord. 115-
2021, passed - - )
§ 674.03 BOARD OF NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Board of Nuisance Abatement which shall
consist of the Director of Public Safety or his or her designee, the
Chairperson of the Public Safety Committee of City Council or his or her
designee, and three members of the community at large, appointed by the Mayor
and subject to the approval of Council. The members of the community at large
shall serve for three years and until a successor is appointed and qualified.
Members shall serve without compensation.
   (B)   The Board of Nuisance Abatement shall hear any appeals referred from
the Chief of Police as set forth in §
674.02(D) above.
   (C)   In any such appeal, the city must show by a preponderance of the
evidence that each violation stated in the notice being appealed has occurred,
and that the declaration of the property as a nuisance property or of the
intent of the city to assess the property for abatement costs, whichever is
applicable, is justified. The city shall not have to show that there has been a
conviction for a criminal offense to show the existence of a nuisance. The city
shall be deemed to have failed to have met this standard if the owner
demonstrates by a preponderance of evidence that:
      (1)   He or she was not the owner at the time of any of the nuisance
activity that is the basis of the notice; or
      (2)   He or she had knowledge of the nuisance activity, but has promptly
and vigorously taken all actions necessary to abate each nuisance including,
without limitation, compliance with the requirements of Ohio R.C. 5321.17(C)
and 5321.04(A)(9);
      (3)   He or she had no knowledge of the nuisance activity and could not,
with reasonable care and diligence, have known of the nuisance activity; and
upon receipt of the notice of the declaration of the property as a nuisance
property, he or she promptly took all actions necessary to abate the nuisance
including, without limitation, compliance with the requirements of Ohio R.C.
5321.17(C) and 5321.04(A)(9); and/or
      (d)   Any appeal from a decision of the Board of Nuisance Abatement shall
be made pursuant to Ohio R.C. Ch. 2506.
(Ord. 189-2005, passed 12-19-2005; Ord. 84-2006, passed 5-22-2006)
§ 674.04 COSTS OF ABATEMENT.
   (a)   Costs of abatement shall be:
      (1)   Each nuisance after three nuisances and up to and including five
nuisances in a 12-month period of the earliest nuisances referred to in §
674.02(A), shall be assessed by the Chief of Police or his or her designee, a
service fee of $100;
      (2)   Each nuisance in a 12-month period of the earliest nuisance in
excess of five nuisances shall be assessed by the Chief of Police, or his or
her designee, a service fee of $200; and
      (3)   If the owner of the property has been duly notified of said
nuisances, but has failed to take corrective action, and/or has failed to
notify the Chief of Police of said corrective actions regarding the nuisances,
and/or has failed to make restitution for said nuisances, the matter will be
turned over to the office of the Law Director for consideration and/or
authorization of charges.
   (b)   All costs of abatement shall be reported to the Director of Finance,
who shall mail a statement of the amount thereof to the owner of the property.
If, after 30 days, such amount remains unpaid, the Director of Finance shall
certify the total amount of the expenses, the name of the owner of the land and
a sufficient description of the premises to the County Auditor, to be entered
on the tax duplicate, to be a lien on the land from the date of entry and to be
collected as other taxes and assessments and returned to the city pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 731.54.
(Ord. 189-2005, passed 12-19-2005; Ord. 84-2006, passed 5-22-2006; Ord. 115-
2021, passed - - )
§ 674.05 LEGAL ACTION BY CITY.
   The declaration of a nuisance property, an order to abate a nuisance, or the
assessment of costs by the city on a property, do not affect or limit the
city's right or authority to bring criminal prosecution or other legal action,
including nuisance abatement and assessment as provided by law.
(Ord. 189-2005, passed 12-19-2005; Ord. 84-2006, passed 5-22-2006)
CHAPTER 698: PENALTIES AND SENTENCING
Section
698.01   Definitions.
698.02   Penalties for misdemeanor.
698.03   Imposing sentence for misdemeanor.
698.04   Organizational penalties.
698.05   Multiple sentences.
698.06   Modification of sentence. (Repealed)
698.07   Suspension or revocation of driver's license.
Cross-reference:
   Burden and degree of proof, see Ohio R.C. 2901.05
   Classification of offenses, see GEN. OFF.
606.03
   Common law offenses abrogated, see GEN. OFF.
606.04
   Criminal law prosecution - see Ohio R.C. 2901.11
   Criteria for probation; conditions for probation, see Ohio R.C. 2951.02
   Culpable mental states, see GEN. OFF.
606.02
   Definition of “imprisoned”, see Ohio R.C. 1.05
   Definitions generally, see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Degree of offense; charge and verdict; prior conviction, see Ohio R.C.
2945.75
   General provisions; administration and enforcement, see GEN. OFF. Ch. 606
   Limitation on prosecutions, see GEN. OFF.
606.06
   Obstructing justice, see GEN. OFF.
606.15
   Organizational criminal liability, see GEN. OFF.
606.08
   Payment of costs and expenses on change of venue, see Ohio R.C. 2931.31
   Personal accountability for organizational conduct, see GEN. OFF.
606.09
   Procedure on change of venue, see Ohio R.C. 2931.29
   Requirements for criminal liability, see GEN. OFF.
606.07
   Rules of construction, see GEN. OFF.
606.05
   Satisfaction of fine; credit for time served, see Ohio R.C. 2947.14
   See section histories for similar state law
   Transfer of prisoner on change of venue, see Ohio R.C. 2931.30
   Venue, see Ohio R.C. 2901.12
§ 698.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DANGEROUS OFFENDER. A person who has committed an offense, whose history,
character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or she will be a
danger to others, and whose conduct has been characterized by a pattern of
repetitive, compulsive or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to the
consequences.
   REPEAT OFFENDER. A person who has a history of persistent criminal activity
and whose character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or she will
commit another offense. It is prima facie evidence that a person is a REPEAT
OFFENDER if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Having been convicted of one or more offenses of violence, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 2901.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence
for one or more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent offense of
violence;
      (2)   Having been convicted of one or more sexually oriented offenses, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 2950.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence
for one or more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent sexually
oriented offense;
      (3)   Having been convicted of one or more theft offenses, as defined in
Ohio R.C. 2913.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for one or
more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent theft offense;
      (4)   Having been convicted of one or more felony drug abuse offenses, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 2925.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence
for one or more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent felony drug
abuse offense;
      (5)   Having been convicted of two or more felonies, and having been
imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such offense, the person commits a
subsequent offense; and/or
      (6)   Having been convicted of three or more offenses of any type or
degree other than traffic offenses, alcoholic intoxication offenses or minor
misdemeanors, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such
offense, the person commits a subsequent offense.
(ORC 2935.36(E))
§ 698.02 PENALTIES FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   (A)   Considerations in misdemeanor sentencing.
      (1)   A court that sentences an offender for a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, or of any
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised Code, shall be guided
by the overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing. The overriding purposes
of misdemeanor sentencing are to protect the public from future crime by the
offender and others and to punish the offender. To achieve those purposes, the
sentencing court shall consider the impact of the offense upon the victim and
the need for changing the offender's behavior, rehabilitating the defender and
making restitution to the victim of the offense, the public or the victim and
the public.
      (2)   A sentence imposed for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation
of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a violation of a municipal ordinance
that is subject to division (B) below shall be reasonably calculated to achieve
the two overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing set forth in division (A)
(1) above, commensurate with and not demeaning to the seriousness of the
offender's conduct and its impact upon the victim, and consistent with
sentences imposed for similar offenses committed by similar offenders.
      (3)   A court that imposes a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor
or minor misdemeanor violation of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a
violation of a municipal ordinance that is subject to division (B)(1) below
shall not base the sentence upon the race, ethnic background, gender or
religion of the offender.
      (4)   Divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) below shall not apply to any offense
that is disposed of by a traffic violations bureau of any court pursuant to
Traffic Rule 13 and shall not apply to any violation of any provision of the
Ohio Revised Code that is a minor misdemeanor and that is disposed of without a
court appearance. Divisions (B)(1) to (B)(3) below do not affect any penalties
established by the municipality for a violation of its ordinances that are not
substantially equivalent to a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation of a
provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
(ORC 2929.21)
   (B)   Misdemeanor jail terms.
      (1)   Except as provided in §
666.99 or
698.03 of this code or Ohio R.C. 2929.22 or 2929.23 or division (B)(5) of this
section and unless another term is required or authorized pursuant to law, if
the sentencing court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor
elects or is required to impose a jail term on the offender pursuant to this
chapter, the court shall impose a definite jail term that shall be one of the
following:
         (a)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree: not more than 180 days;
         (b)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree: not more than 90 days;
         (c)   For a misdemeanor of the third degree: not more than 60 days; or
         (d)   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree: not more than 30 days.
      (2)   (a)   A court that sentences an offender to a jail term under this
division (B) may permit the offender to serve the sentence in intermittent
confinement or may authorize a limited release of the offender as provided in
division (D)(2) below. The court retains jurisdiction over every offender
sentenced to jail to modify the jail sentence imposed at any time, but the
court shall not reduce any mandatory jail term.
         (b)   1.   If a prosecutor, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2935.01, has filed
a notice with the court that the prosecutor wants to be notified about a
particular case and if the court is considering modifying the jail sentence of
the offender in that case, the court shall notify the prosecutor that the court
is considering modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case. The
prosecutor may request a hearing regarding the court’s consideration of
modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, and, if the
prosecutor requests a hearing, the court shall notify the eligible offender of
the hearing.
            2.   If the prosecutor requests a hearing regarding the court’s
consideration of modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, the
court shall hold the hearing before considering whether or not to release the
offender from the offender’s jail sentence.
      (3)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under this division
(B) and the court assigns the offender to a County Jail that has established a
County Jail Industry Program pursuant to Ohio R.C. 5147.30, the court shall
specify, as part of the sentence, whether the offender may be considered for
participation in the program. During the offender's term in the County Jail,
the court retains jurisdiction to modify its specification regarding the
offender's participation in the County Jail Industry Program.
      (4)   If a person sentenced to a jail term pursuant to this division (B),
the court may impose as part of the sentence pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.28 a
reimbursement sanction, and, if the local detention facility in which the term
is to be served is covered by a policy adopted pursuant to Ohio R.C. 307.93,
341.14, 341.19, 341.21, 341.23, 753.02, 753.04, 753.16, 2301.56 or 2947.19 and
2929.37, both of the following apply:
         (a)   The court shall specify both of the following as part of the
sentence:
            1.   If the person is presented with an itemized bill pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 2929.37 for payment of the costs of confinement, the person is
required to pay the bill in accordance with that section; and
            2.   If the person does not dispute the bill described in division
(B)(4)(a)1. above and does not pay the bill by the times specified in Ohio R.C.
2929.37, the Clerk of the Court may issue a certificate of judgment against the
person as described in that section.
         (b)   The sentence automatically includes any certificate of judgment
issued as described in division (B)(4)(a)2. above.
      (5)   (a)   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
misdemeanor violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241 or 2907.25, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and to a specification of the
type described in Ohio R.C. 2941.1421 and if the court imposes a jail term on
the offender for the misdemeanor violation, the court may impose upon the
offender an additional definite jail term as follows:
            1.   Subject to division (B)(5)(a)2. below, an additional definite
jail term of not more than 60 days; and
            2.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one or more misdemeanor or felony violations of Ohio R.C. 2907.22,
2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241 or 2907.25, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and also was convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
specification of the type described in Ohio R.C. 2941.1421 regarding one or
more of those violations, an additional definite jail term of not more than 120
days.
         (b)   In lieu of imposing an additional definite jail term under
division (B)(5)(a) above, the court may directly impose on the offender a
sanction that requires the offender to wear a real- time processing, continual
tracking electronic monitoring device during the period of time specified by
the court. The period of time specified by the court shall equal the duration
of an additional jail term that the court could have imposed upon the offender
under division (B)(5)(a) above. A sanction imposed under this division (B)(5)
(b) shall commence on the date specified by the court; provided that, the
sanction shall not commence until after the offender has served the jail term
imposed for the misdemeanor violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241
or 2907.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and any
residential sanction imposed for the violation under division (D) below or Ohio
R.C. 2929.26. A sanction imposed under this division (B)(5)(b) shall be
considered to be a community control sanction for purposes of division (C)
below or Ohio R.C. 2929.25, and all provisions of this code and the Ohio
Revised Code that pertain to community control sanctions shall apply to a
sanction imposed under this division, except to the extent that they would by
their nature be clearly inapplicable. The offender shall pay all costs
associated with a sanction imposed under this division, including the cost of
the use of the monitoring device.
      (6)   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor
violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.13 and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
specification of the type described in Ohio R.C. 2941.1423 that charges that
the victim of the violation was a woman whom the offender knew was pregnant at
the time of the violation, the court shall impose on the offender a mandatory
jail term that is a definite term of at least 30 days.
      (7)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under this division
(B), the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the offender and the jail
term. Upon motion of either party or upon the court’s own motion, the court, in
the court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may substitute
one or more community control sanctions under divisions (D) or (E) below for
any jail days that are not mandatory jail days.
(ORC 2929.24)
   (C)   Misdemeanor community control sanctions.
      (1)   (a)   Except as provided in §§
666.99 and
698.03 of this code of ordinances or Ohio R.C. 2929.22 and 2929.23 or when a
jail term is required by law, in sentencing an offender for a misdemeanor,
other than a minor misdemeanor, the sentencing court may do either of the
following:
            1.   Directly impose a sentence that consists of one or more
community control sanctions authorized by divisions (D), (E) or (F) below. The
court may impose any other conditions of release under a community control
sanction that the court considers appropriate. If the court imposes a jail term
upon the offender, the court may impose any community control sanction or
combination of community control sanctions in addition to the jail term.
            2.   Impose a jail term under division (B) above from the range of
jail terms authorized under that division for the offense, suspend all or a
portion of the jail term imposed, and place the offender under a community
control sanction or combination of community control sanctions authorized under
divisions (D), (E) or (F) below.
         (b)   The duration of all community control sanctions imposed upon an
offender and in effect for an offender at any time shall not exceed five years.
         (c)   At sentencing, if a court directly imposes a community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to division (C)
(1)(a)1. above, the court shall state the duration of the community control
sanctions imposed and shall notify the offender that if any of the conditions
of the community control sanctions are violated the court may do any of the
following:
            1.   Impose a longer time under the same community control sanction
if the total time under all of the offender's community control sanctions does
not exceed the five-year limit specified in division (C)(1)(b) above;
            2.   Impose a more restrictive community control sanction under
divisions (D), (E) or (F) below, but the court is not required to impose any
particular sanction or sanctions; or
            3.   Impose a definite jail term from the range of jail terms
authorized for the offense under division (B) above.
      (2)   If a court sentences an offender to any community control sanction
or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to division (C)(1)(a)1.
above, the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the offender and the
period of community control for the duration of the period of community
control. Upon the motion of either party or on the court’s own motion, the
court, in the court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may
modify the community control sanctions or conditions of release previously
imposed, substitute a community control sanction or condition of release for
another community control sanction or condition of release previously imposed,
or impose an additional community control sanction or condition of release.
      (3)   (a)   If a court sentences an offender to any community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions authorized under
divisions (D), (E) or (F) below, the court shall place the offender under the
general control and supervision of the court or of a department of probation in
the jurisdiction that serves the court for purposes of reporting to the court a
violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. If the offender
resides in another jurisdiction and a department of probation has been
established to serve the Municipal Court or County Court in that jurisdiction,
the sentencing court may request the Municipal Court or the County Court to
receive the offender into the general control and supervision of that
department of probation for purposes of reporting to the sentencing court a
violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. The sentencing
court retains jurisdiction over any offender whom it sentences for the duration
of the sanction or sanctions imposed.
         (b)   The sentencing court shall require as a condition of any
community control sanction that the offender abide by the law and not leave the
state without the permission of the court or the offender’s probation officer.
In the interests of doing justice, rehabilitating the offender and ensuring the
offender's good behavior, the court may impose additional requirements on the
offender. The offender's compliance with the additional requirements also shall
be a condition of the community control sanction imposed upon the offender.
      (4)   (a)   If the court imposing sentence upon an offender sentences the
offender to any community control sanction or combination of community control
sanctions authorized under divisions (D), (E) or (F) below, and the offender
violates any of the conditions of the sanctions, the public or private person
or entity that supervises or administers the program or activity that comprises
the sanction shall report the violation directly to the sentencing court or to
the department of probation or probation officer with general control and
supervision over the offender. If the public or private person or entity
reports the violation to the department of probation or probation officer, the
department or officer shall report the violation to the sentencing court.
         (b)   Except as provided in division (c)(4)C. of this section, if an
offender violates any condition of a community control sanction, the sentencing
court may impose upon the violator one or more of the following penalties:
            1.   A longer time under the same community control sanction if the
total time under all of the community control sanctions imposed on the violator
does not exceed the five- year limit specified in division (C)(1)(b) above;
            2.   A more restrictive community control sanction; and/or
            3.   A combination of community control sanctions, including a jail
term.
         (c)   If an offender was acting pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2925.11(B)(2)
(b), or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a related
provision under Ohio R.C. 2925.12, Ohio R.C. 2925.14, or Ohio R.C. 2925.141, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and in so doing violated the
conditions of a community control sanction based on a minor drug possession
offense, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2925.11, or violated Ohio R.C. 2925.12, Ohio
R.C. 2925.14(C)(1), or Ohio R.C. 2925.141, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the sentencing court shall not impose any of the penalties
described in division (c)(4)B. of this section based on the violation.
         (d)   If the court imposes a jail term upon a violator pursuant to
division (C)(4)(b) above, the total time spent in jail for the misdemeanor
offense and the violation of a condition of the community control sanction
shall not exceed the maximum jail term available for the offense for which the
sanction that was violated was imposed. The court may reduce the longer period
of time that the violator is required to spend under the longer sanction or the
more restrictive sanction imposed under division (C)(4)(b) above by all or part
of the time the violator successfully spent under the sanction that was
initially imposed.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C), if an offender,
for a significant period of time, fulfills the conditions of a community
control sanction imposed pursuant to divisions (D), (E) or (F) below in an
exemplary manner, the court may reduce the period of time under the community
control sanction or impose a less restrictive community control sanction.
Fulfilling the conditions of a community control sanction does not relieve the
offender of a duty to make restitution under division (F) below.
(ORC 2929.25)
   (D)   Community residential sanction.
      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may
impose upon the offender any community residential sanction or combination of
community residential sanctions under this division (D). Community residential
sanctions include, but are not limited to, the following:
         (a)   A term of up to 180 days in a halfway house or a term in a
halfway house not to exceed the longest jail term available for the offense,
whichever is shorter, if the political subdivision that would have
responsibility for paying the costs of confining the offender in a jail has
entered into a contract with the halfway house for use of the facility for
misdemeanor offenders;
         (b)   If the offender is an eligible offender, as defined in Ohio R.C.
307.932, a term in a community alternative sentencing center or district
community alternative sentencing center established and operated in accordance
with that section, in the circumstances specified in that section, with one of
the conditions of the sanction being that the offender successfully complete
the portion of the sentence to be served in the center.
      (2)   A sentence to a community residential sanction under division (D)
(1)(b) above shall be in accordance with Ohio R.C. 307.932. In all other cases,
the court that sentences an offender to a community residential sanction under
this division (D) may do either or both of the following:
         (a)   Permit the offender to serve the offender's sentence in
intermittent confinement, overnight on weekends or at any other time or times
that will allow the offender to continue at the offender's occupation or care
for the offender's family; and/or
         (b)   Authorize the offender to be released so that the offender may
seek or maintain employment, receive education or training, receive treatment,
perform community service, or otherwise fulfill an obligation imposed by law or
by the court. A release pursuant to this division (D)(2)(b) shall be only for
the duration of time that is needed to fulfill the purpose of the release and
for travel that reasonably is necessary to fulfill the purposes of release.
      (3)   The court may order that a reasonable portion of the income earned
by the offender upon a release pursuant to division (D)(2) above be applied to
any financial sanction imposed under division (F) above.
      (4)   No court shall sentence any person to a prison term for a
misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor or to a jail term for a minor misdemeanor.
      (5)   If a court sentences a person who has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a misdemeanor to a community residential sanction as described in
division (D)(1) above, at the time of reception and at other times the person
in charge of the operation of the halfway house, community alternative
sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing center or other
place at which the offender will serve the residential sanction determines to
be appropriate, the person in charge of the operation of the halfway house,
community alternative sentencing center, district community alternative
sentencing center or other place may cause the convicted offender to be
examined and tested for tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis, including, but
not limited to, hepatitis A, B and C, and other contagious diseases. The person
in charge of the operation of the halfway house, community alternative
sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing center or other
place at which the offender will serve the residential sanction may cause a
convicted offender in the halfway house, community alternative sentencing
center, district community alternative sentencing center or other place who
refuses to be tested or treated for tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis,
including, but not limited to, hepatitis A, B and C, or another contagious
disease to be tested and treated involuntarily.
      (6)   The municipality may enter into a contract with a halfway house for
use of the halfway house to house misdemeanor offenders under a sanction
imposed under division (D)(1)(a) above.
(ORC 2929.26)
   (E)   Non-residential sanction where jail term is not mandatory.
      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may
impose upon the offender any non-residential sanction or combination of non-
residential sanctions authorized under this division (E). Non-residential
sanctions include, but are not limited to, the following:
         (a)   A term of day reporting;
         (b)   A term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous
alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol
monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring
without house arrest, or a term of house arrest without electronic monitoring
or continuous alcohol monitoring;
         (c)   A term of community service of up to 500 hours for misdemeanor
of the first degree or 200 hours for a misdemeanor of the second, third, or
fourth degree;
         (d)   A term in a drug treatment program with a level of security for
the offender as determined necessary by the court;
         (e)   A term of intensive probation supervision;
         (f)   A term of basic probation supervision;
         (g)   A term of monitored time;
         (h)   A term of drug and alcohol use monitoring, including random drug
testing;
         (i)   A curfew term;
         (j)   A requirement that the offender obtain employment;
         (k)   A requirement that the offender obtain education or training;
         (l)   Provided the court obtains the prior approval of the victim, a
requirement that the offender participate in victim-offender mediation;
         (m)   If authorized by law, suspension of the offender's privilege to
operate a motor vehicle, immobilization or forfeiture of the offender's motor
vehicle, a requirement that the offender obtain a valid motor vehicle
operator's license or any other related sanction; and
         (n)   A requirement that the offender obtain counseling if the offense
is a violation of Ohio R.C. 2919.25 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance or a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.13 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance involving a person who was a family or household member at
the time of the violation, if the offender committed the offense in the
vicinity of one or more children who are not victims of the offense, and if the
offender or the victim of the offense is a parent, guardian, custodian, or
person in loco parentis of one or more of those children. This division (E)(1)
(n) does not limit the court in requiring that the offender obtain counseling
for any offense or in any circumstance not specified in this division (E)(1)
(n).
      (2)   If the court imposes a term of community service pursuant to
division (E)(1)(c) above, the offender may request that the court modify the
sentence to authorize the offender to make a reasonable contribution, as
determined by the court, to the general fund of the county, municipality or
other local entity that provides funding to the court. The court may grant the
request if the offender demonstrates a change in circumstances from the date
the court imposes the sentence or that the modification would otherwise be in
the interests of justice. If the court grants the request, the offender shall
make a reasonable contribution to the court, and the clerk of the court shall
deposit that contribution into the general fund of the county, municipality or
other local entity that provides funding to the court. If more than one entity
provides funding to the court, the clerk shall deposit a percentage of the
reasonable contribution equal to the percentage of funding the entity provides
to the court in that entity’s general fund.
      (3)   In addition to the sanctions authorized under division (E)(1)
above, the court imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor
misdemeanor, upon an offender who is not required to serve a mandatory jail
term may impose any other sanction that is intended to discourage the offender
or other persons from committing a similar offense if the sanction is
reasonably related to the overriding purposes and principles of misdemeanor
sentencing.
      (4)   The court imposing a sentence for a minor misdemeanor may impose a
term of community service in lieu of all or part of a fine. The term of
community service imposed for a minor misdemeanor shall not exceed 30 hours.
After imposing a term of community service, the court may modify the sentence
to authorize a reasonable contribution, as determined by the court, to the
appropriate general fund as provided in division (E)(2) above.
(ORC 2929.27)
   (F)   Financial sanctions.
      (1)   In addition to imposing court costs pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2947.23,
the court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor, including a
minor misdemeanor, may sentence the offender to any financial sanction or
combination of financial sanctions authorized under this division (F) and, if
the offender is being sentenced for a criminal offense as defined in Ohio R.C.
2930.01, shall sentence the offender to make restitution pursuant to this
division (F) and Ohio R.C. 2929.281. If the court, in its discretion or as
required by this division (F), imposes one or more financial sanctions, the
financial sanctions that may be imposed pursuant to this division (F) include,
but are not limited to, the following:
         (a)   Restitution.
            1.   Unless the misdemeanor offense could be disposed of by the
traffic violations bureau serving the court under Traffic Rule 13, restitution
by the offender to the victim of the offender's crime or the victim's estate,
in an amount based on the victim's economic loss. The court may not impose
restitution as a sanction pursuant to this division if the offense could be
disposed of by the traffic violations bureau serving the court under Traffic
Rule 13. If the court requires restitution, the court shall order that the
restitution be made to the victim in open court or to the adult probation
department that serves the jurisdiction or the clerk of the court on behalf of
the victim.
            2.   The court shall determine the amount of restitution to be paid
by the offender. The victim, victim's representative, victim's attorney, if
applicable, the prosecutor or the prosecutor's designee, and the offender may
provide information relevant to the determination of the amount of restitution.
The amount the court orders as restitution shall not exceed the amount of the
economic loss suffered by the victim as a direct and proximate result of the
commission of the offense. If the court imposes restitution for the cost of
accounting or auditing done to determine the extent of economic loss, the court
may order restitution for any amount of the victim's costs of accounting or
auditing provided that the amount of restitution is reasonable and does not
exceed the value of property or services stolen or damaged as a result of the
offense. If the court decides to or is required to impose restitution, the
court shall hold an evidentiary hearing on restitution if the offender, victim,
victim's representative, victim's attorney, if applicable, or victim's estate
disputes the amount of restitution. The court shall determine the amount of
full restitution by a preponderance of the evidence.
            3.   All restitution payments shall be credited against any
recovery of economic loss in a civil action brought by the victim or the
victim's estate against the offender. No person may introduce evidence of an
award of restitution under this division (F) in a civil action for purposes of
imposing liability against an insurer under Ohio R.C. 3937.18.
            4.   The court may order that the offender pay a surcharge, of not
more than 5% of the amount of the restitution otherwise ordered, to the entity
responsible for collecting and processing restitution payments.
            5.   The victim, victim's attorney, if applicable, or the attorney
for the victim's estate may request that the prosecutor in the case file a
motion, or the offender may file a motion, for modification of the payment
terms of any restitution ordered. If the court grants the motion, it may modify
the payment terms as it determines appropriate but shall not reduce the amount
of restitution ordered, except as provided in Ohio R.C. 2929.281(A).
         (b)   Fines. A fine of the type described in divisions (F)(1)(b)1. and
(F)(1)(b)2. above payable to the appropriate entity as required by law:
            1.   A fine in the following amount:
               a.   For a misdemeanor of the first degree: not more than
$1,000;
               b.   For a misdemeanor of the second degree: not more than $750;
               c.   For a misdemeanor of the third degree: not more than $500;
               d.   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree: not more than $250;
               e.   For a minor misdemeanor: not more than $150.
            2.   A state fine or cost as defined in Ohio R.C. 2949.111.
         (c)   Reimbursement.
            1.   Reimbursement by the offender of any or all of the costs of
sanctions incurred by the government, including, but not limited to, the
following:
               a.   All or part of the costs of implementing any community
control sanction, including a supervision fee under Ohio R.C. 2951.021 and the
costs of global positioning system device monitoring;
               b.   All or part of the costs of confinement in a jail or other
residential facility, including, but not limited to, a per diem fee for room
and board, the costs of medical and dental treatment, and the costs of
repairing property damaged by the offender while confined; and
               c.   All or part of the cost of purchasing and using an
immobilizing or disabling device, including a certified ignition interlock
device, or a remote alcohol monitoring device that a court orders an offender
to use under Ohio R.C. 4510.13.
            2.   The amount of reimbursement under division (F)(1)(c)1. above
shall not exceed the total amount of reimbursement the offender is able to pay
and shall not exceed the actual cost of the sanctions. The court may collect
any amount of reimbursement the offender is required to pay under that
division. If the court does not order reimbursement under that division,
confinement costs may be assessed pursuant to a repayment policy adopted under
Ohio R.C. 2929.37. In addition, the offender may be required to pay the fees
specified in Ohio R.C. 2929.38 in accordance with that section.
      (2)   (a)   If the court determines a hearing is necessary, the court may
hold a hearing to determine whether the offender is able to pay the financial
sanction imposed pursuant to this division (F) or court costs or is likely in
the future to be able to pay the sanction or costs.
         (b)   If the court determines that the offender is indigent and unable
to pay the financial sanction or court costs, the court shall consider imposing
and may impose a term of community service under division (E)(1) above in lieu
of imposing a financial sanction or court costs. If the court does not
determine that the offender is indigent, the court may impose a term of
community service under division (E)(1) above in lieu of or in addition to
imposing a financial sanction under this division (F) and in addition to
imposing court costs. The court may order community service for a minor
misdemeanor pursuant to division (E)(4) below in lieu of or in addition to
imposing a financial sanction under this section and in addition to imposing
court costs. If a person fails to pay a financial sanction or court costs, the
court may order community service in lieu of the financial sanction or court
costs.
      (3)   (a)   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the
offender pursuant to division (F)(1)(c) above to pay the costs incurred by a
county pursuant to any sanction imposed under divisions (D), (E) or (F) above
or in operating a facility used to confine offenders pursuant to a sanction
imposed under division (D) above to the County Treasurer. The County Treasurer
shall deposit the reimbursements in the county's General Fund. The county shall
use the amounts deposited in the fund to pay the costs incurred by the county
pursuant to any sanction imposed under divisions (D), (E) or (F) of this
section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders pursuant to a
sanction imposed under division (D) above.
         (b)   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the offender
pursuant to division (F)(1)(c) above to pay the costs incurred by a municipal
corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under divisions (D), (E) or (F) of
this section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders pursuant to a
sanction imposed under division (D) above to the Treasurer of the municipal
corporation. The Treasurer shall deposit the reimbursements in the municipal
corporation's General Fund. The municipal corporation shall use the amounts
deposited in the fund to pay the costs incurred by the municipal corporation
pursuant to any sanction imposed under divisions (D), (E) or (F) of this
section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders pursuant to a
sanction imposed under division (D) above.
         (c)   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed pursuant to
division (F)(1)(c) above for the costs incurred by a private provider pursuant
to a sanction imposed under divisions (D), (E) or (F) of this section to the
provider.
      (4)   A.   In addition to any other fine that is or may be imposed under
this section, the court imposing sentence upon an offender for misdemeanor
domestic violence or menacing by stalking may impose a fine of not less than
$70 nor more than $500, which shall, except as provided in divisions (F)(4)(b)
and (F)(4)(c) of this section, be transmitted to the Treasurer of Ohio to be
credited to the address confidentiality program fund created by Ohio R.C.
111.48.
         B.   A court that imposes a fine under division (F)(4)(a) of this
section may retain up to 25% of amounts collected in satisfaction of the fine
to cover administrative costs.
         C.   A court that imposes a fine under division (F)(4)(a) of this
section may assign up to 25% of amounts collected in satisfaction of the fine
to reimburse the prosecuting attorney for costs associated with prosecution of
the offense.
      (5)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (F)(5), a
financial sanction imposed under division (F)(1) above is a judgment in favor
of the state or the political subdivision that operates the court that imposed
the financial sanction, and the offender subject to the financial sanction is
the judgment debtor. A financial sanction of reimbursement imposed pursuant to
division (F)(1)(c)1.a. above upon an offender is a judgment in favor of the
entity administering the community control sanction. A financial sanction of
reimbursement imposed pursuant to division (F)(1)(c)1.b. above upon an offender
confined in a jail or other residential facility is a judgment in favor of the
entity operating the jail or other residential facility. A financial sanction
of restitution imposed pursuant to division (F)(1)(a) above is an order in
favor of the victim of the offender's criminal act that can be collected
through a certificate of judgment as described in division (F)(5)(b)1. below,
through execution as described in division (F)(5)(b)2. below or through an
order as described in division (F)(5)(b)3. below and the offender shall be
considered for purposes of the collection as a judgment debtor.
         (b)   Once a financial sanction is imposed as a judgment or order
under this division (F)(5)(b), the victim, private provider, state or political
subdivision may do any of the following:
            1.   Obtain from the clerk of the court in which the judgment was
entered, at no charge, a certificate of judgment that shall be in the same
manner and form as a certificate of judgment issued in a civil action;
            2.   Obtain execution of the judgment or order through any
available procedure, including any of the procedures identified in Ohio R.C.
2929.18(D)(1) and (D)(2) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
and/or
            3.   Obtain an order for the assignment of wages of the judgment
debtor under Ohio R.C. 1321.33 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
      (6)   The civil remedies authorized under division (F)(5) above for the
collection of the financial sanction supplement, but do not preclude,
enforcement of the criminal sentence.
      (7)   Each court imposing a financial sanction upon an offender under
this division (F) may designate the Clerk of the Court or another person to
collect the financial sanction. The Clerk, or another person authorized by law
or the court to collect the financial sanction may do the following:
         (a)   Enter into contracts with one or more public agencies or private
vendors for the collection of amounts due under the sanction. Before entering
into a contract for the collection of amounts due from an offender pursuant to
any financial sanction imposed pursuant to this division (F), a court shall
comply with Ohio R.C. 307.86 to 307.92;
         (b)   Permit payment of all or any portion of the sanction in
installments, by financial transaction device if the court is a county court or
a municipal court operated by a county, or by any other reasonable method, in
any time, and on any terms that the court considers just. If the court is a
county court or a municipal court operated by a county, the acceptance of
payments by any financial transaction device shall be governed by the policy
adopted by the Board of County Commissioners of the county pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 301.28. If the court is a municipal court not operated by a county, the
Clerk may pay any fee associated with processing an electronic transfer out of
public money or may charge the fee to the offender.
         (c)   To defray administrative costs, charge a reasonable fee to an
offender who elects a payment plan rather than a lump sum payment of any
financial sanction.
      (8)   No financial sanction imposed under this division (F) shall
preclude a victim from bringing a civil action against the offender.
      (9)   If the court imposes restitution, fines, fees, or incarceration
costs on a business or corporation, it is the duty of the person authorized to
make disbursements from assets of the business or corporation to pay the
restitution, fines, fees, or incarceration costs from those assets.
(ORC 2929.28)
§ 698.03 IMPOSING SENTENCE FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   (A)   (1)   Unless a mandatory jail term is required to be imposed by Ohio
R.C. 1547.99(G), 4510.14(B) or 4511.19(G), or any other provision of the
Revised Code, or any municipal ordinance, a court that imposes a sentence under
this chapter upon an offender for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor has
discretion to determine the most effective way to achieve the purposes and
principles of sentencing set forth in §
698.02 of this chapter.
      (2)   Unless a specific sanction is required to be imposed or is
precluded from being imposed by the section setting forth an offense or the
penalty for an offense or by any provision of §§
666.99 or
698.02 of this code of ordinances or Ohio R.C. 2929.23 to 2929.28, a court that
imposes a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor may impose on the
offender any sanction or combination of sanctions under §
698.02(B) to (F) of this chapter. The court shall not impose a sentence that
imposes an unnecessary burden on local government resources.
   (B)   (1)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, the
court shall consider all of the following factors:
         (a)   The nature and circumstances of the offense or offenses;
         (b)   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender and the offense
or offenses indicate that the offender has a history of persistent criminal
activity and that the offender's character and condition reveal a substantial
risk that the offender will commit another offense;
         (c)   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender and the offense
or offenses indicate that the offender's history, character and condition
reveal a substantial risk that the offender will be a danger to others and that
the offender's conduct has been characterized by a pattern of repetitive,
compulsive or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to the
consequences;
         (d)   Whether the victim's youth, age, disability or other factor made
the victim particularly vulnerable to the offense or made the impact of the
offense more serious;
         (e)   Whether the offender is likely to commit future crimes in
general, in addition to the circumstances described in divisions (B)(1)(b) and
(B)(1)(c) above;
         (f)   Whether the offender has an emotional, mental or physical
condition that is traceable to the offender’s service in the armed forces of
the United States and that was a contributing factor in the offender’s
commission of the offense or offenses; and
         (g)   The offender’s military service record.
      (2)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, in
addition to complying with division (B)(1) above, the court may consider any
other factors that are relevant to achieving the purposes and principles of
sentencing set forth in §
698.02(A) of this chapter.
   (C)   Before imposing a jail term as a sentence for a misdemeanor, a court
shall consider the appropriateness of imposing a community control sanction or
a combination of community control sanctions under §
698.02(C), (D), (E), and (F). A court may impose the longest jail term
authorized under §
698.02(b) only upon offenders who commit the worst forms of the offense or upon
offenders whose conduct and response to prior sanctions for prior offenses
demonstrate that the imposition of the longest jail term is necessary to deter
the offender from committing a future criminal offense.
   (D)   (1)   A sentencing court shall consider any relevant oral and written
statement made by the victim, the victim's representative, the victim's
attorney, if applicable, the defendant, the defense attorney, and the
prosecuting authority regarding sentencing for a misdemeanor. This division
does not create any rights to notice other than those rights authorized by Ohio
R.C. Chapter 2930.
      (2)   At the time of sentencing for a misdemeanor or as soon as possible
after sentencing, the court shall notify the victim of the offense of the
victim's right to file an application for an award of reparations pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 2743.51 to 2743.72.
(ORC 2929.22)
§ 698.04 ORGANIZATIONAL PENALTIES.
   (A)   Regardless of the other penalties provided in §
698.02 of this chapter, an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to §
606.08 of this code of ordinances shall be fined by the court as follows:
      (1)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree: not more than $5,000;
      (2)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree: not more than $4,000;
      (3)   For a misdemeanor of the third degree: not more than $3,000;
      (4)   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree: not more than $2,000;
      (5)   For a minor misdemeanor: not more than $1,000;
      (6)   For a misdemeanor not specifically classified: not more than
$2,000; and
      (7)   For a minor misdemeanor not specifically classified: not more than
$1,000.
   (B)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically
classified, and the section defining the offense or penalty plainly indicates a
purpose to impose the penalty provided for violation upon organizations, then
such penalty shall be imposed in lieu of the penalty provided in this section.
   (C)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically
classified, and the penalty provided includes a higher fine than that provided
in this section, then the penalty imposed shall be pursuant to the penalty
provided for violation of the section defining the offense.
   (D)   This section does not prevent the imposition of available civil
sanctions against an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to §
606.08 of this chapter, either in addition to or in lieu of a fine imposed
pursuant to this section.
(ORC 2929.31)
§ 698.05 MULTIPLE SENTENCES.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, Ohio R.C. 2929.14(C) or Ohio
R.C. 2971.03(D) or (E), a prison term, jail term or sentence of imprisonment
shall be served concurrently with any other prison term, jail term or sentence
of imprisonment imposed by a court of the municipality, the state, another
state or the United States. Except as provided in division (B)(2) below, a jail
term or sentence of imprisonment for misdemeanor shall be served concurrently
with a prison term or sentence of imprisonment for felony served in a state or
federal correctional institution.
   (B)   (1)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment for a misdemeanor shall
be served consecutively to any other prison term, jail term or sentence of
imprisonment when the trial court specifies that it is to be served
consecutively or when it is imposed for a misdemeanor violation of Ohio R.C.
2907.322, 2921.34 or 2923.131. When consecutive sentences are imposed for
misdemeanors under this division (B)(1), the term to be served is the aggregate
of the consecutive terms imposed; except that, the aggregate term to be served
shall not exceed 18 months.
      (2)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment imposed for a misdemeanor
violation of Ohio R.C. 4510.14, 4510.16, 4510.21 or 4511.19, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be served consecutively to a prison term
that is imposed for a felony violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.06, 2903.07, 2903.08
or 4511.19 or a felony violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.04 involving the operation
of a motor vehicle by the offender and that is served in a state correctional
institution when the trial court specifies that it is to be served
consecutively. When consecutive jail terms or sentences of imprisonment and
prison terms are imposed for one or more misdemeanors and one or more felonies
under this division (B)(2), the term to be served is the aggregate of the
consecutive terms imposed, and the offender shall serve all terms imposed for a
felony before serving any term imposed for a misdemeanor.
(ORC 2929.41)
§ 698.06 MODIFICATION OF SENTENCE. (REPEALED)
Editor's note:
   Section 698.06 was repealed as part of the 2004 updating and revision of
this code of ordinances because substantially equivalent state law (Ohio R.C.
2929.51) was repealed by the Ohio General Assembly.
§ 698.07 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF DRIVER'S LICENSE.
   Except as otherwise provided in the Ohio R.C. 4510.07 or in any other
provision of the Revised Code, whenever an offender is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of any provision of this code of ordinances that is
substantially equivalent to a provision of the Revised Code, and a court is
permitted or required to suspend a person's driver's or commercial driver's
license or permit for a violation of that provision, a court, in addition to
any other penalties authorized by law, may suspend the offender's driver's or
commercial driver's license or permit or non-resident operating privileges for
the period of time the court determines appropriate, but the period of
suspension imposed for the violation of the provision of this code of
ordinances shall not exceed the period of suspension that is permitted or
required to be imposed for the violation of the provision of the Revised Code
to which the provision of this code of ordinances is substantially equivalent.
(ORC 4510.05)
PART EIGHT: BUSINESS REGULATION AND TAXATION CODE
   Chapter
TITLE TWO: BUSINESS REGULATION
      
804.   Advertising and Billposting
      
808.   Amendments and Shows
      
812.   Auctions
      
816.   Billiard and Pool Rooms
      
820.   Boxing and Wrestling
      
822.   Cable Television
      
824.   Dances and Dance Halls
      
828.   Fortunetelling
      
830.   Gasoline Service Stations
      
832.   Going-Out-of-Business Sales
      
834.   Late Night Retail Establishments and Gasoline Stations
      
836.   Amusement Devices, Skill-Based Amusement Machines and Arcades
      
840.   Payday Loan/Cash Advance Facilities
      
844.   Peddlers, Solicitors and Vendors
      
848.   Polygraph Tests
      
852.   Secondhand Dealers
      
856.   Taxicabs (Repealed)
      
860.   Trailer Camps and Tourist Camps
      
862.   Self-Service Retail Pricing
      
864.   Private Investigators and Agencies
      
866.   Private Patrol Watchmen and Agencies
      
868.   Christmas Tree Sales
      
870.   Strikebreakers
      
872.   Residential Care Facilities
      
874.   Tow Trucks
      
875.   Tobacco 21
      
876.   Medical Marijuana Cultivators, Processors and Retail Dispensaries
TITLE FOUR: TAXATION
      
880.   Earned Income Tax (Effective through January 1, 2024)
      
884.   Motor Vehicle License Tax
TITLE TWO: BUSINESS REGULATION
CHAPTER 804: ADVERTISING AND BILLPOSTING
Section
804.01   License required.
804.02   License issuance; fee.
804.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Advertising and signs in parks, see S. U. & P. S.
1068.07(b),(c)
   Advertising on private and public property, see GEN. OFF.
642.26
   Advertising on state and interstate highways, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 5516
   Merchandise displays, see GEN. OFF.
668.07
   Political signs, see GEN. OFF.
642.27
   Power to regulate, see Ohio R.C. 715.65
   Selling vehicle on highway, see TRAF.
351.06
   Sign licensing, see B. & H. Ch.
1430
   Unauthorized signs and signals, hiding from view, advertising, see TRAF.
313.07
§ 804.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall, except for bills posted on billboards, erected on
private property, engage in or carry on the business of billposting or
advertising by bill distributing, card tacking or distributing advertising
matter of any kind or character in the city, pertaining to merchandise which
has not been manufactured in the city or sold by an established merchant in the
city, without having first procured a license therefor.
   (B)   Each and every person so engaged shall procure a separate license.
(Prior Code, § 804.01) (Ord. 39-1933, passed 10-2-1933)
§ 804.02 LICENSE ISSUANCE; FEE.
   The Mayor shall issue a license to any person making application to him or
her for such license for any or all of the purposes mentioned in §
804.01 of this chapter upon the payment of a fee of $100 per year, $60 for six
months, $36 for three months or $5 per day, for each person so engaged, at the
option of the applicant, which sum shall be payable in advance.
(Prior Code, § 804.02) (Ord. 39-1933, passed 10-2-1933)
§ 804.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined
not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than six months, or both.
   (B)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 804.99) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
CHAPTER 808: AMUSEMENTS AND SHOWS
Section
808.01   License required; fee.
808.02   License application and issuance.
808.03   License validity; display; effective period; renewal.
808.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Alcoholic beverages, see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 612
   Contests or games at county fairs, see Ohio R.C. 1711.09, 1711.11
   County license for public shows, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3765
   Gambling, see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 630
   Permit for parades or blocking of street areas, see TRAF.
311.02
   Power to regulate, see Ohio R.C. 715.48, 715.63
§ 808.01 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE.
   No person shall conduct any permanent, temporary or itinerant form of
amusement, such as theatrical exhibitions, public shows or performances or
carnivals, for which money or other reward is demanded or received, without
having first procured a license therefor. The fee for such license is $25 for
the first day and $10 for each additional consecutive day that such amusement
is to be held. This requirement for licensing shall not apply to
entertainments, exhibitions and shows conducted by schools, churches or
patriotic organizations, nor to exhibitions otherwise specifically regulated
and licensed by any other ordinance of the municipality, nor to athletic games
and moving picture shows.
(Prior Code, § 808.01) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 808.02 LICENSE APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE.
   Applications for the license required by §
808.01 of this chapter shall be made to the Mayor. Upon approval of the
application, the Mayor shall forthwith issue the license upon payment of the
required fee.
(Prior Code, § 808.02) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 808.03 LICENSE VALIDITY; DISPLAY; EFFECTIVE PERIOD; RENEWAL.
   An amusement license shall be valid only for the person in whose name it is
issued and for the conduct of amusements at the place designated therein; it
shall not be assignable; and it shall be conspicuously displayed at the place
for which issued during the period of ticket sales and conduct of the
amusement. All licenses for permanent places of amusement shall expire on
December 31 following the date of issue. Licenses for temporary places of
amusement or for forms of itinerant amusement shall expire at the time
specified therein. Licenses issued for permanent places of amusement under the
provisions of this chapter may be renewed annually before January 1 upon
application to the Mayor. The license required herein shall be in addition to
any and all licenses otherwise required by law.
(Prior Code, § 808.03) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 808.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
more than $500 or imprisoned not more than six months, or both. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 808.99) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
CHAPTER 812: AUCTIONS
Section
812.01   License required.
812.02   License application and issuance.
812.03   License fees.
812.04   Application to court sales.
812.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Bulk transfer by sales at auctions, see Ohio R.C. 1306.06
   Conduct of auction sales, see Ohio R.C. 1302.41
   Disposition of property held by Police Division, see GEN. OFF.
606.24
   Examination and license fees, see Ohio R.C. 4707.08, 4707.10
   License suspension and revocation, see Ohio R.C. 4707.15
   Merchandise displays, see GEN. OFF.
668.07
   Non-resident auctioneer; service of process, see Ohio R.C. 4707.13
   Power to regulate, see Ohio R.C. 715.24, 715.63
   State licensing of new merchandise, public auction sales, see Ohio R.C. Ch.
1318
   State licensing of auctioneers, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4707
   State licensing of motor vehicle auctioning, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4517
§ 812.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall sell or offer for sale at public auction any goods, wares or
merchandise without first obtaining a license to do so from the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 812.01) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 812.02 LICENSE APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE.
   Applications for the license required by §
812.01 of this chapter shall be made, in writing, to the Mayor, stating the
kinds of goods, wares or merchandise desired to be sold at public auction and
the length of time desired to continue the sale. The Mayor, after the payment
of the license fee hereinafter provided for, shall issue to the person a
license stating therein that the applicant has complied with the requirements
of this section and stating the length of time for which the license is
granted.
(Prior Code, § 812.02) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 812.03 LICENSE FEES.
   The fee for the license required by §
812.01 of this chapter shall be $15 for the first day of an individual sale and
$10 for each succeeding day thereafter. Any person who maintains an
establishment for auction sales on a regular basis shall be required to obtain
an annual license. The annual license fee shall be $50 per year.
(Prior Code, § 812.03) (Ord. 10-1965, passed 1-11-1965)
§ 812.04 APPLICATION TO COURT SALES.
   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply to any person making a
sale of any property at auction by virtue of any judgment, order or decree of
any court, under authority of law, and the provisions in §§
812.01 to
812.03 of this chapter shall not be taken or held to license any person to
engage in the occupation of auctioneer, their intent being merely to regulate
the sale of goods and other property at public auction.
(Prior Code, § 812.04) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 812.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
more than $500 or imprisoned not more than six months, or both. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 812.99) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
CHAPTER 816: BILLIARD AND POOL ROOMS
Section
816.01   Permit required; revocation.
816.02   Permit fee; effective period.
816.03   Hours of business.
816.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Alcoholic beverages, see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 612
   Disorderly conduct, see GEN. OFF.
648.04
   Gambling, see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 630
   Power to regulate, see Ohio R.C. 715.51, 715.61
§ 816.01 PERMIT REQUIRED; REVOCATION.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall open or keep open a public place where the game
of billiards or pool may be permitted until such person has first obtained a
permit therefor from the Mayor.
      (2)   Such permit may be issued by the Mayor after an application
therefor has been made and has received the approval of the Chief of Police. In
the case of a corporation or partnership, the application must disclose the
names of all parties or officers in the corporation interested in the same; all
such applications shall be referred for investigation to the Chief of Police,
who shall, within five days after receipt thereof, report in writing to the
Mayor as to the character and reputation of the applicant.
      (3)   No such permit shall be issued unless approved by the Chief of
Police and all such applications shall bear the signature of the applicant and
the names of two responsible citizens of the city as reference to the character
and reputation of the applicant.
   (B)   (1)   No such permit shall be issued to any person who has been
convicted of a felony.
      (2)   No such permit shall be issued to apply to a location used for
gambling.
      (3)   Any permit issued for a public billiard or pool room may be revoked
for either of the foregoing causes.
   (C)   In all cases of revocation or refusal to issue any such permit, the
Mayor shall, upon written request of the applicant or permit holder, conduct a
hearing on the grounds for such refusal or revocation, and the Mayor, after
hearing, may affirm, disaffirm or modify such ruling.
(Prior Code, § 816.01) (Ord. 26-1954, passed 3-15-1954)
§ 816.02 PERMIT FEE; EFFECTIVE PERIOD.
   Any person granted a public billiard or pool room permit by the Mayor
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall pay a fee of $10 therefor,
which permit shall be good for a period of one year from the date of issue,
unless it is revoked sooner for good and sufficient cause, as herein stated.
(Prior Code, § 816.02) (Ord. 26-1954, passed 3-15-1954)
§ 816.03 HOURS OF BUSINESS.
   Any public place in which a billiard or pool table is kept for the purpose
of playing thereon, or permitting the playing thereon of the games of billiards
or pool, shall be deemed to be a billiard or pool room within the meaning of
this chapter, whether such place contains one or more billiard or pool tables,
or whether or not such place contains other businesses or activities. Billiard
or pool rooms and all businesses and activities in connection therewith shall
at all times be conducted in a quiet and orderly manner, and the billiard or
pool tables contained in any such places shall not be used or permitted to be
used between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. of the following day.
Such billiard or pool rooms shall not be open for business on Sundays before
the hour of 1:00 p.m. During such hours of prohibited use, the tables shall be
covered.
(Prior Code, § 816.03) (Ord. 9-1969, passed 3-3-1969)
§ 816.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
more than $500 or imprisoned not more than six months, or both. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 816.99) (Ord. 26-1954, passed 3-15-1954)
CHAPTER 820: BOXING AND WRESTLING
Section
820.01   Establishment of Commission; membership.
820.02   Duties.
820.03   Authority to license promoters; permits for exhibitions.
820.04   Issuance of licenses and permits.
820.05   Fees.
820.06   Promoter’s bond.
820.07   Expenses.
820.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Alcoholic beverages, see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 612
   Authority to establish Commission, see CHTR. §
6.05
   Disorderly conduct, see GEN. OFF.
648.04
   Disturbing the peace, see GEN. OFF.
648.05
   Gambling, see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 630
   Law Director, see CHTR. §
4.05
   Public boxing exhibitions, see Ohio R.C. 3773.38
§ 820.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION; MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Boxing and Wrestling Commission to consist
of three persons to be appointed by the Mayor and to serve at his or her
pleasure. Such Commission shall consist of one member from Council and two
persons domiciled in the city. A member of the Law Director’s office designated
by the Law Director shall be an ex officio member of the Commission and serve
as its Secretary. The Mayor shall designate one member of the Commission as
Chairperson.
   (B)   No member of the Commission shall be interested either directly or
indirectly in the promotion of any boxing or wrestling exhibition.
   (C)   No member of the Commission shall receive any salary or fee as a
member of such Commission or as one of its officers.
(Prior Code, § 820.01) (Ord. 130-1961, passed 9-18-1961)
§ 820.02 DUTIES.
   (A)   The duties of the Boxing and Wrestling Commission shall be to
supervise all boxing and wrestling exhibitions held in the city, to make and
enforce regulations governing such exhibitions and to provide rules and
regulations for the prevention of any indecent, immoral or disorderly conduct
in the interest of preserving peace and good order, and for the prevention of
any unnecessary noise or disturbance in connection with such exhibitions.
   (B)   All rules and regulations shall be approved by the Director of Law and
by Council.
(Prior Code, § 820.02) (Ord. 130-1961, passed 9-18-1961)
§ 820.03 AUTHORITY TO LICENSE PROMOTERS; PERMITS FOR EXHIBITIONS.
   (A)   The Boxing and Wrestling Commission shall recommend to the Mayor the
approval or rejection of applications for licenses for promoters and permits
for boxing and wrestling exhibitions.
   (B)   The Mayor, with the approval of the Director of Law, may issue
licenses for promoters and permits for boxing and wrestling exhibitions.
(Prior Code, § 820.03) (Ord. 130-1961, passed 9-18-1961)
§ 820.04 ISSUANCE OF LICENSES AND PERMITS.
   All permits or licenses provided for in §
820.03 of this chapter shall be issued by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 820.04) (Ord. 130-1961, passed 9-18-1961)
§ 820.05 FEES.
   (A)   The fees to be paid for licenses and permits granted under authority
of this chapter shall be as follows:
 
Amateur exhibitions where no admission is charged                          $1
Amateur exhibitions where admission is charged                             $5
Professional exhibitions where the established price does not exceed $0.75 $10
Professional exhibitions where the established price exceeds $0.75, but    $15
does not exceed $1
Professional exhibitions where the established price exceeds $1, but does  $20
not exceed $1.50
Professional exhibitions where the established price is $1.50 or over      $25
Promoter’s license (annual)                                              $5
 
   (B)   The term AMATEUR, as used in this section, means any contestant who
receives no fee, expenses or other thing of value for participation, except
trophies.
(Prior Code, § 820.05) (Ord. 130-1961, passed 9-18-1961)
§ 820.06 PROMOTER’S BOND.
   Each licensed promoter shall be required to post a bond in an amount not to
exceed $3,000, which bond shall be conditioned upon:
   (A)   Payment of all license fees required in §
820.05 of this chapter;
   (B)   Compliance with the laws of the state, the ordinances of the city and
the rules and regulations of the Boxing and Wrestling Commission; and
   (C)   Payment of all debts and expenses lawfully incurred in connection with
each exhibition.
(Prior Code, § 820.06) (Ord. 130-1961, passed 9-18-1961)
§ 820.07 EXPENSES.
   The necessary expenses of the Boxing and Wrestling Commission shall be paid
from time to time upon voucher of the Chairperson pursuant to appropriations
made therefor by Council.
(Prior Code, § 820.07) (Ord. 130-1961, passed 9-18-1961)
§ 820.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter or any rule or regulation made by the Boxing and Wrestling Commission
pursuant to this chapter shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not
more than six months, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 820.99) (Ord. 130-1961, passed 9-18-1961)
CHAPTER 822: CABLE TELEVISION
Section
822.01   Regulation of basic cable television rates.
822.02   Establishment and duties of cable regulatory staff.
822.03   Computation of time.
822.04   Effective date of rate regulation for basic service and equipment.
822.05   Initiation of review of basic cable service and equipment rates.
822.06   Participation of interested parties.
822.07   Staff and Council review of basic cable rates and equipment costs.
822.08   Additional time for review of rates and basic service and equipment.
822.09   Small systems.
822.10   Written decision.
822.11   Proprietary information.
822.12   Forfeitures for non-compliance.
822.13   Burden of proof.
822.14   Notification of proposed rate increase.
822.15   Change in status of cable operator.
822.16   Video service provider fees.
Cross-reference:
   Cable television contracts, see Ohio R.C. 505.90 et seq.
   Interrupting or impairing television, see Ohio R.C. 2909.04
   “Property” defined to include cable television service, see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Regulation of political broadcast, see Ohio R.C. 3599.09
   “Services” defined to include cable television service, see GEN. OFF.
642.01
§ 822.01 REGULATION OF BASIC CABLE TELEVISION RATES.
   The city hereby adopts the rate regulation rules promulgated by the FCC
pursuant to the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of
1992 (“1992 Cable Act”), 47 C.F.R. part 76, subpart N. The determination of the
lawfulness of any cable television rate within the City’s jurisdiction will be
made pursuant to these FCC rules or any successor FCC regulations. All terms
used herein have the same meaning and application as in the FCC’s cable rate
regulation rules.
(Prior Code, § 822.01) (Ord. 75-1994, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 822.02 ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES OF CABLE REGULATORY STAFF.
   (A)   A cable regulatory staff (the “staff”) for the city will be organized
by the Mayor in order to administer the regulation of basic cable service and
equipment rates pursuant to the FCC’s cable rate regulations and the 1992 Cable
Act, with the aid of counsel and other consultants as may be needed. The
Council may at any time delegate additional duties to the staff.
   (B)   In all instances involving the determination of the lawfulness of a
cable television service rate or rates, the staff will present to the Council a
recommended decision based on the record. The Council may adopt, amend or
remand for further review a recommended decision of the staff. The Council may
also direct the staff, at any time, to investigate issues pertaining to cable
rate regulation and provide a recommended decision. Any adoption by the Council
of any recommended decision by the staff regarding the lawfulness of a cable
television service rate or rates shall be considered a final decision. The
staff shall communicate the results of final decisions to the affected cable
operators in writing.
(Prior Code, § 822.02) (Ord. 75-1994, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 822.03 COMPUTATION OF TIME.
   This section only applies to time periods that need to be computed for
participation in cable rate regulation proceedings administered by the staff or
the Council.
   (A)   The term “day” shall apply to all days, regardless of holidays.
   (B)   The term “business day” means all days which are not “holidays”.
   (C)   If the date for any event specified in these rules falls on a holiday,
the relevant date will be the next business day.
   (D)   The term “holiday” means Saturday, Sunday, officially recognized legal
holidays and any other day on which the staff’s offices are not open. For
example, a regularly scheduled staff business day may become a “holiday” if its
offices are closed for all or part of regular working hours due to adverse
weather or emergency conditions.
   (E)   The first day to be counted in any period of time is the day after the
event which initiates the period. For example, if comments are to be filed
within five days of a public notice issued on November 12, the deadline for
filing the comments would be November 17.
(Prior Code, § 822.03) (Ord. 75-1994, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 822.04 EFFECTIVE DATE OF RATE REGULATION FOR BASIC SERVICE AND EQUIPMENT.
   Pursuant to 47 C.F.R. §§ 76.910(e)(2) and 76.922, the initial date of
regulation for the basic service tier shall be the date on which local notice
is given to the cable operator that the provision of the basic service tier is
subject to rate regulation. This local notice will be in the form of a letter
sent by the staff to the cable operator.
(Prior Code, § 822.04) (Ord. 75-1994, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 822.05 INITIATION OF REVIEW OF BASIC CABLE SERVICE AND EQUIPMENT RATES.
   Pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.930, a cable operator shall file its schedule of
rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment with the staff within
30 days of receiving written notification from the staff that the city has been
certified by the FCC to regulate rates for the basic service tier. To comply
with this provision, a cable operator must file a Form 393 regarding rates that
were charged since 9-1-1993, or one year prior to the commencement of the
city’s rate regulation, whichever is the shorter period, and a second Form 393
regarding any proposed rate increases.
(Prior Code, § 822.05) (Ord. 75-1994, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 822.06 PARTICIPATION OF INTERESTED PARTIES.
   (A)   For purposes of this chapter, PUBLIC NOTICE shall mean publication in
a newspaper of general circulation as described in Ohio R.C. 7.12.
   (B)   Pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.935, the staff shall, within a reasonable
time of, but in any case within the 21 days after, receiving the cable
operator’s Form 393 and any related material, issue a public notice stating
that it has received this information.
   (C)   The notice will provide the address of the city or staff office where
the operator’s Form 393 and any related material will be available for public
viewing within specified times. The notice will also provide the address and
telephone number of the cable operator. The cable operator is required to
provide interested parties, upon request, with copies of Form 393 and any
related materials filed with the staff.
   (D)   After the staff issues the public notice described in divisions (A)
through (C) above, interested parties will have five business days to file
written comments with the staff. There is no prescribed format for these
comments.
(Prior Code, § 822.06) (Ord. 75-1994, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 822.07 STAFF AND COUNCIL REVIEW OF BASIC CABLE RATES AND EQUIPMENT COSTS.
   (A)   Pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.933(a), after a cable operator has
submitted for review its existing or past rates for the basic service tier and
associated equipment costs, or a proposed increase in these rates (including
increases in the baseline channel change that results from reductions in the
number of channels in a tier), the existing rates will remain in effect or the
proposed rates will become effective after 30 days from the date of submission;
provided, however, that, the staff may toll this 30-day deadline for an
additional time by issuing a brief written order, as described in division (B)
below, within 30 days of the rate submission explaining that it needs
additional time to review the rates.
   (B)   Pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.933(b), if the staff is unable to
determine, based upon the material submitted by the cable operator, that the
past, existing or proposed rates are within the FCC’s permitted basic service
tier charge or actual cost of equipment, as defined in 47 C.F.R. §§ 76.922 and
76.923, or if a cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing pursuant
to 47 C.F.R. §§ 76.937(c) and 76.924, seeking to justify a rate above the FCC’s
basic service tier charge as defined in 47 C.F.R. §§ 76.922 and 76.923, then
the staff may toll the 30-day deadline set forth in division (A) above to
request and consider additional information or to consider the comments from
interested parties as follows:
      (1)   For an additional 90 days, in cases not involving cost-of-service
showings, for a total of 120 days from the filing by the cable operator of the
Form 393; or
      (2)   For an additional 150 days, in cases involving cost-of-service
showings, for a total of 180 days from the filing by the cable operator of the
Form 393.
   (C)   Pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.933(c), if the staff has availed itself of
the additional 90 or 150 days permitted in division (B) above, whichever is
applicable, and has taken no action within these additional time periods, then
the proposed rates will go into effect at the end of the 90- or 150-day period,
whichever is applicable, or, if no new rates have been proposed, then the
existing rates will remain in effect at such times. All rates allowed into
effect under this division (C) will remain subject to refunds if the staff
subsequently issues a written decision disapproving any portion of such rates;
provided, however, that, to order refunds the staff must have issued a brief
written order to the cable operator by the end of the 90 or 150-day period
permitted in division (B) above, whichever is applicable, directing the
operator to keep an accurate account of all amounts received by reason of the
rate in issue and on whose behalf such amounts were paid.
   (D)   If the staff does not seek additional time, the staff will, within the
30-day deadline, submit a recommended decision to the Council about the
reasonableness of the cable operator’s rates. If, within the 30- day period,
the Council does not act upon the staff’s recommended decision, then the
recommended decision will be considered a final decision.
(Prior Code, § 822.07) (Ord. 75-1994, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 822.08 ADDITIONAL TIME FOR REVIEW OF RATES FOR BASIC SERVICE AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   If the staff has availed itself of the additional 90 or 150 days
permitted in 47 C.F.R. § 76.933(b), whichever is applicable, then the staff
shall publish a schedule for the issuance of a recommended decision within the
additional time and for the submission of comments by interested parties.
   (B)   Thirty days before the ninetieth day or the one hundred-fiftieth day,
whichever is applicable, the staff shall publish a draft of its recommended
decision. Interested parties will then have five business days to file comments
with the staff regarding the recommended decision.
   (C)   Upon the expiration of the comment period set forth in division (B)
above, the record for the cable rate regulation proceeding will close. The
Council will then have an opportunity to review the recommended decision and
any comments or documents filed in the rate proceeding. Nothing in this
provision prohibits the Council from reviewing the staff’s draft recommended
decision or documents filed with the staff at any time.
   (D)   If the Council does not act upon the staff’s recommended decision by
the ninetieth or the one hundred- fiftieth day, whichever is applicable, then
the recommended decision will be considered the final decision.
   (E)   Within the 90- or 150-day period, whichever is applicable, the Council
may remand the recommended decision to the staff for further review based on
the Council’s recommendations.
   (F)   If the period for additional review by the staff extends beyond the
applicable period specified in division (A) above, then the proposed rates will
go into effect at the end of the 90- or 150-day period, whichever is
applicable, or, if no new rates have been proposed, then the existing rates
will remain in effect at such times. All rates allowed into effect under this
division (F) will remain subject to refunds in the event that the staff
subsequently issues a written decision, pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.933(c),
disapproving any portion of such rates.
(Prior Code, § 822.08) (Ord. 75-1994, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 822.09 SMALL SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.934, the Council may permit a small system,
as defined in 47 C.F.R. § 76.901, to certify that the small system’s rates for
basic service and associated equipment comply with 47 C.F.R. § 76.922.
   (B)   A system seeking the certification described in division (A) above
must file a petition to this effect with the staff.
   (C)   Within a reasonable time of receiving such a petition, the staff shall
issue a public notice as described in §
822.06 of this chapter stating that it has received such a petition. The notice
will provide the address of the staff office where the petition will be
available for public viewing within specified times. The notice will also
provide the address and telephone number of the cable operator. The cable
operator is required to provide interested parties with copies of the petition.
In addition, the notice will also provide a date for the presentation of a
recommended decision by the staff to the Council and shall set a date by which
the Council must act upon the recommended decision, which shall be at least 30
days after the submission of the staff’s recommended decision. If the Council
takes no action by the date designated by the staff, then the recommended
decision shall be considered a final decision.
   (D)   After the staff issues the public notice described in division (C)
above, interested parties will have five business days to file written comments
with the staff.
(Prior Code, § 822.09) (Ord. 75-1994, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 822.10 WRITTEN DECISION.
   Pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.936, the staff will issue a written decision in a
rate-making proceeding whenever it or the Council disapproves an initial or
past rate for the basic service tier or associated equipment in whole or in
part, disapproves a request for a rate increase in whole or in part, or
approves a request for an increase in whole or in part over the objections of
interested parties. In the event that the Council has taken action which
constitutes a final decision of such nature, the written decision will not be
issued until approved by Council. The staff is not required to issue a written
decision that approves an unopposed past, existing or proposed rate for the
basic service tier or associated equipment. The written decision may follow the
announcement of a final decision by a period not to exceed 30 days, unless
additional time is necessary for Council approval as required in this section.
(Prior Code, § 822.10) (Ord. 75-1994, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 822.11 PROPRIETARY INFORMATION.
   Pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.938, the staff may require the production of
proprietary information by the cable operator to make a rate determination and,
in such cases, the staff will devise and apply procedures analogous to those
set forth in 47 C.F.R. § 0.459 regarding requests for confidentiality. If no
request for confidentiality is made, or if the staff denies a request for
confidentiality, the information will be made available for public inspection
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 149.43. A cable operator may appeal to the Council a
denial by the staff of a request for confidentiality. The material which is
subject to the request for confidentiality will not be made available for
public inspection pending a Council decision on the request.
(Prior Code, § 822.11) (Ord. 75-1994, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 822.12 FORFEITURES FOR NON-COMPLIANCE.
   Pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.943(a), the Mayor is hereby authorized to impose
a civil monetary forfeiture on any cable operator that does not comply with a
rate decision or a refund order directed specifically at the cable operator. In
his or her decision to impose such a forfeiture, the Mayor may consider the
pendency of any appeals or legal action involving the rate decision or refund
order, the amount of the refund or rate reduction and the intentional or
unintentional nature of the non-compliance. Such forfeitures may be imposed
pursuant to the following schedule:
   (A)   Failure to implement a rate reduction or refund within 60 days of the
date of the communication to the cable operator of the written decision
ordering such rate reduction or refund: $10,000; and
   (B)   Failure to implement a rate reduction or refund after 60 days of the
date of the communication to the cable operator of the written decision
ordering such rate reduction or refund: $1,000 per day for each day of non-
compliance.
(Prior Code, § 822.12) (Ord. 75-1994, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 822.13 BURDEN OF PROOF.
   (A)   Pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.937(a), a cable operator has the burden of
proving that its past, existing or proposed rates for basic service and
associated equipment comply with 47 U.S.C. § 543 and 47 C.F.R. §§ 76.922 and
76.923.
   (B)   For a past, existing or proposed rate for basic tier service or
associated equipment that is within the permitted tier charge and actual cost
of equipment as set forth in 47 C.F.R. §§ 76.922 and 76.923, the cable operator
must submit the appropriate FCC form.
   (C)   For a past, existing or proposed rate for basic tier service that
exceeds the permitted tier charge as set forth in 47 C.F.R. §§ 76.922 and
76.923, the cable operator must submit a cost-of-service showing to justify the
proposed rate.
(Prior Code, § 822.13) (Ord. 75-1994, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 822.14 NOTIFICATION OF PROPOSED RATE INCREASE.
   Pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.922, a cable operator shall provide written
notice to a subscriber of any increase in the price to be charged for the basic
service tier or associated equipment at least 30 days before any proposed
increase is effective. The notice shall include the name and address of the
Council and the staff.
(Prior Code, § 822.14) (Ord. 75-1994, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 822.15 CHANGE IN STATUS OF CABLE OPERATOR.
   (A)   Pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.907, a cable operator may petition the city
for a change in its regulatory status based on a showing of effective
competition. The operator bears the burden of proving the existence of
effective competition.
   (B)   Within a reasonable time of receiving a cable operator’s petition for
a change in regulatory status, the staff shall issue a public notice stating
that the city has received such a petition. The notice will contain a date for
the presentation of a recommended decision by the staff to the Council. The
notice will also contain the address of the staff office where the operator’s
petition will be available for public viewing within specified times. The
notice will also provide the name and address of the cable operator. The cable
operator is required to provide interested parties with copies of the petition
upon request.
   (C)   Pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.907, oppositions to the operator’s petition
may be filed with the staff within 15 days of public notice of the filing of
the petition and must be served on the operator. The cable operator may reply
within seven days of filing of oppositions.
   (D)   The initial public notice issued by the staff will contain a schedule
for the presentation of a recommended decision to the Council. Pursuant to 47
C.F.R. § 76.907, decisions on petitions for change in status must be made
within 30 days after the pleading cycle set forth in divisions (B) and (C)
above closes. The staff must notify the FCC within ten days of any decision
changing regulatory status. Unless the FCC receives an opposition to such
change in status, the decision will become effective 30 days after adoption by
the Council.
   (E)   Pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.907, if there is a final determination by
the Council that effective competition exists, then the Council and the staff
will cease regulating basic cable service rates. A final determination that
there is no effective competition may be appealed to the FCC pursuant to the
FCC’s rules.
(Prior Code, § 822.15) (Ord. 75-1994, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 822.16 VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEES.
   (A)   (1)   The Council hereby establishes a VSP fee that is calculated by
applying a VSP fee percentage of 5% to the video service provider’s gross
revenues as defined in Ohio R.C. 1332.32(B).
      (2)   For purposes of calculating the VSP fee, the provider’s gross
revenues shall include advertising revenues in accordance with Ohio R.C.
1332.23(B)(2)(g). The VSP fee percentage and the video law gross revenues
definition, as modified in this section, shall apply equally to all video
service providers and cable television operators providing video service in the
city.
   (B)   The VSP fee shall be paid by each video service provider providing
service in the city on a quarterly basis, but not sooner than 45 days nor later
than 60 days after the end of each calendar quarter pursuant to Ohio R.C.
1332.32(A).
   (C)   The Mayor is authorized and directed to provide any video service
provider with notice of the VSP fee percentage and gross revenues definition as
determined by this Council above, which notice shall be given by certified
mail, upon receipt of notice from such video service provider that it will
begin providing video service in the city pursuant to a state-issued video
service authorization.
(Prior Code, § 822.16) (Ord. 158-2008, passed 9-8-2008)
CHAPTER 824: DANCES AND DANCE HALLS
Section
824.01   “Public dance hall” defined.
824.02   License required; fee; effective period; posting.
824.03   Prerequisites to issuance of license; revocation.
824.04   Closing hour.
824.05   Refusal of license.
824.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Disorderly conduct, see GEN. OFF.
648.04
   Intoxicating liquor in dance hall, see Ohio R.C. 4399.14
   Power to regulate dancing academies and public ballrooms, see Ohio R.C.
715.61
   Public indecency, see GEN. OFF.
666.06
§ 824.01 “PUBLIC DANCE HALL” DEFINED.
   As used in this chapter, PUBLIC DANCE HALL means any hall, room, place or
space which is maintained and used for the purpose of public dances.
(Prior Code, § 824.01)
§ 824.02 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE; EFFECTIVE PERIOD; POSTING.
   (A)   No person shall hold any dance in any public dance hall within the
city until such public dance hall has been first duly licensed for such
purpose. Such license shall be issued by the Mayor for a period of one year
from the date thereof or for a period of six months from the date thereof, upon
payment by the applicant for such license of the following fees: $25 for a
period of one year or $15 for a period of six months.
   (B)   The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within any hall
where a dance is held.
(Prior Code, § 824.02)
§ 824.03 PREREQUISITES TO ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; REVOCATION.
   (A)   No license for a public dance hall shall be issued unless the owner of
such hall complies with and conforms to the provisions of this chapter and all
other ordinances and health and fire regulations of the city and unless such
hall is properly ventilated and supplied with sufficient toilet conveniences
and is a safe and proper place for the purpose for which it is to be used.
   (B)   The license issued for any public dance hall may be revoked by the
Mayor for a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or for
disorderly or immoral conduct upon the premises.
(Prior Code, § 824.03)
§ 824.04 CLOSING HOUR.
   All public dances shall be discontinued and all public dance halls shall be
closed at or before the hour of 11:30 p.m.
(Prior Code, § 824.04)
§ 824.05 REFUSAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The Mayor may decline to issue a license to any public dance hall if,
in his or her opinion, the applicant is not a suitable person to conduct the
same or, considering any other circumstances or situations, such public dance
hall would be detrimental to the peace or morals of the city.
   (B)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Mayor made pursuant to
division (A) above may appeal such decision, within ten days of such decision,
to an appeals board consisting of the Director of Public Safety, the Director
of Public Service and the Chief of Police. Such board shall have authority to
affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the Mayor and the decision of such
board shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 824.05)
§ 824.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
more than $500 or imprisoned not more than six months, or both. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 824.99) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
CHAPTER 828: FORTUNETELLING
Section
828.01   Prohibited.
828.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Theft by deception, see GEN. OFF.
642.02(a)(3)
   Securing writings by deception, see GEN. OFF.
642.19
§ 828.01 PROHIBITED.
   No person shall represent himself or herself as an astrologer,
fortuneteller, clairvoyant, palmister or phrenologist.
(Prior Code, § 828.01) (Ord. 53-1938, passed 6-6-1938)
§ 828.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates this chapter shall be fined not more than $500 or
imprisoned not more than six months, or both. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 828.99) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
CHAPTER 830: GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS
Section
830.01   Posting of prices.
830.02   Non-conforming use.
830.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Avoiding traffic control devices, see TRAF.
313.09
   Gasoline, oils and paints, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3741
   Late night gasoline stations, see GEN. OFF. Ch. 834
   Petroleum liquids and gases, see Ohio R.C. 3737.87 et seq.
   Unauthorized signs and signals, hiding from view, advertising, see TRAF.
313.07
§ 830.01 POSTING OF PRICES.
   All gasoline service station owners and/or operators shall post the price
per gallon of regular, premium, unleaded and diesel fuels. Such posting shall
be done in such a manner that the prices are clearly legible and visible to
passing motorists. The area for each price shall be not less than one square
foot and shall be located at the property line of each gasoline station. If a
gasoline station fronts on more than one street, signs shall be placed on both
streets. If a gasoline station has a permanent sign designed to display prices,
that station shall not be required to post its prices at the property line(s).
Such signs shall be in conformity with the Zoning Code of the city.
(Prior Code, § 830.01) (Ord. 233-1981, passed 12-28-1981)
§ 830.02 NON-CONFORMING USE.
   (A)   Any gasoline filling station, existing and lawful at the time of the
enactment of a zoning ordinance or amendment thereto, may be continued even if
such use does not conform with the provisions of such ordinance or amendment.
   (B)   However, if any such non-conforming use is voluntarily discontinued
for two years or more, then no person shall reopen or operate such gasoline
filling station unless it is in conformity with the zoning ordinances and
amendments thereto.
(Prior Code, § 830.02) (Ord. 231-1972, passed 10-16-1972)
§ 830.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
more than $500 or imprisoned not more than six months, or both. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 830.99)
CHAPTER 832: GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALES
Section
832.01   License required.
832.02   License application.
832.03   Merchandise not to be added to stock.
832.04   License renewal; fee.
832.05   Investigation.
832.06   Exceptions.
832.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Disposition of property held by Police Division, see GEN. OFF.
606.24
   Falsification, see GEN. OFF.
606.10
   Licensed auctioneers, see B. R. & T. Ch.
812
   Materials on streets and sidewalks, see GEN. OFF.
668.05
   Merchandise displays, see GEN. OFF.
668.07
§ 832.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall promote, advertise or announce, by any means or device, that
any sale of goods, wares or merchandise is caused or is occasioned by the
intention of discontinuing business in the city, nor conduct any such sale,
unless a license is first obtained from the Mayor to conduct such sale.
(Prior Code, § 832.01) (Ord. 130-1955, passed 8-15-1955)
§ 832.02 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   Upon application for a license required by §
832.01 of this chapter, the applicant shall make a full disclosure under oath
of the following information:
   (A)   The true name of the owner of the goods, wares or merchandise to be
offered for sale and the name of the operator of the sale if he or she is a
person other than the true owner; and
   (B)   A full and complete inventory of the quantity, kind and character of
the articles to be offered for sale, which inventory shall be prepared in the
following manner:
      (1)   An itemized listing of all articles and the quantities thereof
remaining unsold which have been in stock on the premises where such sale is to
be conducted for a period of 15 days or longer prior to the application for the
license;
      (2)   An itemized listing of all articles and the quantities thereof
received in stock on such premises within the 15 days immediately preceding the
application for the license; and
      (3)   An itemized listing of all articles and the quantities thereof
which have been ordered to be placed in stock at such premises for the duration
of the sale, and the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal thereof;
provided, however, that, all articles itemized as provided in this section
shall be goods, wares or merchandise purchased by the applicant for resale on
bona fide orders without cancellation privileges and shall not comprise any
articles purchased on consignment.
(Prior Code, § 832.02) (Ord. 130-1955, passed 8-15-1955)
§ 832.03 MERCHANDISE NOT TO BE ADDED TO STOCK.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B) above, no person licensed
under the provisions of this chapter shall, during the continuance of a sale,
add any goods, wares or merchandise to the stock described and inventoried in
his or her original application for a license, and no goods, wares or
merchandise shall be sold at or during such sale, except as described and
inventoried in the original application.
      (2)   Each and every addition of goods, wares or merchandise to such
stock on the premises, each sale of such goods, wares or merchandise which has
not been described and inventoried in the original application and each false
statement of fact in the application shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Nothing in division (A) above shall be deemed to prohibit the
addition, during the continuance of a sale, to the stock described and
inventoried in a licensee’s original application for a license of goods, wares
or merchandise which were ordered prior to the date of such sale; provided
that, such licensee can prove the existence of such order to the satisfaction
of the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 832.03) (Ord. 130-1955, passed 8-15-1955)
§ 832.04 LICENSE RENEWAL; FEE.
   (A)   (1)   Licenses granted under the provisions of this chapter shall be
effective for a period of not more than 45 days, but may be renewed for a
subsequent period of not more than 45 days; provided that, satisfactory proof
is first submitted to the Mayor showing that the stock itemized in the original
application has not been disposed of.
      (2)   No other license shall be granted to the same person during a
period of one year after the expiration of a previous license, or renewal of a
license, granted as provided in this chapter.
   (B)   The Mayor shall receive from the applicant for such license, upon the
granting thereof, a fee of $25.
(Prior Code, § 832.04) (Ord. 130-1955, passed 8-15-1955)
§ 832.05 INVESTIGATION.
   The Mayor shall make or cause to be made such investigations and inquiries
throughout the conduct of any such sale as he or she may deem advisable to
effectuate the purposes of this chapter and the Mayor is hereby authorized to
administer oaths in connection with the taking of testimony pertaining thereto.
(Prior Code, § 832.05) (Ord. 130-1955, passed 8-15-1955)
§ 832.06 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to sales conducted by any
sheriff, constable or other public or court official, nor to any person acting
under the direction or authority of any state or federal court, selling goods,
wares and merchandise in the course of his or her official duties, nor to sales
by licensed auctioneers.
(Prior Code, § 832.06) (Ord. 130-1955, passed 8-15-1955)
§ 832.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
more than $500 or imprisoned not more than six months, or both. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 832.99) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
CHAPTER 834: LATE NIGHT RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS AND
GASOLINE STATIONS
Section
834.01   Definitions.
834.02   Security measures.
834.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Alarm systems, see S.U. & P.S. Ch.
1062
   Gasoline service stations, see B.R. & T. Ch.
830
   Merchandise displays, see GEN. OFF.
668.07
   Sales of alcoholic beverages, see GEN. OFF.
612.02 et seq.
   Sales of tobacco to minors, see GEN. OFF.
634.06
   Self-service retail pricing, see B.R. & T. Ch.
862
§ 834.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LATE NIGHT GASOLINE STATION. Any person, partnership, corporation or other
entity who or which sells gasoline or other petroleum fuel to the public
between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   LATE NIGHT RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any person, partnership, corporation or
other entity, except grocery stores and fast food establishments, which:
      (1)   Derives 50% or more of its gross income from the sale of goods,
merchandise or other articles of value which are intended for use off the
premises; and
      (2)   Sells goods, merchandise or other articles of value in their
original containers between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   PAY BOOTH. A structure within an establishment or gas station constructed of
bullet-resistant windows, walls and doors. Such PAY BOOTHS and required
equipment must be maintained in good working order at all times. Each PAY BOOTH
must conform to the security requirements set forth in §
834.02 of this chapter.
   PAY DRAWER and/or MERCHANDISE DRAWER. A through-the-wall bullet-resistant
security transaction drawer or opening in an exterior wall of a building which
allows a retail establishment to transact business from the establishment’s
building without direct customer contact. Such PAY AND/OR MERCHANDISE DRAWER(S)
shall be surrounded by bullet-resistant walls and windows. Such PAY AND/OR
MERCHANDISE DRAWER(S) must be maintained in proper working order at all times.
(Prior Code, § 834.01) (Ord. 80-1993, passed 7-26-1993)
§ 834.02 SECURITY MEASURES.
   (A)   All late night retail establishments and late night gasoline stations
shall:
      (1)   Post a sign in the window which is conspicuous and states that
there is a safe on the premises and that it is not accessible to the employees
on the premises;
      (2)   Post a sign in the window which is conspicuous and states that the
cash register has $50 or less in it;
      (3)   Arrange the signs posted in the windows so as to provide a clear
and unobstructed view of the interior of the store. In no case shall signs
obstruct the view of the register from the street;
      (4)   Have a drop-safe on the premises which is bolted to the floor or
installed in the floor, or weighs at least 500 pounds;
      (5)   Position their registers so that they are visible from the street;
      (6)   Install an alarm system which is connected to an alarm business or
monitoring facility which can alert the Police Department, to be used by
employees in case of an emergency; and
      (7)   Provide employees with robbery prevention and behavior training
courses as approved by the Police Department before such employee works between
the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   (B)   In addition to the above requirements, it is urged and recommended,
though not required, that all late night retail establishments and late night
gasoline stations continuously operate a video monitoring and recording system
between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   (C)   The entire area utilized by customers of the late night retail
establishment or late night gasoline station to park their cars must be lighted
and maintained at a minimum of five foot-candles per square foot. The level of
the lighting shall be measured at the surface of the parking area.
   (D)   If fewer than two employees are working between 1:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m., any employee operating a cash register or registers must conduct
business:
      (1)   From a pay booth; or
      (2)   By means of a pay and/or merchandise drawer or opening.
(Prior Code, § 834.02) (Ord. 80-1993, passed 7-26-1993)
§ 834.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than $500 or
imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both. For each subsequent offense, such
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not
more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than six months, or both. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during on which a violation occurs
or continues.
(Prior Code, § 834.99) (Ord. 80-1993, passed 7-26-1993)
CHAPTER 836: AMUSEMENT DEVICES, SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINES AND ARCADES
Section
836.01   Definitions.
836.02   License application; requirements.
836.03   Location.
836.04   License fee; transfer and display.
836.05   Revocation; hearing procedure.
836.06   Closing hours.
836.07   Miscellaneous operating requirements.
836.08   Collection at source.
Cross-reference:
   Skill-based amusement machines, prohibited conduct, see GEN. OFF.
630.14
§ 836.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANYTHING OF VALUE. Cash, cash equivalents, tangible objects, credits to play
and any other tangibles or intangibles, no matter how slight. ANYTHING OF VALUE
includes playing a game, viewing a video display, hearing an audio transmission
and reading entries or outcomes from any other kind of device. A person who
gives ANYTHING OF VALUE for a product or service, whether tangible or
intangible, in any way, directly or indirectly, in association with being given
access to the use of an entertainment device, is deemed to have given value for
the access to the entertainment device.
   ENTERTAINMENT DEVICE. Any mechanical, electronic, video or digital device
that is capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or
on behalf of a person, for the purpose of playing a game, viewing a video
display, hearing an audio transmission or reading entries or outcomes from any
other kind of device. ENTERTAINMENT DEVICE does not include any juke box, audio
book, video player or any device that gives anything of value where the only
value given, directly or indirectly, is a video or audio transmission.
   ENTERTAINMENT DEVICE ARCADE. Any business, establishment, room or place
where four or more entertainment devices are kept for use by the public or by
persons other than the owner of the devices, where persons give anything of
value to access the use of the entertainment devices or the premises, and the
person may be given anything of value by the operator, whether the giving
occurs on or off the premises or at the same time or a later time.
   OPERATOR. Any person or organization that owns, controls, operates, promotes
or maintains or knowingly engages in conduct that facilitates the operation of
an entertainment device arcade or the entertainment devices in an entertainment
device arcade.
(Prior Code, § 836.01) (Ord. 65-2010, passed 6-28-2010; Ord. 53-2012, passed 4-
9-2012)
§ 836.02 LICENSE APPLICATION; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No person, partnership, corporation or other entity shall operate or
conduct an entertainment device arcade without first obtaining a license
therefor from the Director of Public Safety. Every person, partnership,
corporation, organization or other entity shall make an application in writing
to the Director of Public Safety, which application shall set forth:
      (1)   The name under which the business is to be conducted;
      (2)   The location where the business is conducted, with a description of
the premises, including a scaled diagram;
      (3)   The name and address of any manager, supervisor and all other
employees;
      (4)   The name and address of the owner or owners of the entertainment
devices;
      (5)   The name, address and principal occupation of every person with an
interest in the business. If the business is conducted by:
         (a)   A sole proprietorship, the name, home address and principal
occupation of that individual;
         (b)   A firm or partnership, the names, home addresses and principal
occupations of each member of the firm or partnership; and
         (c)   A corporation, the names, home addresses and principal
occupations of all officers and shareholders and the statutory agent.
      (6)   The name, description, model number and serial number of each
entertainment device on the premises and any other device on the premises that
is necessary to the operation of the entertainment device;
      (7)   (a)   A list of each separate prize that may be given out and each
separate dollar amount that may be given; and
         (b)   The odds of winning any offered prize or dollar amount awarded
for the participation in any game, activity, program, scheme or play, use or
participation in any way in an entertainment device or participating in any
other activity or promotion in the entertainment device arcade, whether or not
the determination of the giving of the thing of value or the delivery of the
thing of value occurs totally within the confines of the premises or requires
some event, occurrence or happening at another location;
      (8)   The name and address of any and all persons, businesses or
organizations that provide games, computer software, equipment or services or
operate devices linked to the licensee’s entertainment devices or to devices
necessary to operate the entertainment devices, whether any such provisions are
sold, leased or licensed; and
      (9)   Make application with the City of Barberton Income Tax Division.
   (B)   The person, partnership, corporation or other entity operating or
conducting the business shall have a continuing duty to inform the Director of
Public Safety as to changes in the information required in this section. No
person, partnership, corporation or other entity shall operate or conduct an
entertainment device arcade at any time unless the information on file with the
Director of Public Safety is current and accurately reports the licensing
information at the time of operation.
   (C)   If an application is not approved, the Director of Public Safety shall
notify the applicant in writing, with reasons for rejection.
   (D)   The Director of Public Safety shall not issue a license to any person,
partnership, corporation or other entity if any of the persons with an interest
in the business or if any of the employees of the business have been convicted
of a violation of a federal or state statute or of any local ordinance
pertaining to gambling or other crime of moral turpitude within five years
preceding the application. Also, as a prerequisite to the issuance of such
license, an inspection shall be made of the premises by the Fire Division to
seek and obtain the approval of said agency.
   (E)   The entertainment device arcade shall be open to inspection and
viewing of operations by law enforcement officers and Fire Department personnel
at all times that the arcade is open for business. No operator shall fail to
immediately permit entry to any such city officials.
   (F)   Failure to register or pay a license fee for an entertainment device
shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license for the
entertainment device arcade and said device shall be seized and forfeited to
the city.
(Prior Code, § 836.02) (Ord. 65-2010, passed 6-28-2010; Ord. 53-2012, passed 4-
9-2012)
§ 836.03 LOCATION.
   (A)   No license shall be granted to an entertainment device arcade that
will conduct its business at a location that is within 1,000 feet from the
boundaries of a parcel of real estate having situated on it a school, public
library, public playground or any establishment that has been issued a liquor
permit by the state.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to any entertainment device arcade
locations in existence at the time of the passage of this chapter, and shall
not apply to any duly licensed entertainment device arcade locations in
existence at the time a school, public library, public playground or any
establishment that has been issued a liquor permit by the state moves within
1,000 feet of said entertainment device arcade. However, any change in
ownership of the entertainment device arcade or change in location will remove
said entertainment device arcade from this exception. CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP, in
the case of a partnership or corporation for the purpose of this section, means
more than 50% change in partners or shareholders from the partners or
shareholders owning the partnership or corporation as of the date the school,
public library or public playground moves within 1,000 feet of said
entertainment device arcade.
(Prior Code, § 836.03) (Ord. 65-2010, passed 6-28-2010; Ord. 182-2010, passed
12-13-2010; Ord. 53-2012, passed 4-9-2012)
§ 836.04 LICENSE FEE; TRANSFER AND DISPLAY.
   (A)   The non-refundable annual license fee, payable to the Director of
Public Safety at the time of initial or annual application, shall be $1,000 for
each business location for the year or any part thereof ending on December 31
of each year. Additionally, a semi-annual non-refundable license fee of $200
shall be paid to the Director of Public Safety for each entertainment device on
the premises during the following semi-annual period. The semi-annual license
fee for each entertainment device shall be paid upon preliminary approval of
the initial or annual application and no later than June 1 of each calendar
year, or, if the entertainment device is brought to the premises following the
payment of the semi-annual license fee, prior to such time as the entertainment
device is brought to or operating on the premises. For purposes of determining
licensing fees, each device that is operable by one or more persons is a
separate device.
   (B)   Licenses issued under this chapter shall not be transferable to any
other person, partnership, corporation or other entity and the business may be
conducted only at the location for which the license is issued. The license
must be so placed as to be made conspicuously visible and shall list each
entertainment device with serial number. No new licenses shall be issued
effective upon October 11, 2021.
   (C)   Failure to register any entertainment device before placement on the
premises is an unclassified misdemeanor and the operators shall each be liable
for a mandatory fine of $100 for each day the machine is not registered, and
said fine shall not be reduced or suspended.
(Prior Code, § 836.04) (Ord. 65-2010, passed 6-28-2010; Ord. 53-2012, passed 4-
9-2012; Ord. 112-2021, passed 10-25-2021)
§ 836.05 REVOCATION; HEARING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The license may be suspended or revoked at any time by the Director of
Public Safety on satisfactory proof that violation of the laws of the state,
ordinances of the city, or of this chapter occur on the premises. In addition
to any license suspension, the Director of Public Safety may assess the
licensee a penalty fee of not less than $500, nor more than $1,500, for any
violation of this chapter. Each day a continuing violation exists shall
constitute a separate violation for purpose of assessing penalty fees.
Suspensions, revocations and assessments of penalty fees by the Director of
Public Safety is in addition to and separate from any criminal liability and
does not preclude criminal prosecution for any violation of this chapter or
other city, state or federal laws.
   (B)   Any resident of the city may submit a written notice of complaint to
the Director of Public Safety in regard to any entertainment device arcade
location. The notice of complaint will include the name and address of the
resident, the address of the location and the specific reasons why the resident
is complaining. The Director of Public Safety or a designee from law
enforcement shall regularly inspect the premises, the operation, the
entertainment devices and the licensee’s records and may issue a notice of
complaint to the licensee for any violations.
   (C)   The Director of Public Safety or a designee from law enforcement shall
meet with the complainant and inquire as to the specific reasons for the
complaint. The Director of Public Safety or a designee may dismiss the
complaint if it is determined that:
      (1)   The specific reasons listed in the complaint are not proper grounds
for suspension or revocation of the license; and
      (2)   There are not substantial credible facts to support the complaint
by the resident.
   (D)   No appeal shall be from the decision of the Director of Public Safety
to dismiss a complaint.
   (E)   If the complaint is not dismissed by the Director of Public Safety,
the Director of Public Safety will then notify the licensee and the owner of
the devices on the premises, as listed on the license application, that a
complaint has been filed and will set a date for a fact-finding conference on
the matter. Extensions will be granted and necessary investigations will be
conducted at the discretion of the Director of Public Safety and the Director
of Public Safety may request the assistance of any person in law enforcement to
assist in the investigation. The Director of Public Safety and a designee and
any law enforcement officer shall have access to the premises and the records
of the licensee during all times that the entertainment devices are available
for play.
   (F)   At the time of the conference, the resident, the licensee and the
owner of the devices will meet and attempt to amicably resolve the situation.
If the resident, licensee and the owner can reach an amicable solution, the
Director of Public Safety will direct the licensee to comply with the solution
in his or her notice of reconciliation.
   (G)   If the parties cannot agree upon an amicable solution to the problem,
the Director of Public Safety will transmit the complaint, together with its
recommendation thereon, to the Entertainment Device Arcade License Review
Commission. The Director of Public Safety’s recommendation may be for dismissal
of the complaint, suspension of the license and assessment of penalty fees or
revocation of the license.
   (H)   The Commission shall consist of the Law Director or his or her
designated representative, the Director of Public Service or his or her
designated representative, and the Building Commissioner or his or her
designated representative.
   (I)   The Commission may accept, reject or modify the recommendation of the
Director of Public Safety. The resident, the licensee and the owner of the
devices, as listed on the license application, shall be notified in advance by
certified mail of the day on which the Commission is to consider the complaint;
and they may, if they so choose, be present during consideration of the
complaint. Consideration of the complaint before the Commission shall be a
public hearing which shall be held within 30 days after said notice is given.
The licensee shall have the right to be represented by counsel and have the
right to examine and cross-examine witnesses. The Commission shall enter its
decision the day of hearing. In the event of a decision and ruling adverse to
the licensee, the licensee shall have the right to appeal such decision and
ruling to a court of competent jurisdiction under authority of and pursuant to
the provisions of Ohio R.C. Ch. 2506.
   (J)   This complaint process is separate and distinct from any law
enforcement action taken to enforce the laws of the state or the city and this
chapter, and is not a condition precedent or otherwise an impediment to
enforcement of said laws by criminal prosecution.
(Prior Code, § 836.05) (Ord. 65-2010, passed 6-28-2010; Ord. 53-2012, passed 4-
9-2012)
§ 836.06 CLOSING HOURS.
   No operator of an entertainment device arcade shall permit the same to be or
remain open between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. of the next day. No
operator shall permit any person to operate any entertainment device between
the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. of the next day.
(Prior Code, § 836.06) (Ord. 65-2010, passed 6-28-2010; Ord. 53-2012, passed 4-
9-2012)
§ 836.07 MISCELLANEOUS OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any entertainment device arcade shall have an adult who is 21 years of
age or over on the premises and supervising at all times the entertainment
devices during all hours of operation.
   (B)   The interior of the entertainment device arcade shall provide a
minimum area of 30 square feet per entertainment device in each room in which
entertainment devices are located.
   (C)   No operator shall permit the sale, possession or consumption of
alcoholic beverages on the premises of an entertainment device arcade.
   (D)   No operator shall fail to maintain order and quiet on the premises so
as not to violate the public peace.
   (E)   No persons under the age of eighteen years shall be permitted on the
premises of any entertainment device arcade where any prize valued at greater
than $10 may be awarded.
   (F)   (1)   The operator shall require a photo identification of every
person to whom any thing of value is given in connection with the entertainment
device arcade and shall record the person’s name and home address and a
description of the thing given, a stated dollar value of the thing given, the
date and time of the giving and, if an entertainment device is involved in the
circumstances of the giving, the serial number or other identifying description
of the device. If the dollar value of the thing given to a person is more than
$10, the operator shall include in the record a copy of the photo
identification and the person’s Social Security number.
      (2)   By the second Tuesday of each month the operator shall cause to be
delivered to the City Income Tax Division a copy of the record of things given
to persons together with the above required information given during the
preceding month. The operator and the Income Tax Division shall not disclose
the Social Security number of any person to anyone, except as required by the
laws of the State of Ohio and the United States government.
   (G)   The operator shall post, in a conspicuous place on the premises in the
room where the entertainment devices are located, in no less than 20-point
type:
      (1)   Each separate prize that may be given and each separate dollar
amount that might be given;
      (2)   The odds as stated in the filing with the Director of Public
Safety, as required in §
836.02(A)(7)(b) of this chapter; and
      (3)   A complete statement of the rules and conditions pertaining to the
giving of any prizes or anything of value to any person, whether or not the
determination of the giving of the thing of value or the delivery of the thing
of value occurs totally within the confines of the premises or requires some
event, occurrence or happening at another location.
   (H)   The operator shall keep a complete set of all records of the
operations at the premises at all times, including all federal, state and local
tax records, all records of payments and receipts, all records of expenses and
revenues of the operation, all banking records, all contracts, leases and
agreements affecting the premises, equipment and operation, all personnel
records and all other records pertaining to the business. Records more than ten
years old are excepted from this requirement.
   (I)   No applicant shall make a false or incorrect statement in an
application for an entertainment device arcade license and no operator shall
fail to update the information supplied to the Director of Public Safety to
reflect existing operations as required in §
836.02(A) and (B) of this chapter.
   (J)   Failure to apply with the City Income Tax Division shall be cause for
suspension of the entertainment device arcade license. The operating license
may be revoked by the Director of Public Safety for failure by the licensee to
remain current in the filing of required tax documents, for failure to remain
current in the required payment of taxes and for failure to comply with §
836.02(A)(9) of this chapter.
   (K)   It is the intent of this chapter that operators are strictly liable
for any violations of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 836.07) (Ord. 65-2010, passed 6-28-2010; Ord. 53-2012, passed 4-
9-2012)
§ 836.08 COLLECTION AT SOURCE.
   An individual, association, C Corporation or other entity engaged in the
business of operating an entertainment device arcade, as defined in this
chapter, in the city shall comply with §
836.07(J) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 836.08) (Ord. 65-2010, passed 6-28-2010; Ord. 53-2012, passed 4-
9-2012)
CHAPTER 840: PAYDAY LOAN/CASH ADVANCE FACILITIES
Section
840.01   Location restrictions.
§ 840.01 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   No payday loan/cash advance facility shall be located within 1,000 feet of
any other payday loan/cash advance facility as measured at the closest property
lines, and the number of such facilities may not exceed one per every 10,000 or
portion thereof, of the population of the city.
(Prior Code, § 842.01) (Ord. 82-2008, passed 5-12-2008)
CHAPTER 844: PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND VENDORS
Section
844.01   Definitions
844.02   Hours of solicitation regulated.
844.03   Commercial soliciting in residence districts.
844.04   Registration of credentials for commercial solicitors; application
fee.
844.05   Notice prohibiting solicitation.
844.06   Solicitation in violation of notice.
844.07   Legal action.
844.08   False information; revocation of registration; appeals
844.09   Display of credentials upon request.
844.10   Street vendors.
844.11   Street vendor locations.
844.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Charitable solicitations, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 1716
   Door to door sales activity of minors restricted, see Ohio R.C. 4109.21
   Home solicitation sales, see Ohio R.C. 1345.21 et seq.
   Power to regulate, see Ohio R.C. 715.61 et seq.
§ 844.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION and COMMERCIAL SOLICITOR. Any person who calls at
residences without an invitation or previous consent of the owner or occupant
of such premises for the purpose of any one or more of the following
activities.
      (1)   Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares,
merchandise, foodstuffs or services of any kind, character or description
whatever, for either present or future delivery;
      (2)   Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase
of insurance of any type, kind or character; and
      (3)   Seeking to sell any goods, articles or services of any kind.
   NON-COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION and NON-COMMERCIAL SOLICITOR.
      (1)   Seeking to obtain from an occupant of any residence an indication
of such occupant’s belief in regard to any social, political or religious
matters;
      (2)   Seeking to obtain contributions or sell any goods, articles or
services of any kind for the support or benefit of any educational, civic,
philanthropic, charitable, religious or non-profit association, organization,
corporation or project;
      (3)   Seeking to influence the personal belief of the occupant of any
residence in regard to any social, political or religious matter;
      (4)   Taking a poll or census by any person, firm or corporation, other
than a governmental body or agency thereof, and excluding commercial polls; or
      (5)   Seeking to obtain signatures to support or oppose any group, cause,
movement or candidate.
   RESIDENCE. “Dwelling”, as defined in § 1133.01 of this code of ordinances.
   STREET VENDOR. A cart, stall, vehicle or other outdoor facility normally
located within a public right- of-way for the purpose of selling or otherwise
distributing food, services or merchandise. All STREET VENDORS must maintain a
certificate of insurance naming the city as an additional insured. STREET
VENDORS are considered to be a temporary use and must conform to § 1310 of the
Barberton Development Code. STREET VENDORS do not include vending machines,
newspaper racks, parking meters, fire or police call boxes, pay telephones or
farm stands.
(Prior Code, § 844.01) (Ord. 140-2013, passed 9-9-2013; Ord. 85-2018, passed 7-
25-2018)
§ 844.02 HOURS OF SOLICITATION REGULATED.
   (A)   No commercial solicitation shall be conducted before 9:00 a.m. or
after 9:00 p.m. (local time) Monday through Saturday, or at any time on a state
or national holiday.
   (B)   No non-commercial solicitation shall be conducted before 9:00 a.m.
(local time) or after 9:00 p.m. (local time) or at any time on a state or
national holiday.
(Prior Code, § 844.02) (Ord. 140-2013, passed 9-9-2013; Ord. 85-2018, passed 7-
25-1918)
§ 844.03 COMMERCIAL SOLICITING IN RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
   No person shall enter upon the lot or land of any residence in the city, for
the purpose of commercial soliciting as defined in §
844.01 of this chapter unless such person has successfully registered his or
her credentials with the Chief of Police as provided in §
844.04 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 844.03) (Ord. 140-2013, passed 9-9-2013; Ord. 85-2018, passed 7-
25-2018)
§ 844.04 REGISTRATION OF CREDENTIALS FOR COMMERCIAL SOLICITORS; APPLICATION
FEE.
   (A)   Whoever desires to solicit for commercial purposes as defined in §
844.01 of this chapter shall have his or her credentials registered and shall
file in duplicate with the Chief of Police, or the Chief of Police’s designee,
a written application on a form to be provided by the Chief of Police correctly
setting forth the following information:
      (1)   The full name of the applicant;
      (2)   His or her address;
      (3)   His or her birth date, demonstrating the person is at least 18
years of age, (or have the application consigned as set forth in division (E)
below), height, weight and color of eyes and hair;
      (4)   Whether or not he or she uses a motor vehicle in his or her
business and, if so, the make, model, year and current registration number
thereof;
      (5)   The state of issue of his or her driver’s license and the number
thereof;
      (6)   The name, address and phone of his or her employer, and a contract
person therein;
      (7)   A brief description of the goods, wares, merchandise or services
involved;
      (8)   Whether or not he or she has ever been convicted of any crime,
other than a traffic offense and, if so, the nature thereof and the penalty
therefor;
      (9)   Mobile telephone number; and
      (10)   A photo identification card.
   (B)   Concurrently with the filing of the application, the applicant shall
pay a fee for a BCI and FBI background check in addition to $85 to compensate
for the costs incident to the examination, registration and issuance of stamped
copies of credentials.
   (C)   Within 30 days of compliance of the foregoing provisions of this
section and absent a conviction for an offense listed in division (F) below,
the Chief of Police shall forthwith stamp the original of the application as
“Inspected and Registered” and deliver the same to the applicant for
identification use as hereinafter provided. Such application shall also be
stamped with the date of expiration of the registration which in each case
shall be the close of the current calendar year, or six months whichever is
later.
   (D)   Possession of such stamped application shall not entitle the applicant
to enter upon any lot or land specified in §
844.05 of this chapter or between the hours of 9:00 p.m. (local time) and 9:00
a.m. (local time) on weekdays and Saturdays or at any time on a state or
national holiday, not to any residence displaying the notice contained in §
844.05 of this chapter, nor to a residence on the “Do Not Solicit” list, nor
shall such credentials be valid for the solicitation or sale of any goods or
services not disclosed in the original application.
   (E)   Any person who has not reached 18 years of age shall be required to
have a parent, guardian or employer co-sign on the application.
   (F)   Any person who through the solicitation permitting process is
discovered to have been convicted of, or who has pleaded guilty to any criminal
offense of the Ohio Revised Code, United States Code, or any other
substantially similar state or local code provisions that constitutes any theft
or fraud offense, any offense of burglary, any offenses of violence, any drug
trafficking offense or any offenses of any sex crime law or statute, is
prohibited from commercial solicitation within the city.
   (G)   Any person whose application for registration is rejected or denied
shall be entitled to appeal that denial by filing a notice of appeal of that
denial or rejection with the Council Clerk. Said notice appeal shall be filed
within ten days of said denial. Said appeal shall be heard by Council. Council
shall forthwith set a time and place for hearing such appeal and give the
appellant due notice thereof by certified mail. Appeal from the decision of the
Council shall be as provided in the Ohio Revised Code.
(Prior Code, § 844.04) (Ord. 140-2013, passed 9-9-2013; Ord. 113-2016, passed
10-24-2016; Ord. 153-2017, passed 11-27-2017; Ord. 85-2018, passed 7-25-2018)
§ 844.05 NOTICE PROHIBITING SOLICITATION.
   (A)   Notice by the owner or occupant of any residence or place of business
of the determination to refuse to receive any uninvited solicitors shall be
given by displaying a card, decal or sign that is plainly visible, upon or near
the main entrance door to the residence or place of business, indicating such
determination by the owner or occupancy, containing the words “No Solicitors
Invited”, or words of similar import, that are clearly printed and legible. Any
such sign that complies with the requirements of this section shall be exempt
from any additional or different requirements contained in the provisions of
this code, including, but not limited to, the Planning and Zoning Code. No
commercial or non-commercial solicitor shall solicit upon any residence or
place of business displaying the notice contained herein.
   (B)   In addition to division (A) above, any resident may further appear at
the city or otherwise cause to register their residence on the “City of
Barberton - Do Not Solicit” list which shall be maintained and updated by the
Chief of Police and provided to each registered solicitor.
(Prior Code, § 844.05) (Ord. 140-2013, passed 9-9-2013)
§ 844.06 SOLICITATION IN VIOLATION OF NOTICE.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a trespass for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, rap
or knock upon any door or create any sound in any other manner calculated to
attract the attention of any occupant of such residence for the purpose of
commercial or non-commercial solicitation in defiance of the notice exhibited
at the residence in accordance with the provisions of §
844.05(A) of this chapter, or the “Do Not Solicit” list as contained in §
844.05(B) of this chapter unless the commercial or non-commercial solicitor has
been previously invited upon the premises by the owner, lessee or an adult
occupant thereof.
(Prior Code, § 844.06) (Ord. 140-2013, passed 9-9-2013; Ord. 85-2018, passed 7-
25-2018)
§ 844.07 LEGAL ACTION.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any penalty provided for under the terms of this
chapter, the Chief of Police or any resident of the city, or any other person,
firm or corporation, partnership or other entity who believes they have been
improperly solicited under this chapter may commence a civil action in any
court of competent jurisdiction against any person, firm, corporation,
partnership or other entity who violates the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Such relief shall include any preliminary or permanent injunction to
abate such nuisance and such other relief as the court may deem appropriate,
including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney’s fees, expenses and court
costs.
(Prior Code, § 844.07) (Ord. 140-2013, passed 9-9-2013; Ord. 85-2018, passed 7-
25-2018)
§ 844.08 FALSE INFORMATION; REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION; APPEALS.
   (A)   No person shall make any false statement or give any false or
misleading information in the application required by §
844.04 of this chapter.
   (B)   Should subsequent information disclose that any applicant has
falsified any information required in such application, the Chief of Police
shall forthwith revoke such registration and notify the holder thereof either
in person or by certified mail of the actions so taken. Such remedy shall be in
addition to the penalty provided by in §
844.99 of this chapter.
   (C)   Any person whose registration is so revoked may, within ten days after
receipt of the revocation notice, appeal to Council by filing with the Clerk a
signed written statement briefly setting forth his or her ground of appeal.
Council shall forthwith set a time and place for hearing such appeal and give
the appellant due notice thereof by certified mail. The appellant may appear
before Council in person or by an attorney. The decision of Council shall be
subject to appeal as provided in the Ohio Revised Code.
(Prior Code, § 844.08) (Ord. 140-2013, passed 9-9-2013; Ord. 85-2018, passed 7-
25-2018)
§ 844.09 DISPLAY OF CREDENTIALS UPON REQUEST.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of any police officer of the municipality to
require any person found engaged in commercial soliciting for orders or selling
goods, wares, merchandise or services in any residence district established by
the Zoning Code who is not known by such police officer to be the holder of
registered and stamped credentials as required by §
844.04 of this chapter to produce his or her credentials, and to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Every holder of registered and stamped credentials, when engaged in
soliciting orders for or selling goods, wares, merchandise or services upon any
lot or land of any residence in any residence district established by the
Zoning Code, shall, upon the request of any owner or occupant of such lot or
land, exhibit for examination his or her credentials issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Every holder of registered and stamped credentials, when engaged in
soliciting orders for or selling goods, wares, merchandise or services upon any
lot or land of any residence in any residence district established by the
Zoning Code, shall prominently display his or her credentials in a conspicuous
place upon his or her person at all times while soliciting pursuant to this
section.
   (D)   The Chief of Police shall cause a weather-proof credential of
sufficient size and color to be given to each approved applicant herein.
   (E)   While engaging in solicitation, each solicitor shall carry the “Do Not
Solicit” list upon their person.
(Prior Code, § 844.09) (Ord. 140-2013, passed 9-9-2013; Ord. 85-2018, passed 7-
25-2018)
§ 844.10 STREET VENDORS.
   (A)   All street vendors must register in the office of the Chief of Police
and obtain a permit to do so from him or her.
   (B)   Copies of all valid licenses or permits necessary to conduct business
as outlined above are required. All original licenses and permits must be able
to be produced upon request.
(Prior Code, § 844.10) (Ord. 140-2013, passed 9-9-2013)
§ 844.11 STREET VENDOR LOCATIONS.
   No street vendor, as defined in §
844.01(C) of this chapter, may set up within a distance of 250 feet from any
event that is sanctioned and approved by the Mayor or Director of Public
Safety, during a period of beginning eight hours before said event and ending
eight hours after the conclusion of said event.
(Prior Code, § 844.11) (Ord. 140-2013, passed 9-9-2013; Ord. 85-2018, passed 7-
25-2018)
§ 844.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation violating any
provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree
for a first offense and a misdemeanor of the first degree for a subsequent
offense.
(Prior Code, § 844.99) (Ord. 140-2013, passed 9-9-2013)
CHAPTER 848: POLYGRAPH TESTS
Section
848.01   Use prohibited.
848.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Falsification of mileage expense report, see ADM.
254.03
§ 848.01 USE PROHIBITED.
   No person, by himself or herself or by his or her agent or representative,
shall require, as a condition for employment or continuation of employment, any
person or employee to take a polygraph test or any form of lie detector test.
(Prior Code, § 848.01) (Ord. 112-1965, passed 7-6-1965)
§ 848.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
more than $500 or imprisoned not more than six months, or both.
(Prior Code, § 848.99) (Ord. 112-1965, passed 7-6-1965)
CHAPTER 852: SECONDHAND DEALERS
Section
852.01   Definitions.
852.02   License required; application.
852.03   Effective period; fee; form; transferability; display.
852.04   Licensee’s bond.
852.05   Record information.
852.06   Daily reports to Police.
852.07   Retention of articles.
852.08   Prohibited purchases; customers.
852.09   Exceptions.
852.10   Revocation of license.
852.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   License revocation for receiving stolen property, see Ohio R.C. 2961.03
   Merchandise displays, see GEN. OFF.
668.07
   Pawnbrokers, see B. R. & T. Ch.
840
   Power to regulate, see Ohio R.C. 715.61
   Receiving stolen property, see GEN. OFF.
642.22
   Secondhand dealers, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4737
§ 852.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SECONDHAND ARTICLE. Any item which has previously been used, worn or owned
by another person.
   SECONDHAND DEALER. Any person dealing in the purchase or sale of secondhand
articles of whatever nature or dealing in the purchase or sale of any
secondhand manufactured article, composed wholly or in part of gold, silver,
platinum or other precious metal, for selling or otherwise using the same, or
in the purchase or sale of old gold, silver or platinum, for the purpose of
selling, or in the purchase or sale of pawnbroker tickets or other evidence of
pledged articles or, not being a pawnbroker, who deals in the redemption or
sale of furs, clothing or other pledged articles.
(Prior Code, § 852.01) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957; Ord. 67-2015, passed
5-26-2015)
§ 852.02 LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   No secondhand dealer shall engage in the business of keeping a secondhand
store or a place for buying and selling secondhand goods in the city until he
or she has first obtained a license to engage in and carry on such business.
Every applicant for a license shall make application in writing to the Director
of Public Safety, which application shall set forth the name under which the
business is to be conducted, the name of every person interested in the
business and the location at which the business is to be conducted. The
application must be made by the person who is to conduct the business and must
contain references of at least two other residents of the city as to the
character of the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 852.02) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 852.03 EFFECTIVE PERIOD; FEE; FORM; TRANSFERABILITY; DISPLAY.
   Licenses required by this chapter shall be issued annually and shall expire
annually on December 31. The license fee shall be $25 per year. The license
shall contain the name under which the business is to be conducted, the name of
every person interested in the business and the location at which the business
is to be conducted. Licenses issued under this chapter shall not be
transferable to any other person. The business may be conducted only at the
location for which the license is issued and the license must be conspicuously
displayed.
(Prior Code, § 852.03) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957; Ord. 67-2015, passed
5-26-2015)
§ 852.04 LICENSEE’S BOND.
   Every person licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall execute and
file a bond in the sum of $500, with the surety to the satisfaction of the Law
Director, conditioned upon such person’s conforming to the requirements of law
and the ordinances of the city.
(Prior Code, § 852.04) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 852.05 RECORD INFORMATION.
   (A)   The City Police Department shall enter into a contract for services
and maintain its contract for services with LeadsOnline or a similar entity in
order to enhance its investigative services to protect both secondhand dealers
and members of the general public. Every secondhand dealer shall operate and
maintain a computer system with internet access for the purposes described
herein. Every secondhand dealer shall subscribe to LeadsOnline or the city’s
current electronic reporting system and maintain said subscription throughout
the term of the secondhand dealer’s business license. Every secondhand dealer
shall provide an electronic record utilizing the LeadsOnline electronic
reporting system or the electronic system then in use by the city. Such report
shall enter and upload all information from its books and records regarding
contracts for purchase, pledges and purchase transactions of any secondhand
scrap iron, automobile parts, tires, household furniture or furnishings,
household appliances, office equipment, coins, jewelry, jewels, weapons,
bicycles, tools, toys, electronic media and or electronic equipment to
LeadsOnline or a similar system as soon as reasonably possible after the
transaction is consummated. Every secondhand dealer shall input information to
every data field supported by the LeadsOnline system. In the event the
electronic reporting system malfunctions or is otherwise not operational, the
secondhand dealer shall, at all times during such malfunction or non-
operation, be required to keep written records of any and all transactions that
would have otherwise been entered in the electronic reporting system and shall
submit such records to the City Police Department within 24 hours of such
transaction during the non-operational period. The written records shall
contain all information required on the electronic reporting system. If any
article that is left on deposit, pledged or purchased has engraved thereon a
number, word or initials or contains settings of any kind, the description of
the article in the report shall contain the number, word or initials engraved
and shall describe the setting of the item and the number of each kind. In the
event of a change to its electronic reporting system, the city shall notify all
secondhand dealers in the city of the change within a reasonable time prior to
such change.
   (B)   No item shall be received unless the person from whom the article is
acquired exhibits a driver’s license or state-issued identification card and
the identifying numbers are recorded on the electronic report. Whenever the
dealer has reason to know or believe the seller, purchaser or exchangor is
under 18 years of age, he or she must require that person to produce sufficient
articles of identification to establish his or her age.
   (C)   This section shall apply in those instances where the article
purchased or received by the dealer is any secondhand scrap iron, junk,
household furniture or furnishings, household appliances, office equipment,
coins, jewelry, jewels, weapons, bicycles, tools, toys, electronic media and or
any other electronic equipment.
   (D)   Every entry shall be numbered consecutively, commencing with number
one. No entry shall be erased, obliterated or defaced.
   (E)   All books or records which are required to be maintained as a result
of this section shall be open to inspection by the Chief of Police or his or
her designee immediately, at any time during hours of operation. Upon demand by
the Chief of Police or his or her designee, the secondhand dealer shall also
produce and show the article or articles thus listed and described.
(Prior Code, § 852.05) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 852.06 DAILY REPORTS TO POLICE.
   (A)   A person licensed as a secondhand dealer shall furnish a list of every
article taken in pawn or bought by such secondhand dealer the previous day by
uploading such list to the LeadsOnline program via a secure internet
connection.
   (B)   A person licensed as a secondhand dealer shall every day furnish a
photograph of every article of jewelry, precious metal or stone, regardless of
value, taken in pawn or bought by such secondhand dealer the previous day by
uploading the photograph to the LeadsOnline program via a secure internet
connection.
(Prior Code, § 852.06) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957; Ord. 67-2015, passed
5-26-2015)
§ 852.07 RETENTION OF ARTICLES.
   (A)   All articles as provided in this chapter shall be retained by the
purchaser thereof for at least seven days, before disposing of them, in an
accessible place, in the confines where such articles were purchased or
received. No article may be changed, altered, smelted or defaced during this
period. Articles may be released, prior to five days, upon inspection and
approval by the Chief of Police or any police officer designated by him or her.
The seven day waiting period may be waived by an authorized person after
inspection or voluntary submittal of records to an authorized city law
enforcement officer.
   (B)   If any city law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that
the item(s) described in the daily list provided for under this chapter is
stolen property, the city law enforcement officer shall notify the secondhand
dealer in writing, and upon receipt of such notice, the secondhand dealer shall
retain such item(s) until the expiration a reasonable period of time to conduct
an investigation has elapsed, such time shall not be less than 30 days after
the day on which the secondhand dealer is first required to make available the
information required in the daily list provided for under this chapter, unless
the city law enforcement officer notifies the secondhand dealer in writing that
retention is not required until such expiration.
(Prior Code, § 852.07) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 852.08 PROHIBITED PURCHASES; CUSTOMERS.
   (A)   No dealer shall purchase or exchange any article from any person under
18 years of age, from any intoxicated person or any person under the influence
of drugs and/or alcohol, from any person he or she knows to have been convicted
of a theft offense or associate of any person he or she knows to have been
convicted of a theft offense or receiver of stolen property, from any person
whom he or she has reason to suspect or believe to be any of the foregoing or
from a senile person.
   (B)   Every dealer shall immediately report to the police any article or
thing pledged or sold to him or her; or which is sought to be sold to him or
her, if he or she has reason to believe that the article or thing was stolen or
lost.
   (C)   No person shall use or provide a fictitious or false name or address,
or false or fictitious information when selling or exchanging any article with
a secondhand dealer.
(Prior Code, § 852.08) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 852.09 EXCEPTIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to persons who deal exclusively in furniture,
nor to persons who deal exclusively in secondhand automobiles. Nothing
contained in this chapter shall be construed to apply to pianos, books,
magazines, rugs, tapestries, burlap, paintings, drawings, etchings and
engravings. The chapter shall not apply to infrequent sales which are conducted
as a yard or garage sales as defined in § 1310.04 of the City of Barberton
Development Code, at the residence of the seller, or sales by religious,
charitable or governmental organizations.
(Prior Code, § 852.09) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 852.10 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The Director of Public Safety may revoke the license of any person licensed
under the provisions of this chapter who is found guilty of violating any of
the provisions hereof. Any person whose license is revoked shall not be issued
another license before the expiration of one year from the date of the
revocation.
(Prior Code, § 852.10) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
§ 852.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter or encourages another to
violate any provision of this chapter is guilty of a second degree misdemeanor
and is guilty of a first degree misdemeanor if that person has previously been
convicted of any violation of this chapter. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 852.99) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
CHAPTER 856: TAXICABS (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Chapter 856 was rescinded as by Ordinance 95-2023, passed 7-24-2023.
CHAPTER 860: TRAILER CAMPS AND TOURIST CAMPS
Section
860.01   Definitions.
860.02   Locating outside camps; parking and stopping.
860.03   Permanent occupancy outside camps prohibited.
860.04   Location of camps; availability of utilities; setbacks.
860.05   Camp plan.
860.06   Water supply.
860.07   Service building and accommodations.
860.08   Waste and garbage disposal.
860.09   Limitation on number of occupants.
860.10   Duties of camp owner or operator.
860.11   Applicability of Plumbing, Electrical and Building Codes.
860.12   Enforcement.
860.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Camping in parks, see S.U. & P.S.
1068.05(i)
   Garbage and refuse, see S.U. & P.S. Ch.
1060
   Improper drainage, see GEN. OFF.
660.18
   Littering, see GEN. OFF.
660.05,
668.04
   Open burning, see GEN. OFF.
660.20
   Register; information open to inspection, see Ohio R.C. 4503.062
   Sewers, see S.U. & P.S. Ch.
1040
   Tax levy on house trailers, see Ohio R.C. 4503.06 et seq.
   Trailer parks and ports, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3733
   Water, see S.U. & P.S. Ch.
1044
§ 860.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTOMOBILE TRAILER, TRAILER COACH and TRAILER. Any vehicle or structure
designed and constructed in such manner as will permit occupancy thereof as
sleeping quarters for one or more persons or for the conduct of any business,
profession, occupation or trade or for use as a selling or advertising device,
and so designed that it is or may be mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance
on highways or city streets, propelled or drawn by its own or other motive
power, except a device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
   CABIN PLOT. A section of ground not less than 30 feet by 40 feet in area,
upon which only one camp cottage or cabin is located.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation, tenant,
owner, lessee or licensee, their agents, heirs and assigns.
   TRAILER CAMP. Any park, trailer park, trailer court, court, camp, site, lot,
parcel or tract of land designed, maintained or intended for the purpose of
supplying a location or accommodations for any trailer coach and upon which any
trailer coach is parked. The term includes all buildings used or intended for
use as part of the equipment thereof, whether a charge is made for the use of
the trailer camp and its facilities or not. The term does not include
automobile or trailer sales lots on which unoccupied trailers are parked for
purposes of inspection and sale.
   TOURIST CAMP. Any park, tourist park, tourist court, camp, court, site, lot,
parcel or tract of land upon which one or more camp cottages or cabins are
located and maintained for the accommodation of transients by the day, week or
month, whether a charge is made or not, but does not include motels not
providing facilities for the parking of house trailers.
   UNIT. A section of ground in a trailer camp of not less than 800 square feet
of unoccupied space in an area designated as the location for only one
automobile and one trailer.
(Prior Code, § 860.01) (Ord. 58-1954, passed 7-6-1954)
§ 860.02 LOCATING OUTSIDE CAMPS; PARKING AND STOPPING.
   (A)   No person shall park any trailer on any street, alley, highway or
other public place, or on any tract of land owned by any person, occupied or
unoccupied, within the city, except as provided in this chapter.
   (B)   Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is permitted on any street,
alley or highway for no longer than one hour subject to any other and further
prohibitions, regulations or limitations imposed by the Traffic Code or other
regulations or ordinances for that street, alley or highway.
   (C)   No person shall park or occupy any trailer on the premises of any
occupied dwelling or on any lot which is not a part of the premises of any
occupied dwelling, either of which is situated outside an approved trailer
camp; except that, parking of one unoccupied trailer in an accessory private
garage building, or in a rear yard in any district, is permitted; provided
that, no living quarters are maintained or any business practiced in the
trailer while such trailer is so parked or stored.
(Prior Code, § 860.02) (Ord. 58-1954, passed 7-6-1954)
§ 860.03 PERMANENT OCCUPANCY OUTSIDE CAMPS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall use as a place of abode, temporary, permanent or for
indefinite periods of time, any trailer on a rear lot, parcel or tract of land,
except in a trailer camp or tourist camp licensed by the state.
(Prior Code, § 860.03) (Ord. 58-1954, passed 7-6-1954)
§ 860.04 LOCATION OF CAMPS; AVAILABILITY OF UTILITIES; SETBACKS.
   (A)   No trailer or tourist camp shall be located in any fire district. (See
Ch. 1444 of the Building and Housing Code.)
   (B)   No trailer or tourist camp shall be located within the limits of the
city unless city water and sewer connections and fire protection facilities are
available.
   (C)   No occupied trailer or camp cottage or cabin cottage, cabin or other
building shall be located within the city limits within the recognized setback
line for the zoning district in which such trailer or cabin is located nor less
than ten feet from any other building or vehicle or the boundary line of the
tract on which it is located.
(Prior Code, § 860.04) (Ord. 58-1954, passed 7-6-1954)
§ 860.05 CAMP PLAN.
   (A)   Every trailer or tourist camp shall be located on a well drained area,
and the premises shall be properly graded so as to prevent the accumulation of
storm or other waters.
   (B)   Units and cabin plots shall be clearly designated and the camp so
arranged that all units and cabin plots shall face or abut on a driveway of not
less than 16 feet in width, giving easy access from all units to a public
street. Such driveway shall be paved and maintained in good condition, shall
have natural drainage into a city street catch basin, shall be well lighted at
night and shall not be obstructed.
   (C)   No camp cottage or cabin shall be less than 280 square feet, less than
14 feet wide at its narrowest point, less than eight feet high from floor to
ceiling or have less than 27 square feet of ventilating openings. All windows
must be fully screened. If the floor is made of wood, it shall be raised not
less than 12 inches above the ground level.
   (D)   The camp shall be so laid out that no unit or cabin shall be located
farther than 200 feet from the toilets and service buildings provided for
herein, and walkways to such buildings shall be paved and well lighted at
night.
   (E)   Every trailer unit shall be furnished with an electric service outlet.
Such outlet shall be equipped with an externally operated switch or fuse of not
less than 30 amperes capacity and a heavy duty outlet receptacle.
(Prior Code, § 860.05) (Ord. 58-1954, passed 7-6-1954)
§ 860.06 WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   An adequate supply of pure water, furnished through a pipe
distribution system connected directly with the city water main, with supply
faucets located not more than 200 feet from any trailer or cabin, shall be
furnished for drinking and domestic purposes.
   (B)   No common drinking vessels shall be permitted, nor shall any drinking
water faucets be placed in any toilet room or water closet compartment.
   (C)   An abundant supply of hot water shall be provided at all times for
bathing, washing and laundry facilities.
(Prior Code, § 860.06) (Ord. 58-1954, passed 7-6-1954)
§ 860.07 SERVICE BUILDING AND ACCOMMODATIONS.
   (A)   Every trailer or tourist camp shall have erected thereon, at a
distance not greater than 200 feet from any unit or cabin it is designed to
serve, a suitable building for housing toilets, showers and laundry facilities
as required by this chapter, such building to be known as the service building.
   (B)   There shall be provided separate toilet rooms for each sex. Flush
toilets provided with an adequate water supply shall be enclosed in separate
compartments having a minimum width of two feet, eight inches, and shall be
provided for each sex in the ratio of one toilet for each eight units or cabins
or fraction thereof. Every male toilet room shall have one urinal for each 16
units or cabins, but in no case shall any male toilet be without one urinal.
Toilet rooms shall contain lavatories with hot and cold water in the ratio of
one lavatory to every two or less water closets.
   (C)   Separate bathing facilities for each sex shall be provided with one
shower enclosed in a compartment at least four feet square, for each eight
units or cabins or fraction thereof. Each shower compartment shall be
supplemented by an individual dressing compartment of at least 12 square feet.
   (D)   Laundry facilities shall be provided in the ratio of one double tray
and one ironing board for each ten units or cabins.
   (E)   The above accommodations shall be based on the total camp capacity
according to accepted plans.
   (F)   Floors of toilets, showers and the laundry shall be of concrete, tile
or similar material impervious to water and easily cleaned and pitched to a
floor drain.
(Prior Code, § 860.07) (Ord. 58-1954, passed 7-6-1954)
§ 860.08 WASTE AND GARBAGE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   All waste from showers, toilets, laundries, faucets and lavatories
shall be directed into a sewerage system extended from and connected with the
city sewerage system.
   (B)   All sanitary facilities in any trailer which are not connected with
the city sewerage system by means of rigid pipe connections shall be sealed and
their use is hereby declared to be unlawful.
   (C)   Each faucet site shall be equipped with facilities for drainage of
waste and excess water into the sewer. In no case shall any waste water be
thrown or discharged upon the surface of the ground or disposed of by means
other than as herein provided.
   (D)   Every unit shall be provided with a substantial fly-tight metal
garbage depository from which the contents shall be removed by the city garbage
collection service.
(Prior Code, § 860.08) (Ord. 58-1954, passed 7-6-1954)
§ 860.09 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF OCCUPANTS.
   No trailer or cabin shall be inhabited by a greater number of occupants than
that for which it was designed.
(Prior Code, § 860.09) (Ord. 58-1954, passed 7-6-1954)
§ 860.10 DUTIES OF CAMP OWNER OR OPERATOR.
   (A)   In every trailer or tourist camp there shall be an office building in
which shall be located the office of the person in charge of the camp. A copy
of the camp license and of this chapter shall be posted therein and the camp
register shall at all times be kept in the office.
   (B)   It is hereby made the duty of the attendant or person in charge,
together with the licensee to:
      (1)   Keep at all times a register of all guests (which shall be open at
all times to inspection by state and federal officers and officers of the City
Board of Health) showing for all guests:
         (a)   Names and addresses;
         (b)   Dates of entrance and departure;
         (c)   License numbers of all trailers and towing or other automobiles;
         (d)   States issuing such licenses; and
         (e)   Place of last location and length of stay.
      (2)   Maintain the camp in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all
times;
      (3)   See that the provisions of this chapter are complied with and
enforced and report promptly to the proper authorities any violation of this
chapter or any other violation of law which may come to his attention;
      (4)   Report to the Board of Health all cases of persons or animals
infected or suspected of being infected with any communicable disease;
      (5)   Prevent the running loose of dogs, cats or other animals or pets;
      (6)   Maintain in convenient places, approved by the Fire Division, hand
fire extinguishers in the ratio of one to each eight units or cabins;
      (7)   Prohibit the lighting of open fires on the premises; and
      (8)   Prohibit the use of any trailer or cabin by a greater number of
occupants than that which it is designed to accommodate.
(Prior Code, § 860.10) (Ord. 58-1954, passed 7-6-1954)
§ 860.11 APPLICABILITY OF PLUMBING, ELECTRICAL AND BUILDING CODES.
   All plumbing, electrical, building and other work on or at any trailer or
tourist camp shall be in accordance with the provisions of this code of
ordinances regulating such work unless such provisions are specifically made
inapplicable under the terms of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 860.11) (Ord. 58-1954, passed 7-6-1954)
§ 860.12 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   A Board of Investigators, consisting of the Service Director, Fire
Chief, Police Chief, Building Commissioner and Health Commissioner, with the
Service Director acting as Chairperson, is hereby created. The Chairperson
shall, with the approval of the members of the Board, appoint a Secretary for
the Board from among the employees of the city.
   (B)   The Building Commissioner shall have primary responsibility for the
enforcement of this chapter. However, it shall be the duty of the Health
Commissioner to enforce sanitary or health regulations contained herein.
(Prior Code, § 860.12) (Ord. 58-1954, passed 7-6-1954)
§ 860.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
more than $500 or imprisoned not more than six months, or both. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 860.99) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
CHAPTER 862: SELF-SERVICE RETAIL PRICING
Section
862.01   Price display on items.
862.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Fraud, see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 642
§ 862.01 PRICE DISPLAY ON ITEMS.
   (A)   Every item of goods that is offered for sale by a self-service
retailer and/or self-service supplier in connection with a consumer transaction
shall have conspicuously, clearly and plainly displayed in Arabic numerals on
the item of goods, or at the location where said item is displayed, the price
at which such item of goods is offered for sale.
   (B)   No self-service supplier or self-service retailer of any item of goods
offered for sale in connection with a consumer transaction shall purposely fail
to display on such item, or at the location where said item is displayed, the
price at which such item is offered for sale as required by division (A) above.
   (C)   As used in this section, “consumer”, “consumer transaction” and
“supplier” have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 1345.01.
   (D)   This section does not apply to any item of goods that is:
      (1)   Subject to the packaging or labeling requirements of the Federal
Alcohol Administration or to any pricing requirements established by federal
law;
      (2)   An item of goods actually offered for sale through a vending
machine; or
      (3)   An item of goods sold only by prescription.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If the offender has previously been convicted of an offense under this
section, a violation shall be a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (F)   The Zoning Administrator shall have the primary responsibility of
enforcing the provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 862.01) (Ord. 350-1975, passed 10-20-1975; Ord. 19-1990, passed
1-29-1990)
§ 862.99 PENALTY.
   See §
698.02 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification.
(Prior Code, § 862.99)
CHAPTER 864: PRIVATE INVESTIGATORS AND AGENCIES
Section
864.01   Definitions.
864.02   License required.
864.03   Exceptions to provisions.
864.04   License application; requirements.
864.05   License issuance or denial.
864.06   License fees; display; identification.
864.07   License revocation.
864.08   Right of appeal.
864.09   Bond and insurance.
864.10   Reports filed with Police Chief.
864.11   Badges.
864.12   Radios.
864.13   Oath.
864.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Commission of private police officers, see Ohio R.C. 737.05
   Private investigators, see Ohio R.C. 4749.01 et seq.
   Private police impersonation, see GEN. OFF.
606.06
§ 864.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PRIVATE INVESTIGATION. The conducting or making, for hire, of any
investigation for the purpose of obtaining evidence or testimony to be used
before investigating committees, boards of award or arbitration, in the trial
of civil or criminal cases, or obtaining information with reference to any of
the following matters:
      (1)   Crimes and offenses or wrongs done or threatened;
      (2)   The habits, conduct, movements, associates, transactions,
reputation, character or location of persons, firms or corporations;
      (3)   The credibility of witnesses or other persons;
      (4)   The location or recovery of lost or stolen property; or
      (5)   The causes, origin or responsibility for fires, accidents or
injuries to real or personal property or strikes and labor difficulties.
   PRIVATE INVESTIGATOR. Any person who engages in private investigation for
hire, whether self-employed or employed by a private investigation agency.
   PRIVATE INVESTIGATION AGENCY. A person, firm or corporation employing, in
the private investigation business, one or more private investigators.
(Prior Code, § 864.01) (Ord. 160-1976, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 864.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall operate a private investigation agency or act as a
private investigator within the city unless duly licensed as provided in this
chapter.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly employ or hire the services of an unlicensed
private investigator or private investigation agency.
(Prior Code, § 864.02) (Ord. 160-1976, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 864.03 EXCEPTIONS TO PROVISIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to the following:
   (A)   Employment as regularly appointed police officers, regularly appointed
peace officers or law enforcement agents of the United States, the state or
political subdivisions thereof;
   (B)   Off-duty employment as regularly appointed police officers of the city
when approved by the Chief of Police or as regularly appointed members of the
Summit County Sheriff’s office when approved by the Sheriff;
   (C)   The protection of persons or property being transported in interstate
or intrastate commerce;
   (D)   The investigation and adjustment of insurance losses;
   (E)   Attorneys at law in the practice of their profession; and
   (F)   Agencies whose exclusive business is the furnishing of information as
to the business, financial standing and credit responsibility of persons, firms
and corporations, or personal habits and financial responsibility of applicants
or claimants with respect to insurance, indemnity bonds or commercial credit.
(Prior Code, § 864.03) (Ord. 160-1976, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 864.04 LICENSE APPLICATION; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Application for private investigation agency or private investigator
licenses shall be made to the Mayor on forms approved by him or her. Applicants
shall be fingerprinted and photographed at the Identification Section of the
Police Division.
   (B)   Licenses shall be issued only to United States citizens of full age.
Licenses shall not be issued to persons who have been adjudged insane,
convicted of a felony or of a crime or offense involving violence or moral
turpitude or found, upon investigation by the Chief of Police, not to be of
good character.
   (C)   Any person found upon such investigation not to be of good character
shall be entitled, upon request, to a copy of such adverse finding and shall
have the right of appeal as hereinafter provided.
(Prior Code, § 864.04) (Ord. 160-1976, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 864.05 LICENSE ISSUANCE OR DENIAL.
   (A)   When the Mayor is satisfied that there is a necessity therefor and
that the applicant is of good moral character, competency and integrity and has
complied with all the requirements of this chapter, then, upon payment of the
proper license fee, he or she shall issue licenses for private investigators
and private investigation agencies.
   (B)   In the event that the Mayor declines to approve such license, the
person adversely affected shall have the right of appeal as hereinafter
provided.
(Prior Code, § 864.05) (Ord. 160-1976, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 864.06 LICENSE FEES; DISPLAY; IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   All licenses granted under this chapter shall expire on December 31 of
each year, unless sooner revoked. The following fees shall be collected by the
Mayor:
      (1)   For a private investigator: $20; and
      (2)   For a private investigation agency: $50.
   (B)   The license for a private investigator shall be in such form as to
contain a true photograph and right thumbprint of the licensee, his or her
name, address, physical description and signature. Such license shall be
carried by the licensee during his or her hours of employment or duty and shall
be subject at all times to inspection by any member of the Police Division.
   (C)   The license for a private investigation agency shall be in a form
prescribed by the Mayor and shall be displayed at the licensee’s office.
(Prior Code, § 864.06) (Ord. 160-1976, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 864.07 LICENSE REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to suspend or revoke any license
granted hereunder and to refuse to grant or renew any license to any person who
violates any of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person adversely affected by any act of the Mayor under this
section shall have the right of appeal, as hereinafter provided.
(Prior Code, § 864.07) (Ord. 160-1976, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 864.08 RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   Any decision of the Chief of Police or the Mayor made pursuant to §§
864.04,
864.05 or
864.07 may be appealed to an Appeal Board consisting of the Presiding Judge of
the Municipal Court, the Chairperson of the Committee of Public Safety of
Council and the Mayor. Such appeal shall be filed within ten days of the date
of such decision by any person adversely affected thereby. Such appeal shall be
perfected by the appellant filing with the Mayor a written notice of his or her
intention to appeal, together with a deposit of $50, of which one-half shall be
refunded to the appellant in case the Appeal Board renders a decision in favor
of the appellant; otherwise, such deposit shall be forfeited to the city. The
decision of the Appeal Board shall be rendered within 15 days from hearing and
shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 864.08) (Ord. 160-1976, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 864.09 BOND AND INSURANCE.
   (A)   Each applicant shall file with the Mayor an approved fidelity bond in
the principal sum of $5,000 in favor of the city for the benefit of any person
damaged by a dishonest, willful, malicious or fraudulent act of the applicant.
Such bond shall be maintained in full force and in the full principal amount at
all times and shall provide that it shall not be cancelled or revoked until ten
days after written notice of intention to cancel or revoke has been given to
the Mayor.
   (B)   In addition to the bond required in division (A) above, each applicant
shall file with the Mayor an approved policy of public liability insurance,
including coverage for false arrest, having coverage limits of $20,000 per
person, $40,000 per accident and $10,000 property damage. Such policy of
insurance shall be maintained in full force and full coverage at all times and
shall provide that it shall not be cancelled or revoked until ten days after
written notice of intention to cancel or revoke has been given to the Mayor.
   (C)   The insolvency or bankruptcy of the licensee shall not operate to
release the surety or insurer from liability upon the bond or policy of
insurance.
(Prior Code, § 864.09) (Ord. 160-1976, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 864.10 REPORTS FILED WITH POLICE CHIEF.
   (A)   Every private investigation agency licensee shall immediately submit
to the Chief of Police in writing the names of all persons in its employ and
thereafter the names of all persons hired or discharged.
   (B)   Licensees shall report all police action taken, except routine patrol
duty, to the Chief of Police within 12 hours and shall report as soon as
practicable to the Chief of Police all property found or recovered.
   (C)   Licensees shall report all knowledge or information of any crime to
the Division of Police.
(Prior Code, § 864.10) (Ord. 160-1976, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 864.11 BADGES.
   Licensed private investigators may carry badges approved by the Chief of
Police, the design of which shall differ substantially from that worn by
members of the Division of Police.
(Prior Code, § 864.11) (Ord. 160-1976, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 864.12 RADIOS.
   Vehicles equipped with radios capable of being tuned to the city police
frequency shall not be used without the knowledge of the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 864.12) (Ord. 160-1976, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 864.13 OATH.
   Upon issuance of a license, the licensee shall take and subscribe to an oath
or affirmation similar to that administered to police officers of the city.
(Prior Code, § 864.13) (Ord. 160-1976, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 864.99 PENALTY.
   A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
minor misdemeanor. Each day of non- compliance shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 864.99) (Ord. 160-1976, passed 7-6-1976)
Editor’s note:
   See §
698.02 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification.
CHAPTER 866: PRIVATE PATROL WATCHMEN AND AGENCIES
Section
866.01   Definitions.
866.02   License required.
866.03   Exceptions to provisions.
866.04   License application; requirements.
866.05   Bond and insurance.
866.06   License issuance or denial.
866.07   License fees; display; identification.
866.08   Revocation of license.
866.09   Right of appeal.
866.10   Radios.
866.11   Oath.
866.12   Uniform and badge.
866.13   Vehicles.
866.14   Reports filed with Police Chief.
866.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Private investigations, see Ohio R.C. 4749.01 et seq.
§ 866.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PRIVATE PATROL AGENCY. Any person, firm or corporation who or which employs,
furnishes or provides the service of a private patrol watchman.
   PRIVATE PATROL WATCHMAN. Any person, in uniform or otherwise who, for hire
or reward, guards or protects any structure, premises, property or person by
patrolling on foot or in any vehicle upon any street, highway, alley or other
public place in the city. The term includes any person who, for hire or reward,
is employed to guard, protect or maintain peace and order in or about any
structure, premises or property which is operated, maintained or conducted as a
dance hall, theater or other place of amusement, recreation or entertainment
frequented by the public, including liquor establishments licensed under state
statutes.
(Prior Code, § 866.01) (Ord. 182-1976, passed 7-26-1976)
§ 866.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall operate a private patrol agency or act as a private
patrol watchman within the city unless duly licensed by this chapter.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly employ or hire the services of an unlicensed
private patrol agency or private patrol watchman.
(Prior Code, § 866.02) (Ord. 182-1976, passed 7-26-1976)
§ 866.03 EXCEPTIONS TO PROVISIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to the following:
   (A)   Employment as regularly appointed police officers, regularly appointed
peace officers or law enforcement agents of the United States, or the state or
political subdivisions thereof;
   (B)   Off-duty employment as regularly appointed police officers of the city
when approved by the Chief of Police or as regularly appointed members of the
Summit County Sheriff’s office when approved by the Sheriff;
   (C)   Employment as guards or watchmen engaged in the protection of persons
or property being transported in interstate or intrastate commerce; and
   (D)   Employment as guards or watchmen employed in private business
establishments, premises or structures, where the major portion of such
employment is confined to services within such private business establishments,
premises or structures, and where such establishments, premises or structures
are not places of amusement, recreation, retail, discount or wholesale sales,
or entertainment frequented by the public, including liquor establishments
licensed under state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 866.03) (Ord. 182-1976, passed 7-26-1976)
§ 866.04 LICENSE APPLICATION; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Application for private patrol agency or private patrol watchman
licenses shall be made to the Mayor on forms approved by him or her. Applicants
shall be fingerprinted and photographed at the Identification Section of the
Police Division.
   (B)   Licenses shall be issued only to United States citizens of full age
who have resided in Summit County for not less than one year immediately
preceding such application. Licenses shall not be issued to persons who have
been adjudged insane, or found upon investigation by the Chief of Police not to
be of good character.
   (C)   Any person found upon such investigation not to be of good character
shall be entitled, upon request, to a copy of such adverse finding and shall
have the right of appeal as hereinafter provided.
(Prior Code, § 866.04) (Ord. 182-1976, passed 7-26-1976)
§ 866.05 BOND AND INSURANCE.
   (A)   Each applicant shall file with the Mayor’s office an approved fidelity
bond in the principal sum of $5,000 in favor of the city for the benefit of any
person damaged by a dishonest or fraudulent act of the applicant. Such bond
shall be maintained in full force and in the full principal amount at all times
and shall provide that it shall not be cancelled or revoked until ten days
after written notice of intention to cancel or revoke has been given to the
Mayor’s office.
   (B)   In addition to the bond required in division (A) above each applicant
shall file with the Mayor’s office an approved policy of public liability
insurance, including coverage for false arrest, having coverage limits of
$20,000 per person, $40,000 per accident and $10,000 property damage. Such
policy of insurance shall be maintained in full force and full coverage at all
times and shall provide that it shall not be cancelled or revoked until after
ten days’ written notice of intention to cancel or revoke has been given to the
Mayor’s office.
   (C)   The insolvency or bankruptcy of the licensee shall not operate to
release the surety or insurer from liability upon the bond or policy of
insurance.
(Prior Code, § 866.05) (Ord. 182-1976, passed 7-26-1976)
§ 866.06 LICENSE ISSUANCE OR DENIAL.
   (A)   When the Mayor is satisfied that there is a necessity therefor and
that the applicant is of good moral character, compentency and integrity and
has complied with all requirements of this chapter then, upon payment of the
proper license fee, the Mayor’s office shall issue licenses for private patrol
watchmen and private patrol agencies.
   (B)   In the event that the Mayor declines to approve such license, the
person adversely affected shall have the right of appeal as hereinafter
provided.
(Prior Code, § 866.06) (Ord. 182-1976, passed 7-26-1976)
§ 866.07 LICENSE FEES; DISPLAY; IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   All licenses granted under this chapter shall expire on June 30 of
each year, unless sooner revoked. The following fees shall be collected by the
Mayor’s office:
      (1)   For a private patrol watchman: $20;
      (2)   For a private patrol agency: $50.
   (B)   The license for a private patrol watchman shall be in such form as to
contain a true photograph and right thumbprint of the licensee, his or her
name, address, physical description and signature. Such license shall be
carried by the licensee during the hours of employment or duty and shall be
subject at all times to inspection by any member of the Police Division.
   (C)   The license for a private patrol agency shall be in a form as
prescribed by the Mayor and shall be displayed at the licensee’s office.
(Prior Code, § 866.07) (Ord. 182-1976, passed 7-26-1976)
§ 866.08 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to suspend or revoke any license
granted hereunder and to refuse to grant or renew any license to any person who
violates any of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person adversely affected by any act of the Mayor under this
section shall have the right of appeal, as hereinafter provided.
(Prior Code, § 866.08) (Ord. 182-1976, passed 7-26-1976)
§ 866.09 RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   Any decision of the Chief of Police or the Mayor made pursuant to §§
866.04,
866.06 or
866.08 may be appealed to an Appeal Board consisting of the Presiding Judge of
the Municipal Court, the Chairperson of the Committee of Public Safety of
Council and the Mayor. Such appeal shall be filed within ten days of the date
of decision by any person adversely affected thereby. Such appeal shall be
perfected by the appellant filing with the Mayor a written notice of his or her
intention to appeal, together with a deposit of $50, of which one-half shall be
refunded to the appellant; otherwise, the deposit shall be forfeited to the
city. The decision of the Appeal Board shall be rendered within 15 days from
hearing and shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 866.09) (Ord. 182-1976, passed 7-26-1976)
§ 866.10 RADIOS.
   Vehicles equipped with radios capable of being tuned to the city police
frequency shall not be used without the knowledge of the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 866.10) (Ord. 182-1976, passed 7-26-1976)
§ 866.11 OATH.
   Upon issuance of a license, the licensee shall take and subscribe to an oath
or affirmation similar to that administered to police officers of the city.
(Prior Code, § 866.11) (Ord. 182-1976, passed 7-26-1976)
§ 866.12 UNIFORM AND BADGE.
   Licensed private patrol watchmen may wear a uniform and a badge of a design
approved by the Chief of Police, which design shall substantially differ from
those worn by members of the Division of Police.
(Prior Code, § 866.12) (Ord. 182-1976, passed 7-26-1976)
§ 866.13 VEHICLES.
   Licensees may identify the vehicles used while on patrol, but only in a
manner approved by the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 866.13) (Ord. 182-1976, passed 7-26-1976)
§ 866.14 REPORTS FILED WITH POLICE CHIEF.
   (A)   Every private patrol agency licensee shall immediately submit to the
Chief of Police in writing the names of all persons in its employ and
thereafter the names of all persons hired or discharged.
   (B)   Licensees shall report all police action taken, except routine patrol
duty, to the Chief of Police within 12 hours and shall report as soon as
practicable to the Chief of Police all property found or recovered.
   (C)   Licensees shall report all knowledge or information of any crime to
the Division of Police.
(Prior Code, § 866.14) (Ord. 182-1976, passed 7-26-1976)
§ 866.99 PENALTY.
   A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
minor misdemeanor. Each day of non- compliance shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 866.99) (Ord. 182-1976, passed 7-26-1976)
Editor’s note:
   See §
698.02 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification.
CHAPTER 868: CHRISTMAS TREE SALES
Section
868.01   Definitions.
868.02   Permit required; conditions; fee.
868.03   Enforcement.
868.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Christmas tree transportation, see Ohio R. C. 4551.01 et seq.
§ 868.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. Individuals, firms, partnerships, corporations for profit, non-
profit corporations, fraternal groups, lodges, charities, churches, youth
groups, associations, Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts and organizations.
   APPLICATION. An approved form prepared and furnished by the City Zoning
Inspector.
   PERMIT. The written authorization of the Zoning Inspector and shall include,
but not be limited to, the date of issuance, date of expiration, location of
site where the trees will be sold, applicant’s name or group and the like and
the fact that the permit fee of $10 and the guarantee of $50 have been
deposited with the City Auditor.
(Prior Code, § 868.01) (Ord. 423-1974, passed 12-9-1974)
§ 868.02 PERMIT REQUIRED; CONDITIONS; FEE.
   (A)   No combustible Christmas trees, or other conifers, whether live or
cut, may be sold within the city during the period beginning November 15 of
each year until January 10 of the following year, except on lots that are zoned
for business and not until a valid permit has been issued by the city’s Zoning
Inspector.
   (B)   No permit shall be issued, in accordance with this chapter, until the
following conditions have been met:
      (1)   An application has been made to and approved by the Zoning
Inspector;
      (2)   The applicant has deposited $10, in cash or a certified check, with
the City Auditor, as payment for the permit; and
      (3)   The applicant has deposited $50, in cash or by certified check,
with the City Auditor, as a guarantee that the applicant will restore the
premises to as good as or better condition than when the permit was issued.
   (C)   The $50 shall not be refunded until the Zoning Inspector has
personally inspected the applicant’s location and determined that it has been
restored to a condition as good as or better than when the permit was issued.
Inspection shall be made no later than January 10 of each year. Any applicant
who fails to restore his or her location to a proper condition by January 10 of
each year shall forfeit his or her $50.
(Prior Code, § 868.02) (Ord. 423-1974, passed 12-9-1974)
§ 868.03 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Zoning Inspector shall have the primary responsibility for enforcing the
provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 868.03) (Ord. 423-1974, passed 12-9-1974)
§ 868.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates this chapter shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 868.99) (Ord. 423-1974, passed 12-9-1974)
Editor’s note:
   See §
698.02 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification.
CHAPTER 870: STRIKEBREAKERS
Section
870.01   Definitions.
870.02   Strikebreakers prohibited.
870.99   Penalty.
§ 870.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMPLOYMENT. Services for an employer whether compensated by wages, salary or
any other consideration, not limited to the foregoing and whether secured,
arranged or paid for an employer or any other person, partnership, firm,
corporation, association or other entity.
   EMPLOYMENT FOR THE DURATION OF SUCH STRIKE OR LOCKOUT. Includes employment
for all or part of the duration of a strike or lockout, and in connection
therewith includes services during all or part of such strike or lockout, which
services began 30 days or less prior to the initiation of such strike or
lockout or, in the alternative, which services terminated 30 days or less after
the conclusion of the strike or lockout.
   LOCKOUT. Any refusal by an employer to permit any group of five or more
employees to work as a result of a dispute with such employees affecting wages,
hours or other terms or conditions of employment of such employees.
   PROFESSIONAL STRIKEBREAKER. Any person, other than supervisory personnel and
salaried personnel who have been in the employ of the employer before the
commencement of the strike or lockout involved or members of the immediate
family of the owner of the place of business who, during a period of five years
immediately preceding the acts described in §
870.02, offered himself or herself to and has been accepted on a prior occasion
by at least one employer at whose place of business a strike or lockout was
currently in progress, for employment for the duration of such strike or
lockout, for the purpose of replacing employees involved in such strike or
lockout and who currently offers himself or herself to an employer at whose
place of business a strike or lockout is presently in progress for employment
for the purpose of replacing employees involved in such strike or lockout.
   PRIOR OCCASIONS. At least one previous occasion exclusive of any current
offer of employment in connection with the current strike or lockout.
   STRIKE. Any concerted act of more than 50% of the bargaining unit employees
in a lawful refusal of such employees under applicable state or federal law to
perform work or services for an employer, other than work stoppages based on
conflicting union jurisdictions or work stoppages unauthorized by the proper
union governing body.
   SUPERVISORY PERSONNEL. Those employees who have the authority to hire,
reward or discipline other employees of the employer, or who have a history of
having the authority to effectively recommend such action.
(Prior Code, § 870.01) (Ord. 418-1975, passed 12-8-1975)
§ 870.02 STRIKEBREAKERS PROHIBITED.
   No person, firm, licensed employment agency, or corporation directly or
indirectly involved in a strike or lockout, shall cause or attempt to have
caused either directly or through an officer, agent or other entity acting
under the direction and control of the above entities, or willfully and
knowingly utilize or attempt to utilize any professional strikebreaker to
replace employees involved in a strike or lockout at a place of business
located within the city. No professional strikebreaker shall willfully and
knowingly offer himself or herself for employment, to replace employees
involved in a strike or lockout at a place of business located within the city.
(Prior Code, § 870.02) (Ord. 418-1975, passed 12-8-1975)
§ 870.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of professional
strikebreaking, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Prior Code, § 870.99) (Ord. 418-1975, passed 12-8-1975)
Editor’s note:
   See §
698.02 for penalties applicable to any misdemeanor classification.
CHAPTER 872: RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES
Section
872.01   Definitions.
872.02   License required.
872.03   License procedure.
872.04   License fees.
872.05   Revocation and termination of licenses.
872.06   Variances.
872.07   Exclusions.
872.08   Safely.
872.09   Responsibilities of the operator.
872.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Housing Code, see B. & H. Ch.
1462 et seq.
   Maternity boarding houses, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3711
   Nursing home administrators, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4751
   Rest homes; nursing homes, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3721
   Sheltered housing for older adults, see Ohio R.C. 173.04
§ 872.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT CLIENT. A client who has reached his or her eighteenth birthday.
   BOARD OF HEALTH. The local administrative agency of the City Health District
created by Ohio R.C. 3709.05 and § 6.04 of the City Charter.
   CARE. The provision of a combination of supervision and service to meet the
social, physical and mental health needs of a person and to enhance the level
of functioning by habilitative, medical and training programs within and
outside the residential facility, thereby integrating the individual into the
community.
   CHILDREN and ADOLESCENTS. Clients who have not reached their eighteenth
birthday.
   CHILDREN’S SERVICES BOARD. The County Agency which provides services to
dependent, neglected and abused children, the funding for which is obtained by
local levy and from state and federal sources.
   CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. The permit required for certain types of main uses
because of their uncommon or unique characteristics. Holders of such a permit
must comply with certain standards and explicit conditions established and
granted by the Planning Commission.
   DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY. Includes the specific disabling conditions of
mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy and autism.
   DWELLING. A building designed or occupied exclusively for non-transient
residential use, including one-family, two-family or multi-family buildings.
   DWELLING UNIT. A space, within a dwelling, comprising a living room, a
dining room and a sleeping room or rooms and storage closets, as well as space
and equipment for cooking, bathing and toilet facilities, all used by only one
family.
   EXTRAMURAL CARE. A type of funding which provides for the support of a
mental health client upon discharge from a state institution for up to six
months. The facility in which the mental health client resides must be approved
by the Department of Mental Health. Generally, this facility fits the
definition of a group home, but may not exceed eight client beds.
   FAMILY. Either an individual, two or more persons who live together in one
dwelling unit, who maintain a common household and who are related by blood,
marriage or adoption, or not more than three persons not related by blood,
marriage or adoption.
   FAMILY HOME. A residential facility that provides room, board, personal
care, habilitation services and supervision in a family setting for not more
than eight persons with developmental disabilities.
   FOSTER HOME (ADULT). A residence providing care for one to five adults,
usually the elderly.
   FOSTER HOME (CHILD). A private residence providing care for one or more
children, apart from their parents, but which does not care for more than ten
children. The usual FOSTER HOME does not exceed five placements.
   GROUP HOME. A residential facility, with a maximum of 16 beds, which
provides room and board, personal care, habilitation services and supervision
and is licensed and/or approved by the state (Ohio R.C. 5123.18). In all cases,
programmatic linkages dependent upon client need should be made with
appropriate community agencies and the home operator should endeavor to
establish rehabilitative programming.
   HABILITATION. The provision of room, board, socialization and linkage with
other community facilities for the provision of other services necessary for
normalized community living.
   HALFWAY HOUSE. A residential facility located in the community which
provides twenty-four hour supervision (for the relatively short term, three to
nine months) with a significant rehabilitative component which is an integral
part of the placement. A HALFWAY HOUSE may be utilized post-discharge from an
institution or as an alternative placement.
   HEALTH COMMISSIONER. The person occupying the office in the City Health
District, which is created by Ohio R.C. 3709.14.
   INSTITUTION. A facility providing care on a 24-hour basis for 11 or more
children, required by law to be certified by the Division of Social
Administration of the Ohio Department of Public Welfare. It is not a detention
home or educational facility.
   JUVENILE COURT. The county agency which provides services to children who
are status or delinquent offenders. Funding is obtained from the county’s
General Fund and from federal sources.
   LICENSE. Written approval of a residential care facility and the written
authorization to operate the facility.
   MENTAL HEALTH AND MENTAL RETARDATION BOARD or 648 BOARD. The legally created
body which provides planning and funding for mental health and mental
retardation clients by services provided directly to clients through contract
agencies. Funding is obtained by local levy and from state and federal sources.
   MENTAL ILLNESS. A substantial disorder of thought, mood, perception,
orientation or memory that grossly impairs judgment, behavior, the capacity to
recognize reality or the ability to meet the ordinary demands of life.
   MENTAL RETARDATION. A significantly sub-average general intellectual
functioning existing concurrently with deficiencies in adaptive behavior,
manifested during the developmental period.
   MENTAL RETARDATION BOARD or 169 BOARD. The legally created body which
provides planning for and direct services to mental retardation clients.
Funding is obtained by local levy and from state and federal sources.
   NURSING HOME. A licensed residential facility providing (as required)
personal assistance and nursing care on a 24-hour basis. A NURSING HOME may be
certified as a skilled nursing facility or an intermediate care facility by the
Ohio Commission on Aging.
   OPERATOR. A person, firm, partnership, agency, association or corporation
responsible for the overall management and daily operation of a residential
care facility.
   PROPRIETARY. Owned and operated for the purpose of making a profit, whether
or not a profit is made.
   REHABILITATION. The provision of room, board, socialization, counseling and
specific educative programming determined by client needs (such as daily living
skills and pre-vocation experiences), as well as linkage with other community
facilities for the provision of other services necessary for normalized
community living.
   RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY. An institution, residence or facility that may be
categorized into the following five care levels, which would include clients
who are mentally ill, under 21 years of age and/or mentally retarded.
      (1)   LEVEL I. Facilities for persons who require attention by a
medically trained staff, including nurses. Such facilities, in addition to
providing room and board, serve persons not in need of hospital care but still
requiring medical supervision, skilled nursing or limited nursing attention.
Prototypical faculties in this level are skilled nursing homes and intermediate
care facilities.
      (2)   LEVEL II. Facilities offering non-medical residential services with
around-the-clock supervision and a professional staff in attendance. Such
facilities include room, board, counseling or therapy and assistance in
vocational and educational programs. The estimated average period of residence
is one to six months. Prototypical facilities in this level are halfway houses;
other descriptors in this level include transitional residential homes and
rehabilitation houses.
      (3)   LEVEL III. Non-medical residences providing around-the-clock
supervision under paraprofessional and part-time professional staffs and
offering room and board and limited assistance in the activities of daily
living. The estimated average period of residence is six months to indefinite.
The prototypical facilities in this level are group homes; other descriptors in
this level include board and care facilities, extended care facilities and
hostels.
      (4)   LEVEL IV. Residential care facilities providing beds for from four
to 20 clients. Such facilities are typically operated by non-professional
proprietors and offer few services other than provision of room and board and
minimal personal supervision. The facility setting may be in a private home
under the supervision of a sponsoring family or an individual proprietor or a
home owned and/or operated by a board or agency. The estimated period of
residence is short-term to indefinite. Prototypical facilities included in this
level are foster homes and boarding homes. Additional descriptors included in
this level are domiciliary care facilities, individual foster homes and group
foster homes.
      (5)   LEVEL V. Semi-independent settings owned or operated by an agency
or board designed to accommodate approximately two or more persons, usually in
apartments. Such facilities are utilized for individuals capable of higher
levels of independent functioning so that a live-in staff is not required. The
resident assumes major responsibility for activities of daily living (e.g.,
food preparation, housekeeping and finances). Services include, after initial
assistance in location and placement, periodic supervisory follow-up
visitations. The estimated period of residence is short-term to indefinite. The
prototypical facilities in this level are supervised apartments. Other
descriptors in this category are transitional apartments, sheltered apartments
and cooperative apartments.
   RESIDENTIAL TREATMENT CENTER. A residential facility which provides
intensive psychiatric treatment to individuals suffering from some severe
emotional disturbance, who temporarily should not live in their own homes and
who need controlled group living.
   RESPITE CARE. Short-term, contractual, out of the home, residential care of
a person, usually provided by a licensed residential care facility. Such care
affords temporary relief for the person’s family or legal guardian.
   ROOMING HOUSE. A building or part thereof, operated by a resident family, in
which a room or rooms (excluding cooking facilities) are occupied by one or
more persons for compensation.
   SPECIALIZED CARE FACILITY. A home or institution which provides for
seventeen or more persons.
   TRANSITIONAL RESIDENTIAL HOME. A supportive residential care facility
utilized in cases in which an individual has no family or in which the natural
home environment is considered harmful or anti-therapeutic. Transitional
residences may provide a 24-hour structure, such as a halfway facility to
independent having or anything in between.
   TREATMENT. The provision of intensive psychotherapeutic and/or counseling
services or medication by a physician or a licensed psychologist. TREATMENT may
be one component provided by a residential care facility, but in Summit County
treatment per se is usually provided at a mental health center or hospital or
by a private physician.
   VARIANCE. An adjustment permitted in instances where a literal application
of the provisions of this chapter would result in undue hardship as a result of
some peculiar or unique condition or circumstance.
(Prior Code, § 872.01) (Ord. 162-1979, passed 7-23-1979)
§ 872.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   On or before June 1 of each year, any person, firm, corporation,
association, partnership or agency, governmental or private, desiring to
operate a residential care facility in the city shall first obtain a proper
license therefor from the Health Commissioner. Except as provided in this
chapter, no residential care facility shall be maintained and conducted in the
city without such a license.
(Prior Code, § 872.02) (Ord. 162-1979, passed 7-23-1979)
§ 872.03 LICENSE PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Each residential care facility may be licensed by the Health
Commissioner upon receipt of the following:
      (1)   A completed application form supplied by the Health Department;
      (2)   The license fee, if applicable;
      (3)   Floor plans, showing the size and use of rooms; and
      (4)   Written certification from the Health Department, the Division of
Building Inspection, the Planning Department, the Fire Division and the Police
Division that the residential care facility is in compliance with the
respective codes of each such Department and Division.
   (B)   Each residential care facility shall be required to have the following
inspections:
      (1)   A building inspection by the Division of Building Inspection, using
the Building Code of the city for new construction and the Housing Code of the
city for existing structures;
      (2)   An inspection by the Health Department for compliance with the Ohio
Food Service Operations law, the Sanitary Code of the city and this chapter;
and
      (3)   A fire safety inspection by the Fire Marshal.
   (C)   Inspections by the Division of Building Inspection, the Health
Department and the Fire Division shall be made upon application for a license
and on an annual basis. A building inspection shall be repeated whenever
renovations or changes in the building are made that would affect either the
maximum number of licensed clients approved for the facility or substantially
change the level of care provided by the facility.
   (D)   Deficiencies observed during an on-site inspection shall be listed and
sent to the operator of the facility and the license applicant, if different
from the actual operator. The operator shall submit a plan of correction to
each department or division which listed violations within the time specified.
The department or division which noted the violation shall obtain assurance,
either through documentation or reinspection, that the corrections have been
made within the time indicated.
   (E)   Residential care facilities which are already in operation at me time
this chapter becomes effective (Ordinance 162-1979, passed 7-23-1979) shall
have six months from the effective date to be surveyed for licensure and shall
meet all the conditions for licensure within 90 days after the survey.
   (F)   Any residential care facility not in operation at the time this
chapter becomes effective (Ord. 162-1979, passed 7-23-1979) shall be licensed
prior to the admission of clients; thereafter, the facility shall be inspected
annually, and if the facility is in compliance with this chapter, the license
shall be renewed.
   (G)   A license to operate a residential care facility is not transferable
and is valid only for the operator and premises named in the license. The
operator shall notify the Health Department, in writing, 30 days before closing
a licensed residential care facility, selling or leasing such a facility to
another operator, vacating the premises or discontinuing responsibility for the
operation of such a facility.
   (H)   The license issued by the Health Commissioner to a residential care
facility shall be posted in a prominent place within the facility.
(Prior Code, § 872.03) (Ord. 162-1979, passed 7-23-1979)
§ 872.04 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   Upon application for the license required by §
872.02, and at each annual review thereafter, the operator shall submit to the
Health Department a license fee made payable to the city. This fee, or any
portion thereof, shall not be refunded if the license is denied, terminated or
revoked.
   (B)   The license fee may be waived when the petitioner is a local, state or
federal government agency.
   (C)   The initial application fee shall be $100 for all facilities. The
annual renewal fee shall be $50 for all facilities.
   (D)   Any new facility desiring to begin operation within three months of
the annual renewal date may, at the discretion of the Health Commissioner, be
granted a license for not to exceed a 15-month period. Such license fee shall
be prorated for the period.
(Prior Code, § 872.04) (Ord. 162-1979, passed 7-23-1979)
§ 872.05 REVOCATION AND TERMINATION OF LICENSES.
   (A)   The license required by §
872.02 of this code of ordinances the property of the city and shall be
relinquished by an operator at the time of its termination or revocation.
   (B)   If the operator of a residential care facility no longer desires to
serve clients, he or she may voluntarily relinquish the license.
   (C)   A license shall be terminated if the operator does not apply for an
annual license renewal or does not pay the annual renewal fee within 30 days of
the expiration date.
   (D)   A license shall be considered terminated if a facility has not
provided service to clients during the 12-month period prior to the expiration
date of the license.
   (E)   When complaints concerning a residential care facility are received by
any department or division, the appropriate department or division has the
option of resurveying such facility at any time.
   (F)   An operator shall relinquish his or her license upon written order of
the Health Commissioner when a facility fails to correct deficiencies within
the time period specified by the applicable department or division.
   (G)   If a license is not relinquished, action shall be taken according to
Ch. 181, § 2, of the Sanitary Code of the city.
   (H)   Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter may be
grounds for the revocation of a license.
(Prior Code, § 872.05) (Ord. 162-1979, passed 7-23-1979)
§ 872.06 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Upon written request, the Board of Health of the City Health District
may grant to a residential care facility a variance from the requirements of
any of the provisions of this chapter. Variances from specific building,
health, fire and safety code provisions will be reviewed by the Board according
to the procedures defined in those particular codes.
   (B)   A facility shall submit a variance application, supplied by the Board,
accompanied by a written report explaining the reasons why the variance should
be granted.
   (C)   The application for a variance and the written report shall be
submitted to the Board through the Health Commissioner.
   (D)   The Board may grant a variance only upon being satisfied that an undue
hardship exists and that to grant the variance would not cause harm to the
residents of the facility or to the public.
   (E)   Within thirty days of receipt of the variance application and report,
the Board may grant or deny the application as submitted, or may amend the
application before approving it.
   (F)   The decision of the Board on the variance application shall be final.
Such decisions may be appealed to the Court of Common Pleas.
   (G)   If a variance is granted, it shall be stated in writing and sent to
the facility. Such variance shall be effective for a one-year period or for
such lesser period of time as the Board may determine.
   (H)   An approved variance shall be reviewed each time a license is renewed.
(Prior Code, § 872.06) (Ord. 162-1979, passed 7-23-1979)
§ 872.07 EXCLUSIONS.
   The following types of situations are excluded from the requirements of this
chapter:
   (A)   A residence containing what is commonly known as a family unit, as
defined in this chapter and in the Zoning Code of the city; and
   (B)   A hospital, or any part or program thereof, subject to licensure under
Ohio R.C. 5123.16 or registration under Ohio R.C. 3701.07.
(Prior Code, § 872.07) (Ord. 162-1979, passed 7-23-1979)
§ 872.08 SAFETY.
   (A)   Each residential care facility shall meet the requirements of the Fire
Division.
   (B)   A written evacuation plan for emergency situations shall be developed
by the residential care facility, showing routes to exits, and shall be
explained to each resident.
   (C)   A fire drill shall be conducted and documented at least once every
three months.
   (D)   A smoke detector and fire extinguisher shall be provided on each floor
of the facility, or as determined by appropriate fire inspectors.
   (E)   The telephone number of the Fire Division, the hospital emergency room
and the Police Division, and other emergency numbers, shall be prominently
displayed at each telephone in the facility.
   (F)   First-aid supplies shall be available and kept in a convenient place
ready for use for minor injuries.
(Prior Code, § 872.08) (Ord. 162-1979, passed 7-23-1979)
§ 872.09 RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE OPERATOR.
   The operator of a residential care facility shall be responsible for
assuring that the facility is in compliance with all rules of licensure and
applicable health, building and safety codes.
(Prior Code, § 872.09) (Ord. 162-1979, passed 7-23-1979)
§ 872.99 PENALTY.
   Any operator operating a residential care facility, in violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree
and shall be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than six months,
or both, for each offense.
(Prior Code, § 872.99) (Ord. 162-1979, passed 7-23-1979)
CHAPTER 874: TOW TRUCKS
Section
874.01   Definitions.
874.02   Identification of trucks.
874.03   License required; fees.
874.04   Authority to remove vehicles.
874.05   Records.
874.06   Exemptions.
874.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Drivers of commercial vehicles, see TRAF. Ch.
341
   Impounding of vehicles; towing charges, see TRAF.
303.08,
351.01,
357.03
   Towing requirements, see TRAF.
339.07
§ 874.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   TOW TRUCK. Any commercial truck or other commercial vehicle adapted or used
for the purpose of towing, winching or otherwise removing disabled motor
vehicles.
   TOW TRUCK OWNER. Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of
offering towing services. A lessee in operation of a tow truck shall constitute
an OWNER.
(Prior Code, § 874.01) (Ord. 221-1988, passed 12-19-1988)
§ 874.02 IDENTIFICATION OF TRUCKS.
   Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of offering towing
services shall have permanently imprinted and affixed on both sides of any
vehicle used as a tow truck the name, address and telephone number of the
person, firm or corporation owning such vehicle. The name shall be printed in
letters three inches high and not less than three-eighths of an inch wide,
while the address, place and phone number shall be in letters two inches high
and not less than three-eighths of an inch wide. Such lettering shall be done
in a color which will contrast sharply with the background upon which it is
painted and shall be placed in such a position as to be easily seen by anyone
wishing to identify the vehicle. Markings must be kept clear and distinct at
all times.
(Prior Code, § 874.02) (Ord. 221-1988, passed 12-19-1988)
§ 874.03 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEES.
   (A)   No person shall operate a tow truck upon the streets of the city
without first obtaining a license therefor from the Safety Director. Such
license shall be issued for a 12-month period and expire on June 30 of each
year. Application for a license shall be made by the owner on forms provided by
the Safety Director. The fee shall be $35 for the first vehicle and $10 for
each additional vehicle. Each owner of a tow truck shall furnish, at the time
of application or renewal of such license, a certificate of insurance, or an
acknowledgment thereof, by an insurance carrier licensed to do business in the
state; evidence of the owner’s legal liability to protect property left in his
or her care, custody or control, in an amount not less than $25,000; and
general liability in an amount not less than $100,000. The city shall be an
additional insured on said insurance policy. In addition, a first application
and renewal shall include a photograph of both sides of each vehicle to be
licensed.
   (B)   The provisions of this section relating to the owner’s legal liability
shall not apply to tow truck owners who establish, to the satisfaction of the
Safety Director, that they do not own, operate or maintain garage or vehicular
storage.
(Prior Code, § 874.03) (Ord. 221-1988, passed 12-19-1988)
§ 874.04 AUTHORITY TO REMOVE VEHICLES.
   No tow truck shall have a motor vehicle in tow unless the operator of the
truck has authorization to remove the vehicle, such authorization being either
in his or her possession or in a log book at the base dispatching office. The
authorization of the owner or of an officer of the Police Division shall
include, but not be limited to, the name of the owner of the motor vehicle, the
name and telephone number of the person authorizing the moving of the motor
vehicle, the motor vehicle registration number or the vehicle identification
number.
(Prior Code, § 874.04) (Ord. 221-1988, passed 12-19-1988)
§ 874.05 RECORDS.
   (A)   The owner of a tow truck shall keep a record of all vehicles towed,
including, but not limited to, the date, time and place of removal and the
ultimate new destination of the towed vehicles, and shall, at the request of
the Chief of Police, or his or her designated representative, have for
inspection a record of all transactions.
   (B)   After a towed vehicle has been stored for seven days, the tow truck
owner shall file the affidavit required to obtain an unclaimed motor vehicle
title. No notification of the owner will be required if the owner has
acknowledged in writing that the vehicle is in custody of the tow company.
(Prior Code, § 874.05) (Ord. 221-1988, passed 12-19-1988)
§ 874.06 EXEMPTIONS.
   Where a tow truck, originating from a location outside the city, is passing
through the city on city streets to a destination outside the city, such truck
shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. Further, any tow truck
licensed by another political subdivision shall be exempt from the provisions
of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 874.06) (Ord. 221-1988, passed 12-19-1988)
§ 874.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
more than $500 or imprisoned not more than six months, or both, for each
offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 874.99) (Ord. 221-1988, passed 12-19-1988)
CHAPTER 875: TOBACCO 21
Section
875.01   Definitions.
875.02   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, tobacco products, or tobacco
product paraphernalia.
§ 875.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE. Any device that can be used to deliver
aerosolized or vaporized nicotine or any other substance to the person inhaling
from the device, including, but not limited to, an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-
pipe, vape-pen or e-hookah. ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE includes any component,
part, or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately, and
includes any substance intended to aerosolized or vaporized during the use of
the device. ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE does not include drugs, devices, or
combination products authorized for sale by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, as those terms are defined in the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT PARAPHERNALIA. Any product that is used to assist in
chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, or any other consumption of
nicotine to include, but not limited to pipes, rolling papers, and electronic
cigarette cases.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any product that is made from or derived from tobacco, and
is intended for human consumption or is likely to be consumed, whether smoked,
heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled or ingested by any other means,
including but not limited to, a cigarette, a cigar, pipe tobacco, chewing
tobacco, snuff, or snus. The term also includes TOBACCO PRODUCT PARAPHERNALIA,
including but not limited to, electronic smoking devices and any component or
accessory used in the consumption of a tobacco product, such as filters,
rolling papers, pipes, or liquids used in electronic smoking devises, whether
or not they contain nicotine. TOBACCO PRODUCT does not include drugs, devices,
or combination products authorized for sale by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, as those terms are defined in the Federal Food Drug and
Cosmetic Act.
(Ord. 22-2020, passed 3-9-2020)
§ 875.02 ILLEGAL DISTRIBUTION OF CIGARETTES, TOBACCO PRODUCTS, OR TOBACCO
PRODUCT PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by Ohio R.C. 2927.02(D) and (E), no
manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or tobacco product paraphernalia or any agent,
employee, or representative of a manufacturer, producer, distributor,
wholesaler, or retailer of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or tobacco
product paraphernalia shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Give, sell, or otherwise distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or tobacco product paraphernalia to any person under 21 years of age;
or
      (2)   Give away, sell, or distribute cigarettes, other tobacco products,
or tobacco product paraphernalia in any place that does not have posted in a
conspicuous place sign stating that giving, selling or otherwise distributing
cigarettes or other tobacco products to a person under 21years of age is
prohibited by law.
   (B)   No person shall sell or offer to sell cigarettes, tobacco products, or
tobacco product paraphernalia by or from a vending machine except in the
following locations:
      (1)   An area either:
         (a)   Within a factory, business office, or other place not open to
the general public; or
         (b)   To which persons under the age of 21 years are not generally
permitted access.
      (2)   In any other place not identified in division (B)(1) of this
section, upon all of the following conditions:
         (a)   The vending machine is located within the immediate vicinity,
plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place, or an
employee of such person, so that all purchases of cigarettes, tobacco products,
or tobacco product paraphernalia from the vending machine will be readily
observed by the person who owns or operates the place or an employee of such
person. For the purpose of this section, a vending machine located in any
unmonitored area, including an unmonitored coatroom, restroom, hallway, or
outer waiting area, shall not be considered located within the immediately
vicinity, plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place
or an employee of such person; or
         (b)   The vending machine is inaccessible to the public when the place
is closed.
   (C)   As used in this section, “vending machine” has the same meaning as
“coin machine” as defined in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section shall be subject to a civil penalty for
illegal distribution of cigarettes, tobacco products, or tobacco product
paraphernalia. Whoever violates this section shall not be subject to a fine for
a first violation. A civil fine of $500 will be issued for a second violation
of this section. A civil fine of $1,000 will be issued for all subsequent
violations.
   (E)   All fines collected by the County Combined General Health District
pursuant to this section shall be utilized for efforts to prevent smoking
initiation by persons under the age of 21 or for efforts to promote smoking
cessation, including supports for those who will no longer be able to purchase
cigarettes or other tobacco products pursuant to this section.
   (F)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, enforcement
authority of this section shall rest with the County Combined General Health
District pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3709.281. Enforcement of this chapter, including
the issuance of penalties, shall only be undertaken following the adoption of
regulations by the County Combined General Health District relating to the
enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 22-2020, passed 3-9-2020)
CHAPTER 876: MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATORS, PROCESSORS AND RETAIL DISPENSARIES
Section
876.01   Prohibition.
876.02   Exceptions.
§ 876.01 PROHIBITION.
   Cultivators, processors or retail dispensaries of medical marijuana as
defined and licensed under Ohio R.C. Ch. 3796, as it may be amended from time
to time, shall be prohibited in all zoning districts and anywhere in the city;
except that, the distribution of medical marijuana shall be permitted by a
licensed pharmacy in the same manner as other prescription drugs are sold.
(Prior Code, § 876.01) (Ord. 03-2018, passed 2-12-2018)
§ 876.02 EXCEPTIONS.
   The prohibition set forth in §
876.01 of this chapter shall not apply to licensed facilities involving
research related to marijuana conducted at a state university, academic medical
center or by a private research and development organization as part of a
research protocol approved by an institutional review board or equivalent
entity as provided in Ohio R.C. 3796.29.
(Prior Code, § 876.02) (Ord. 03-2018, passed 2-12-2018)
TITLE FOUR: TAXATION
CHAPTER 880: EARNED INCOME TAX (EFFECTIVE BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2024)
Section
880.01   Authority to levy tax; purposes of tax; rate.
880.02   Effective date.
880.03   Definitions.
880.04   Income subject to tax for individuals.
880.05   Collection at source.
880.06   Income subject to net profit tax.
880.07   Declaration of estimated tax.
880.08   Credit for tax paid.
880.09   Annual return.
880.10   Penalty, interest, fees and charges.
880.11   Audit.
880.12   Rounding.
880.13   Authority and powers of the Tax Administrator.
880.14   Confidentiality.
880.15   Fraud.
880.16   Opinion of the Tax Administrator.
880.17   Assessment; appeal based on presumption of delivery.
880.18   Local Board of Tax Review; appeal to Local Board of Tax Review.
880.19   Actions to recover; statute of limitations.
880.20   Adoption of rules.
880.21   Election to be subject to R.C. 718.80 to 718.95.
880.22   Collection after termination of chapter.
880.23   Savings clause.
880.99   Violations; penalty.
§ 880.01 AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX; PURPOSES OF TAX; RATE.
   (A)   Authority to levy tax.
      (1)   The tax on income and the withholding tax established by this
chapter are authorized by Art. XVIII, § 3, of the Ohio Constitution. The tax on
income and the withholding tax established by this chapter are deemed to be
levied in accordance with, and to be consistent with, the provisions and
limitations of Ohio R.C. Ch. 718. This chapter is deemed to incorporate the
provisions of Ohio R.C. Ch. 718.
      (2)   The tax is an annual tax levied on the income of every person
residing in or earning or receiving income in the municipal corporation, and
shall be measured by municipal taxable income. The municipality shall tax
income at a uniform rate. The tax is levied on municipal taxable income, as
defined herein.
(Prior Code, § 880.011)
   (B)   Purposes of tax; rate.
      (1)   A tax at the rate of 2% is hereby levied on gross income as defined
in §
880.03 of this chapter including salaries, wages, commissions and other
compensation, and on net profits, to provide funds for the purposes of general
municipal operations, maintenance, new equipment, extensions and enlargements
of municipal services and facilities and capital improvements, is hereby levied
a tax on gross income including salaries, wages, commissions and other
compensation, and on net profits, as herein provided.
      (2)   Effective 1-1-2014, there is hereby levied on gross income, as
defined in §
880.03 of this chapter, an additional 0.25% to provide funds for the purpose of
providing funds to pay for roadway reconstruction and resurfacing of streets
and alleys, to include any debt service on the aforementioned improvements.
(Prior Code, § 880.012)
   (C)   Allocation of funds.
      (1)   The funds collected under the provisions of division (B)(1) above
shall be deposited in a special fund known as the Income Tax Revenue Fund, and
said funds shall be disbursed in the following manner:
         (a)   First, such part therefore as shall be necessary to defray all
expense of collecting the tax and administering and enforcing the provisions of
the chapter shall be paid; and
         (b)   Second, to defray all expenses of the General Fund and other
funds as designated in the annual budget adopted by City Council.
      (2)   The funds collected under the provisions of division (B)(2) above
shall be deposited in a special fund known as the Street Capital Improvement
Fund for the purpose of street improvements, as defined by Ord. 127-2013.
(Prior Code, § 880.013)
   (D)   Statement of procedural history; state mandated changes to municipal
income tax.
      (1)   Significant and wide-ranging amendments to Ohio R.C. Ch. 718 were
enacted by Am. Sub. H.B. 5, passed by the 130th General Assembly, and signed by
Governor Kasich on 12-19-2014, and H.B. 5 required municipal corporations to
conform to and adopt the provisions of Ohio R.C. Ch. 718 in order to have the
authority to impose, enforce, administer and collect a municipal income tax.
      (2)   As mandated by H.B. 5, municipal income tax Ord. 182-2015,
effective 1-1-2016, comprehensively amends pervious regulations in accordance
with the provisions of Ohio R.C. Ch. 718 to allow the municipality to continue
the income tax and withholding tax administration and collection efforts on
behalf of the municipality.
(Prior Code, § 880.014)
(Ord. 182-2015, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 880.02 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   (A)   Ord. 182-2015, effective 1-1-2016, and corresponding changes to Ohio
R.C. Ch. 718, apply to municipal taxable years beginning on or after 1-1-2016.
All provisions of this chapter apply to taxable years beginning 2016 and
succeeding taxable years.
   (B)   Ord. 182-2015 does not repeal the existing sections of this chapter
for any taxable year prior to 2016, but rather amends pervious regulations,
effective 1-1-2016. For municipal taxable years beginning before 1-1-2016, the
municipality shall continue to administer, audit, and enforce the income tax of
the municipality under Ohio R.C. Ch. 718 and ordinances and resolutions of the
municipality as that chapter and those ordinances and resolutions existed
before 1-1-2016.
(Prior Code, § 880.02) (Ord. 182-2015, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 880.03 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Any term used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in this
chapter has the same meaning as when used in a comparable context in laws of
the United States relating to federal income taxation or in Title LVII of the
Ohio Revised Code, unless a different meaning is clearly required. If a term
used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in this chapter is used in a
comparable context in both the laws of the United States relating to federal
income tax and in Title LVII of the Ohio Revised Code and the use is not
consistent, then the use of the term in the laws of the United States relating
to Federal income tax shall control over the use of the term in Title LVII of
the Ohio Revised Code.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, the singular shall include the plural,
and the masculine shall include the feminine and the gender-neutral.
   (C)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME. For a person required to file as a C
corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C corporation
hereunder, means a C corporation’s federal taxable income before net operating
losses and special deductions as determined under the Internal Revenue Code,
adjusted as follows:
            1.   Deduct intangible income to the extent included in federal
taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the
intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held
for the production of income;
            2.   Add an amount equal to 5% of intangible income deducted
hereunder, but excluding that portion of intangible income directly related to
the sale, exchange or other disposition of property described in I.R.C. § 1221;
            3.   Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of
federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange or
other disposition of an asset described in I.R.C. §§ 1221 or 1231;
            4.   a.   Except as provided herein, deduct income and gain
included in federal taxable income to the extent the income and gain directly
relate to the sale, exchange or other disposition of an asset described in
I.R.C. §§ 1221 or 1231; and
               b.   Division 4.a. above does not apply to the extent the income
or gain is income or gain described in I.R.C. §§ 1245 or 1250.
            5.   Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction
in the computation of federal taxable income;
            6.   In the case of a real estate investment trust or regulated
investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions
to or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and allowed
as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income;
            7.   Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in
computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer agreement
or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under Ohio R.C.
4313.02;
            8.   a.   Except as limited by divisions 8.b., 8.c. and 8.d. below,
deduct any net operating loss incurred by the person in a taxable year
beginning on or after 1-1-2017. The amount of such net operating loss shall be
deducted from net profit that is reduced by exempt income to the extent
necessary to reduce municipal taxable income to zero, with any remaining unused
portion of the net operating loss carried forward to not more than five
consecutive taxable years following the taxable year in which the loss was
incurred, but in no case for more years than necessary for the deduction to be
fully utilized.
               b.   No person shall use the deduction allowed by division 8.a.
above to offset qualifying wages.
               c.   i.   For taxable years beginning in 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021
or 2022, a person may not deduct, for purposes of an income tax levied by a
municipal corporation that levies an income tax before 1-1-2016, more than 50%
of the amount of the deduction otherwise allowed by division 8.a. above.
                  ii.   For taxable years beginning in 2023 or thereafter, a
person may deduct, for purposes of an income tax levied by a municipal
corporation that levies an income tax before 1-1-2016, the full amount allowed
by division 8.a. above.
               d.   Any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward deduction that
is available must be utilized before a taxpayer may deduct any amount pursuant
to this division 8.
               e.   Nothing in division 8.c.i. above precludes a person from
carrying forward, for use with respect to any return filed for a taxable year
beginning after 2018, any amount of net operating loss that was not fully
utilized by operation of division 8.c.i. above. To the extent that an amount of
net operating loss that was not fully utilized in one or more taxable years by
operation of division 8.c.i. above is carried forward for use with respect to a
return filed for a taxable year beginning in 2019, 2020, 2021 or 2022, the
limitation described in division 8.c.i. above shall apply to the amount carried
forward.
            9.   Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned directly
or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer’s federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net profit in
the group’s federal taxable income in accordance with §
880.06(C)(5)(c)2. of this chapter.
            10.   Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned directly
or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer’s federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss in the
group’s federal taxable income in accordance with §
880.06(C)(5)(c)2. of this chapter. If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is
not a disregarded entity that has made the election described herein, is not a
publicly traded partnership that has made the election described herein and is
not an individual, the taxpayer shall compute adjusted federal taxable income
under this section as if the taxpayer were a C corporation, except guaranteed
payments and other similar amounts paid or accrued to a partner, former
partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member shall not be
allowed as a deductible expense unless such payments are in consideration for
the use of capital and treated as payment of interest under I.R.C. § 469 or
United States Treasury regulations. Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified
self-employed retirement plan with respect to a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member of the taxpayer,
amounts paid or accrued to or for health insurance for a partner, former
partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member or former member, and amounts
paid or accrued to or for life insurance for a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member or former member shall not be allowed
as a deduction. Nothing herein shall be construed as allowing the taxpayer to
add or deduct any amount more than once or shall be construed as allowing any
taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued for purposes of federal self-
employment tax.
      ASSESSMENT.
         (a)   Any of the following:
            1.   A written finding by the Tax Administrator that a person has
underpaid Municipal income tax, or owes penalty and interest, or any
combination of tax, penalty or interest, to the municipal corporation;
            2.   A full or partial denial of a refund request issued under §
880.09(F)(2)(b) of this chapter;
            3.   A Tax Administrator’s denial of a taxpayer’s request for use
of an alternative apportionment method, issued under §
880.06(B)(2)(b) of this chapter;
            4.   A Tax Administrator’s requirement for a taxpayer to use an
alternative apportionment method, issued under §
880.06(B)(2)(c) of this chapter; and
            5.   For purposes of divisions (a)1., 2., 3. and 4. above, an
ASSESSMENT shall commence the person’s time limitation for making an appeal to
the Local Board of Tax Review pursuant to §
880.18 of this chapter, and shall have “ASSESSMENT” written in all capital
letters at the top of such finding.
         (b)   ASSESSMENT does not include notice(s) denying a request for
refund issued under §
880.09(F)(2)(c) of this chapter, a billing statement notifying a taxpayer of
current or past-due balances owed to the municipal corporation, a Tax
Administrator’s request for additional information, a notification to the
taxpayer of mathematical errors, or a Tax Administrator’s other written
correspondence to a person or taxpayer that does not meet the criteria
prescribed hereby.
      AUDIT. The examination of a person or the inspection of the books,
records, memoranda, or accounts of a person, ordered to appear before the Tax
Administrator, for the purpose of determining liability for a municipal income
tax.
      BOARD OF REVIEW. The same meaning as “Local Board of Tax Review”.
      CALENDAR QUARTER. The three-month period ending on the last day of March,
June, September or December.
      CASINO OPERATOR and CASINO FACILITY. The same meanings as in Ohio R.C.
3772.01.
      CERTIFIED MAIL, EXPRESS MAIL, UNITED STATES MAIL, POSTAL SERVICE and
similar terms. Include any delivery service authorized pursuant to Ohio R.C.
5703.056.
      COMPENSATION. Any form of remuneration paid to an employee for personal
services.
      DISREGARDED ENTITY. A single member limited liability company, a
qualifying subchapter S subsidiary or another entity if the company, subsidiary
or entity is a disregarded entity for federal income tax purposes.
      DOMICILE. The true, fixed and permanent home of the taxpayer to which,
whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return.
      EXEMPT INCOME. All of the following:
         (a)   The military pay or allowances of members of the Armed Forces of
the United States or members of their reserve components, including the
national guard of any state;
         (b)   1.   Except as provided in division (b)2. below, intangible
income;
            2.   A municipal corporation that taxed any type of intangible
income on 3-29-1988, pursuant to § 3 of S.B. 238 of the 116th General Assembly,
may continue to tax that type of income if a majority of the electors of the
municipal corporation voting on the question of whether to permit the taxation
of that type of intangible income after 1988 voted in favor thereof at an
election held on 11-8-1988;
            3.   Social Security benefits, railroad retirement benefits,
unemployment compensation, pensions, retirement benefit payments, payments from
annuities, and similar payments made to an employee or to the beneficiary of an
employee under a retirement program or plan, disability payments received from
private industry or local, state or federal governments or from charitable,
religious or educational organizations, and the proceeds of sickness, accident
or liability insurance policies. As used in this division (b)3., “unemployment
compensation” does not include supplemental unemployment compensation described
in I.R.S. § 3402(o)(2);
            4.   The income of religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific,
literary or educational institutions to the extent such income is derived from
tax-exempt real estate, tax-exempt tangible or intangible property or tax-
exempt activities;
            5.   Compensation paid under Ohio R.C. 3501.28 or 3501.36 to a
person serving as a precinct election official to the extent that such
compensation does not exceed $1,000 for the taxable year. Such compensation in
excess of $1,000 for the taxable year may be subject to taxation by a municipal
corporation. A municipal corporation shall not require the payer of such
compensation to withhold any tax from that compensation;
            6.   Dues, contributions and similar payments received by
charitable, religious, educational or literary organizations or labor unions,
lodges and similar organizations;
            7.   Alimony and child support received;
            8.   Awards for personal injuries or for damages to property from
insurance proceeds or otherwise, excluding compensation paid for lost salaries
or wages or awards for punitive damages;
            9.   Income of a public utility when that public utility is subject
to the tax levied under Ohio R.C. 5727.24 or 5727.30. This division (b)9. does
not apply for purposes of Ohio R.C. Ch. 5745;
            10.   Gains from involuntary conversions, interest on federal
obligations, items of income subject to a tax levied by the state and that a
municipal corporation is specifically prohibited by law from taxing, and income
of a decedent’s estate during the period of administration except such income
from the operation of a trade or business;
            11.   Compensation or allowances excluded from federal gross income
under I.R.C. § 107;
            12.   Employee compensation that is not qualifying wages, as
defined herein;
            13.   Compensation paid to a person employed within the boundaries
of a United States Air Force base under the jurisdiction of the United States
Air Force that is used for the housing of members of the United States Air
Force and is a center for Air Force operations, unless the person is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile. If the compensation is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile, tax on such income shall be payable
only to the municipal corporation of residence or domicile;
            14.   An S corporation shareholder’s distributive share of net
profits of the S corporation, other than any part of the distributive share of
net profits that represents wages as defined in I.R.C. § 3121(a) or net
earnings from self-employment as defined in I.R.C. § 1402(a);
            15.   All of the municipal taxable income earned by individuals
under 18 years of age;
            16.   a.   Except as provided in divisions (b)16.b., (b)16.c. and
(b)16.d. below, qualifying wages described in §
880.05(B)(2)(a) or (B)(5) of this chapter to the extent the qualifying wages
are not subject to withholding for the municipality under either of those
divisions.
               b.   The exemption provided in division (b)16.a. above does not
apply with respect to the municipal corporation in which the employee resided
at the time the employee earned the qualifying wages.
               c.   The exemption provided in division (b)16.a. above does not
apply to qualifying wages that an employer elects to withhold under §
880.05(B)(4)(b) of this chapter.
               d.   The exemption provided in division (b)16.a. above does not
apply to qualifying wages if both of the following conditions apply:
                  i.   For qualifying wages described in §
880.05(B)(2)(a) of this chapter, the employee’s employer withholds and remits
tax on the qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the
employee’s principal place of work is situated, or, for qualifying wages
described in §
880.05(B)(5) of this chapter, the employee’s employer withholds and remits tax
on the qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employer’s
fixed location is located;
                  ii.   The employee receives a refund of the tax described in
division (b)16.d.i. above on the basis of the employee not performing services
in that municipal corporation.
            17.   a.   Except as provided in divisions (b)17.b. or (b)17.c.
below, compensation that is not qualifying wages paid to a non-resident
individual for personal services performed in the municipality on not more than
20 days in a taxable year.
               b.   The exemption provided in division (b)17.a. above does not
apply under either of the following circumstances:
                  i.   The individual’s base of operation is located in the
municipality; and
                  ii.   The individual is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer or public figure, and the compensation is paid for the performance
of services in the individual’s capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer or public figure. For purposes of division (b)17.b.(c)
(11)Q.2.b. of this section, “professional athlete”, “professional entertainer”
and “public figure” have the same meanings as in §
880.05(B) of this chapter.
               c.   Compensation to which this division (b)17. applies shall be
treated as earned or received at the individual’s base of operation. If the
individual does not have a base of operation, the compensation shall be treated
as earned or received where the individual is domiciled.
               d.   For purposes of this division (b)17., “base of operation”
means the location where an individual owns or rents an office, storefront or
similar facility to which the individual regularly reports and at which the
individual regularly performs personal services for compensation.
            18.   Compensation paid to a person for personal services performed
for a political subdivision on property owned by the political subdivision,
regardless of whether the compensation is received by an employee of the
subdivision or another person performing services for the subdivision under a
contract with the subdivision, if the property on which services are performed
is annexed to a municipal corporation pursuant to Ohio R.C. 709.023 on or after
3-27-2013, unless the person is subject to such taxation because of residence.
If the compensation is subject to taxation because of residence, municipal
income tax shall be payable only to the municipal corporation of residence.
            19.   Income the taxation of which is prohibited by the
constitution or laws of the United States. Any item of income that is exempt
income of a pass-through entity under this definition is exempt income of each
owner of the pass-through entity to the extent of that owner’s distributive or
proportionate share of that item of the entity’s income.
      FORM 2106. Internal Revenue Service Form 2106 filed by a taxpayer
pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      GENERIC FORM. An electronic or paper form that is not prescribed by a
particular municipal corporation and that is designed for reporting taxes
withheld by an employer, agent of an employer or other payer, estimated
municipal income taxes or annual municipal income tax liability, including a
request for refund.
      INCOME. The following:
         (a)   1.   For residents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages,
commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by
the resident, including the resident’s distributive share of the net profit of
pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by the resident and any net
profit of the resident, except as provided in division (d) below.
            2.   For the purposes of division (a)1. above:
               a.   Any net operating loss of the resident incurred in the
taxable year and the resident’s distributive share of any net operating loss
generated in the same taxable year and attributable to the resident’s ownership
interest in a pass-through entity shall be allowed as a deduction, for that
taxable year and the following five taxable years, against any other net profit
of the resident or the resident’s distributive share of any net profit
attributable to the resident’s ownership interest in a pass-through entity
until fully utilized, subject hereto;
               b.   The resident’s distributive share of the net profit of each
pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the resident shall be
calculated without regard to any net operating loss that is carried forward by
that entity from a prior taxable year and applied to reduce the entity’s net
profit for the current taxable year.
               c.   Division (c)(14)A.2. of this section does not apply with
respect to any net profit or net operating loss attributable to an ownership
interest in an S corporation unless shareholders’ distributive shares of net
profits from S corporations are subject to tax in the municipal corporation as
provided in division (c)(11)N. or division (c)(14)E. of this section.
               d.   Any amount of a net operating loss used to reduce a
taxpayer’s net profit for a taxable year shall reduce the amount of net
operating loss that may be carried forward to any subsequent year for use by
that taxpayer. In no event shall the cumulative deductions for all taxable
years with respect to a taxpayer’s net operating loss exceed the original
amount of that net operating loss available to that taxpayer.
         (b)   In the case of non-residents, all income, salaries, qualifying
wages, commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or
received by the non-resident for work done, services performed or rendered, or
activities conducted in the municipality, including any net profit of the non-
resident, but excluding the non-resident’s distributive share of the net profit
or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by the non-
resident.
         (c)   For taxpayers that are not individuals, net profit of the
taxpayer.
         (d)   Lottery, sweepstakes, gambling and sports winnings, winnings
from games of chance, and prizes and awards. If the taxpayer is a professional
gambler for Federal income tax purposes, the taxpayer may deduct related
wagering losses and expenses to the extent authorized under the Internal
Revenue Code and claimed against such winnings. Credit for tax withheld or paid
to another municipal corporation on such winnings paid to the municipal
corporation where winnings occur is limited to the credit as specified in
Section 880.081.
      INTANGIBLE INCOME. Income of any of the following types: income yield,
interest, capital gains, dividends, or other income arising from the ownership,
sale, exchange or other disposition of intangible property including, but not
limited to, investments, deposits, money or credits as those terms are defined
in Ohio R.C. Ch. 5701, and patents, copyrights, trademarks, trade names,
investments in real estate investment trusts, investments in regulated
investment companies and appreciation on deferred compensation. INTANGIBLE
INCOME does not include prizes, awards or other income associated with any
lottery winnings, gambling winnings or other similar games of chance.
      INTERNAL REVENUE CODE. The “Internal Revenue Code of 1986”, 100 Sta.
2085, 26 U.S.C.A. § 1, as amended.
      LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY. A limited liability company formed under Ohio
R.C. Ch. 1705 or under the laws of another state.
      LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW and BOARD OF TAX REVIEW. The entity created
under §
880.18.
      MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. In general terms, a status conferred upon a local
government unit, by state law giving the unit certain autonomous operating
authority such as the power of taxation, power of eminent domain, police power
and regulatory power, and includes a joint economic development district or
joint economic development zone that levies an income tax under Ohio R.C.
718.691, 715.70, 715.71 or 715.74.
      MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME.
         (a)   The following:
            1.   For a person other than an individual, income reduced by
exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then, as
applicable, apportioned or sitused to the municipality under §
880.06(B) of this chapter, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating
loss carryforward available to the person for the municipality.
            2.   a.   For an individual who is a resident of a municipality
other than a qualified municipal corporation, income reduced by exempt income
to the extent otherwise included in income, then reduced as provided herein and
further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to
the individual for the municipality.
               b.   For an individual who is a resident of a qualified
municipal corporation, Ohio adjusted gross income reduced by income exempted,
and increased by deductions excluded, by the qualified municipal corporation
from the qualified municipal corporation’s tax on or before 12-31-2013. If a
qualified municipal corporation, on or before 12-31-2013, exempts income earned
by individuals who are not residents of the qualified municipal corporation and
net profit of persons that are not wholly located within the qualified
municipal corporation, such individual or person shall have no municipal
taxable income for the purposes of the tax levied by the qualified municipal
corporation and may be exempted by the qualified municipal corporation from the
requirements of Ohio R.C. 718.03.
            3.   For an individual who is a non-resident of the municipality,
income reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and
then, as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the municipality under §
880.06(B) of this chapter, then reduced as provided herein and further reduced
by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the individual for
the municipality.
         (b)   In computing the municipal taxable income of a taxpayer who is
an individual, the taxpayer may subtract, as provided herein, the amount of the
individual’s employee business expenses reported on the individual’s form 2106
that the individual deducted for federal income tax purposes for the taxable
year, subject to the limitation imposed by I.R.C. § 67. For the municipal
corporation in which the taxpayer is a resident, the taxpayer may deduct all
such expenses allowed for federal income tax purposes. For a municipal
corporation in which the taxpayer is not a resident, the taxpayer may deduct
such expenses only to the extent the expenses are related to the taxpayer’s
performance of personal services in that non-resident municipal corporation.
      MUNICIPALITY. The City of Barberton.
      NET OPERATING LOSS. A loss incurred by a person in the operation of a
trade or business. NET OPERATING LOSS does not include unutilized losses
resulting from basis limitations, at-risk limitations or passive activity loss
limitations.
      NET PROFIT.
         (a)   For a person other than an individual means adjusted Federal
taxable income.
         (b)   For a person who is an individual means the individual’s net
profit required to be reported on schedule C, schedule E or schedule F reduced
by any net operating loss carried forward. For the purposes of division (a)
above, the net operating loss carried forward shall be calculated and deducted
in the same manner as provided herein.
         (c)   For the purposes of this chapter, and notwithstanding division
(a) above, net profit of a disregarded entity shall not be taxable as against
that disregarded entity, but shall instead be included in the net profit of the
owner of the disregarded entity.
         (d)   1.   For purposes of this chapter, “publicly traded partnership”
means any partnership, an interest in which is regularly traded on an
established securities market. A “publicly traded partnership” may have any
number of partners.
            2.   For the purposes of this chapter, and not withstanding any
other provision of this chapter, the net profit of a publicly traded
partnership that makes the election described herein shall be taxed as if the
partnership were a C corporation, and shall not be treated as the net profit or
income of any owner of the partnership.
            3.   A publicly traded partnership that is treated as a partnership
for federal income tax purposes and that is subject to tax on its net profits
in one or more municipal corporations in this State may elect to be treated as
a C corporation for municipal income tax purposes. The publicly traded
partnership shall make the election in every municipal corporation in which the
partnership is subject to taxation on its net profits. The election shall be
made on the annual tax return filed in each such municipal corporation. Once
the election is made, the election is binding for a five-year period beginning
with the first taxable year of the initial election. The election continues to
be binding for each subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to
discontinue filing municipal income tax returns as a C corporation for
municipal purposes under division (d)(4) below.
            4.   An election to discontinue filing as a C corporation must be
made in the first year following the last year of a five-year election period
in effect under division (d)3. above. The election to discontinue filing as a C
corporation is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first taxable
year of the election and continues to be binding for each subsequent five-year
period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing municipal income tax
returns as a partnership for municipal purposes. An election to discontinue
filing as a partnership must be made in the first year following the last year
of a five-year election period.
            5.   The publicly traded partnership shall not be required to file
the election with any municipal corporation in which the partnership is not
subject to taxation on its net profits, but this division (d) applies to all
municipal corporations in which an individual owner of the partnership resides.
            6.   The individual owners of the partnership not filing as a C
corporation shall be required to file with their municipal corporation of
residence and report partnership distribution of net profit.
      NON-RESIDENT. An individual that is not a resident of the municipality.
      OHIO BUSINESS GATEWAY. The online computer network system, created under
Ohio R.C. 125.30, that allows persons to electronically file business reply
forms with state agencies and includes any successor electronic filing and
payment system.
      OTHER PAYER. Any person, other than an individual’s employer or the
employer’s agent, that pays an individual any amount included in the federal
gross income of the individual. OTHER PAYER includes casino operators and video
lottery terminal sales agents.
      PASS-THROUGH ENTITY. A partnership not treated as an association taxable
as a C corporation for federal income tax purposes, a limited liability company
not treated as an association taxable as a C corporation for federal income tax
purposes, an S corporation or any other class of entity from which the income
or profits of the entity are given pass-through treatment for federal income
tax purposes. PASS-THROUGH ENTITY does not include a trust, estate, grantor of
a grantor trust or disregarded entity.
      PENSION. Any amount paid to an employee or former employee that is
reported to the recipient on an IRS form 1099-R, or successor form. PENSION
does not include deferred compensation, or amounts attributable to non-
qualified deferred compensation plans, reported as FICA/Medicare wages on an
IRS form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement, or successor form.
      PERSON. Includes individuals, firms, companies, joint stock companies,
business trusts, estates, trusts, partnerships, limited liability partnerships,
limited liability companies, associations, C corporations, S corporations,
governmental entities and any other entity.
      POSTAL SERVICE. The United States postal service, or private delivery
service delivering documents and packages within an agreed upon delivery
schedule, or any other carrier service delivering the item.
      POSTMARK DATE, DATE OF POSTMARK and similar terms. Include the date
recorded and marked by a delivery service and recorded electronically to a
database kept in the regular course of its business and marked on the cover in
which the payment or document is enclosed, the date on which the payment or
document was given to the delivery service for delivery.
      PRE-2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRYFORWARD.
         (a)   Any net operating loss incurred in a taxable year beginning
before 1-1-2017, to the extent such loss was permitted, by a resolution or
ordinance of the municipality that was adopted by the municipality before 1-1-
2016, to be carried forward and utilized to offset income or net profit
generated in such municipality in future taxable years.
         (b)   For the purpose of calculating municipal taxable income, any
pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward may be carried forward to any taxable
year, including taxable years beginning in 2017 or thereafter, for the number
of taxable years provided in the resolution or ordinance or until fully
utilized, whichever is earlier.
      QUALIFIED MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. A municipal corporation that, by
resolution or ordinance adopted on or before 12-31-2011, adopted Ohio adjusted
gross income, as defined by Ohio R.C. 5747.01, as the income subject to tax for
the purposes of imposing a municipal income tax.
      QUALIFYING WAGES. Wages, as defined in I.R.C. § 3121(a), without regard
to any wage limitations, adjusted as follows:
         (a)   Deduct the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes
compensation attributable to a plan or program described in I.R.C. § 125;
            2.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes payment
on account of a disability related to sickness or an accident paid by a party
unrelated to the employer, agent of an employer or other payer; or
            3.   Any amount included in wages that is exempt income.
         (b)   Add the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount not included in wages solely because the employee
was employed by the employer before 4-1-1986;
            2.   Any amount not included in wages because the amount arises
from the sale, exchange, or other disposition of a stock option, the exercise
of a stock option, or the sale, exchange or other disposition of stock
purchased under a stock option. This division (b) applies only to those amounts
constituting ordinary income;
            3.   Any amount not included in wages if the amount is an amount
described in I.R.C. §§ 401(k), 403(b) or 457. This division (b)3. applies only
to employee contributions and employee deferrals;
            4.   Any amount that is supplemental unemployment compensation
benefits described in I.R.C. § 3402(o)(2) and not included in wages;
            5.   Any amount received that is treated as self-employment income
for Federal tax purposes in accordance with I.R.S. § 1402(a)(8); and
            6.   Any amount not included in wages if all of the following
apply:
               a.   For the taxable year the amount is employee compensation
that is earned outside of the United States and that either is included in the
taxpayer’s gross income for federal income tax purposes or would have been
included in the taxpayer’s gross income for such purposes if the taxpayer did
not elect to exclude the income under I.R.S. § 911;
               b.   For no preceding taxable year did the amount constitute
wages as defined in I.R.C. § 3121(a);
               c.   For no succeeding taxable year will the amount constitute
wages; and
               d.   For any taxable year the amount has not otherwise been
added to wages pursuant to either division (b) above or Ohio R.C. 718.03, as
that section existed before the effective date of H.B. 5 of the 130th General
Assembly, 3-23-2015.
      RELATED ENTITY. Any of the following:
         (a)   An individual stockholder, or a member of the stockholder’s
family enumerated in I.R.C. § 318, if the stockholder and the members of the
stockholder’s family own directly, indirectly, beneficially or constructively,
in the aggregate, at least 50% of the value of the taxpayer’s outstanding
stock;
         (b)   A stockholder, or a stockholder’s partnership, estate, trust or
corporation, if the stockholder and the stockholder’s partnerships, estates,
trusts or corporations own directly, indirectly, beneficially or
constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50% of the value of the taxpayer’s
outstanding stock;
         (c)   A corporation, or a party related to the corporation in a manner
that would require an attribution of stock from the corporation to the party or
from the party to the corporation under division (d) below; provided, the
taxpayer owns directly, indirectly, beneficially or constructively, at least
50% of the value of the corporation’s outstanding stock;
         (d)   The attribution rules described in I.R.C. § 318 apply for the
purpose of determining whether the ownership requirements in divisions (a) to
(c) above have been met.
      RELATED MEMBER. A person that, with respect to the taxpayer during all or
any portion of the taxable year, is either a related entity, a component member
as defined in I.R.C. § 1563(b) or a person to or from whom there is attribution
of stock ownership in accordance with I.R.C. § 1563(e), except, for purposes of
determining whether a person is a related member under this division, “20%”
shall be substituted for “5%” wherever “5%” appears in I.R.C. § 1563(e).
      RESIDENT. An individual who is domiciled in the municipality as
determined under §
880.04(B) of this chapter.
      S CORPORATION. A person that has made an election under I.R.C. subchapter
S of Chapter 1 of Subtitle A for its taxable year.
      SCHEDULE C. Internal Revenue Service Schedule C (form 1040) filed by a
taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      SCHEDULE E. Internal Revenue Service Schedule E (form 1040) filed by a
taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      SCHEDULE F. Internal Revenue Service Schedule F (form 1040) filed by a
taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      SINGLE MEMBER LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY. A limited liability company that
has one direct member.
      SMALL EMPLOYER. Any employer that had total revenue of less than $500,000
during the preceding taxable year. For purposes of this division, “total
revenue” means receipts of any type or kind, including, but not limited to:
sales receipts; payments; rents; profits; gains, dividends, and other
investment income; commissions; premiums; money; property; grants;
contributions; donations; gifts; program service revenue; patient service
revenue; premiums; fees, including premium fees and service fees; tuition
payments; unrelated business revenue; reimbursements; any type of payment from
a governmental unit, including grants and other allocations; and any other
similar receipts reported for federal income tax purposes or under generally
accepted accounting principles. SMALL EMPLOYER does not include the Federal
government; any state government, including any state agency or
instrumentality; any political subdivision; or any entity treated as a
government for financial accounting and reporting purposes.
      TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The individual charged with direct responsibility for
administration of an income tax levied by a municipal corporation in accordance
with this chapter, and also includes the following:
         (a)   A municipal corporation acting as the agent of another municipal
corporation;
         (b)   A person retained by a municipal corporation to administer a tax
levied by the municipal corporation, but only if the municipal corporation does
not compensate the person in whole or in part on a contingency basis; and
         (c)   The Central Collection Agency (CCA) or the Regional Income Tax
Agency (RITA) or their successors in interest, or another entity organized to
perform functions similar to those performed by the Central Collection Agency
and the Regional Income Tax Agency.
      TAX RETURN PREPARER. Any individual described in I.R.C. § 7701(a)(36) and
26 C.F.R. § 301.7701-15.
      TAXABLE YEAR. The corresponding tax reporting period as prescribed for
the taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code.
      TAXPAYER.
         (a)   A person subject to a tax levied on income by a municipal
corporation in accordance with this chapter. TAXPAYER does not include a
grantor trust or, except as provided in division (B)1. below, a disregarded
entity.
         (b)   1.   A single member limited liability company that is a
disregarded entity for federal tax purposes may be a separate taxpayer from its
single member in all Ohio municipal corporations in which it either filed as a
separate taxpayer or did not file for its taxable year ending in 2003, if all
of the following conditions are met:
               a.   The limited liability company’s single member is also a
limited liability company;
               b.   The limited liability company and its single member were
formed and doing business in one or more Ohio municipal corporations for at
least five years before 1-1-2004;
               c.   Not later than 12-31-2004, the limited liability company
and its single member each made an election to be treated as a separate
taxpayer under division (L) of Ohio R.C. 718.01 as this section existed on 12-
31-2004;
               d.   The limited liability company was not formed for the
purpose of evading or reducing Ohio municipal corporation income tax liability
of the limited liability company or its single member; and
               e.   The Ohio municipal corporation that was the primary place
of business of the sole member of the limited liability company consented to
the election.
            2.   For purposes of division (b)1. above, a municipal corporation
was the primary place of business of a limited liability company if, for the
limited liability company’s taxable year ending in 2003, its income tax
liability was greater in that municipal corporation than in any other municipal
corporation in Ohio, and that tax liability to that municipal corporation for
its taxable year ending in 2003 was at least $400,000.
      TAXPAYERS’ RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The rights provided to taxpayers
in Ohio R.C. 718.11, 718.12, 718.19, 718.23, 718.36, 718.37, 718.38, 5717.011
and 5717.03 and any corresponding ordinances of the municipality, and the
responsibilities of taxpayers to file, report, withhold, remit and pay
municipal income tax and otherwise comply with Ohio R.C. Ch. 718 and
resolutions, ordinances and rules adopted by a municipal corporation for the
imposition and administration of a municipal income tax.
      VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL. The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3770.21.
      VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL SALES AGENT. A lottery sales agent licensed under
Ohio R.C. Ch. 3770 to conduct video lottery terminals on behalf of the state
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3770.21.
(Prior Code, § 880.03) (Ord. 182-2015, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 880.04 INCOME SUBJECT TO TAX FOR INDIVIDUALS.
   (A)   Determining municipal taxable income for individuals.
      (1)   Municipal taxable income for a resident of the municipality is
calculated as follows: income reduced by exempt income to the extent such
exempt income is otherwise included in income, reduced by allowable employee
business expense deduction as found in §
880.03 of this chapter, further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss
carryforward equals municipal taxable income.
         (a)   “Income” is defined in §
880.03 of this chapter.
            1.   “Qualifying wages” is defined in §
880.03 of this chapter.
            2.   “Net profit” is included in “income”, and is defined in §
880.03 of this chapter. This section also provides that the net operating loss
carryforward shall be calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in
§
880.03 of this chapter. Treatment of net profits received by an individual
taxpayer from rental real estate is provided in §
880.06(B)(5) of this chapter.
            3.   Section 880.03 of this chapter provides the following:
offsetting and net operating loss carryforward treatment in §
880.03 of this chapter; resident’s distributive share of net profit from pass
through entity treatment in §
880.03 of this chapter.; treatment of S corporation distributive share of net
profit in the hands of the shareholder in §
880.03 of this chapter; restriction of amount of loss permitted to be carried
forward for use by taxpayer in a subsequent taxable year in §
880.03 of this chapter.
            4.   “Pass through entity” is defined in §
880.03 of this chapter.
         (b)   “Exempt income” is defined in §
880.03 of this chapter.
         (c)   Allowable employee business expense deduction is described in §
880.03 of this chapter, and is subject to the limitations provided in that
section.
         (d)   “Pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward” is defined in §
880.03 of this chapter.
      (2)   “Municipal taxable income” for a non-resident of the municipality
is calculated as follows: income reduced by exempt income to the extent such
exempt income is otherwise included in income, as applicable, apportioned or
sitused to the municipality as provided in §
880.06(B) of this chapter, reduced by allowable employee business expense
deduction as found in §
880.03 of this chapter, further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss
carryforward equals municipal taxable income.
         (a)   “Income” is defined in §
880.03 of this chapter.
            1.   “Qualifying wages” is defined in §
880.03 of this chapter.
            2.   “Net profit” is included in “income”, and is defined in §
880.03 of this chapter. This section also provides that the net operating loss
carryforward shall be calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in
§
880.03 of this chapter. “Net profit” for a non-resident individual includes any
net profit of the non-resident, but excludes the distributive share of net
profit or loss of only pass through entity owned directly or indirectly by the
non-resident.
            3.   “Pass through entity” is defined in §
880.03 of this chapter.
         (b)   “Exempt income” is defined in §
880.03 of this chapter.
         (c)   “Apportioned or sitused to the municipality as provided in §
880.06(B) of this chapter” includes the apportionment of net profit income
attributable to work done or services performed in the municipality. Treatment
of net profits received by an individual taxpayer from rental real estate is
provided in §
880.06(B)(5) of this chapter.
         (d)   “Allowable employee business expense deduction” as described in
§
880.03 of this chapter, is subject to the limitations provided in that section.
For a non-resident of the municipality, the deduction is limited to the extent
the expenses are related to the performance of personal services by the non-
resident in the municipality.
         (e)   “Pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward” is defined in §
880.03 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 880.041)
   (B)   Domicile.
      (1)   As used in this section, DOMICILE means the true, fixed and
permanent home of the taxpayer to which whenever absent, the taxpayer intends
to return. An individual is presumed to be domiciled in the municipality for
all or part of a taxable year if the individual was domiciled in the
municipality on the last day of the immediately preceding taxable year or if
the Tax Administrator reasonably concludes that the individual is domiciled in
the municipality for all or part of the taxable year. An individual may rebut
the presumption of domicile described in this division (a)(1) if the individual
establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that the individual was not
domiciled in the municipality for all or part of the taxable year.
      (2)   For the purpose of determining whether an individual is domiciled
in the municipality for all or part of a taxable year, factors that may be
considered include, but are not limited to, the following:
         (a)   The individual’s domicile in other taxable years;
         (b)   The location at which the individual is registered to vote;
         (c)   The address on the individual’s driver’s license;
         (d)   The location of real estate for which the individual claimed a
property tax exemption or reduction allowed on the basis of the individual’s
residence or domicile;
         (e)   The location and value of abodes owned or leased by the
individual;
         (f)   Declarations, written or oral, made by the individual regarding
the individual’s residency;
         (g)   The primary location at which the individual is employed;
         (h)   The location of educational institutions attended by the
individual’s dependents as defined in I.R.C. § 152, to the extent that tuition
paid to such educational institution is based on the residency of the
individual or the individual’s spouse in the municipal corporation or state
where the educational institution is located; and
         (i)   The number of contact periods the individual has with the
municipality. For the purposes of this division (B)(2), an individual has one
“contact period” with the municipality if the individual is away overnight from
the individual’s abode located outside of the municipality and while away
overnight from that abode spends at least some portion, however minimal, of
each of two consecutive days in the municipality. For purposes of this division
(B), the state’s contact period test or bright-line test and resulting
determination have no bearing on municipal residency or domicile.
      (3)   All applicable factors are provided in Ohio R.C. 718.012.
(Prior Code, § 880.042)
   (C)   Exemption for member or employee of general assembly and certain
judges.
      (1)   Only the municipal corporation of residence shall be permitted to
levy a tax on the income of any member or employee of the Ohio General
Assembly, including the Lieutenant Governor, whose income is received as a
result of services rendered as such member or employee and is paid from
appropriated funds of the state.
      (2)   Only the municipal corporation of residence and the City of
Columbus shall levy a tax on the income of the Chief Justice or a Justice of
the Supreme Court received as a result of services rendered as the Chief
Justice or Justice. Only the municipal corporation of residence shall levy a
tax on the income of a judge sitting by assignment of the Chief Justice or on
the income of a district court of appeals judge sitting in multiple locations
within the district, received as a result of services rendered as a judge.
(Prior Code, § 880.043)
(Ord. 182-2015, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 880.05 COLLECTION AT SOURCE.
   (A)   Collection at source; withholding from qualifying wages.
      (1)   (a)   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer located
or doing business in the municipality shall withhold from each employee an
amount equal to the qualifying wages of the employee earned by the employee in
the municipality multiplied by the applicable rate of the municipality’s income
tax, except for qualifying wages for which withholding is not required under
division (B) below or divisions (A)(4) or (A)(6) below. An employer, agent of
an employer, or other payer shall deduct and withhold the tax from qualifying
wages on the date that the employer, agent or other payer directly, indirectly
or constructively pays the qualifying wages to, or credits the qualifying wages
to the benefit of, the employee.
         (b)   In addition to withholding the amounts required under division
(A)(1)(a) above, an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer may also
deduct and withhold, on the request of an employee, taxes for the municipal
corporation in which the employee is a resident.
      (2)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall remit to
the Tax Administrator of the municipality the greater of the income taxes
deducted and withheld or the income taxes required to be deducted and withheld
by the employer, agent or other payer, along with any report required by the
Tax Administrator to accompany such payment, according to the following
schedule:
         (a)   Any employer, agent of an employer or other payer not required
to make payments under division (A)(2)(b) below of taxes required to be
deducted and withheld shall make quarterly payments to the Tax Administrator
not later than the fifteenth day of the month following the end of each
calendar quarter.
         (b)   Taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall be remitted
monthly to the Tax Administrator if the total taxes deducted and withheld or
required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent, or other payer on
behalf of the municipal corporation in the preceding calendar year exceeded
$2,399, or if the total amount of taxes deducted and withheld or required to be
deducted and withheld on behalf of the municipality in any month of the
preceding calendar quarter exceeded $200. Payment under division (B)(2)(a)
above shall be made so that the payment is received by the Tax Administrator
not later than 15 days after the last day of each month.
      (3)   An employer, agent of an employer or other payer shall make and
file a return showing the amount of tax withheld by the employer, agent or
other payer from the qualifying wages of each employee and remitted to the Tax
Administrator. A return filed by an employer, agent or other payer under this
division shall be accepted by the municipality as the return required of an
employee whose sole income subject to the tax under this chapter is the
qualifying wages reported by the employee’s employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer, unless the municipality requires all resident individual taxpayers
to file a tax return under §
880.09(A) of this chapter.
      (4)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is not required
to withhold Municipal income tax with respect to an individual’s disqualifying
disposition of an incentive stock option if, at the time of the disqualifying
disposition, the individual is not an employee of either the corporation with
respect to whose stock the option has been issued or of such corporation’s
successor entity.
      (5)   (a)   An employee is not relieved from liability for a tax by the
failure of the employer, agent of an employer or other payer to withhold the
tax as required under this chapter or by the employer’s, agent’s or other
payer’s exemption from the requirement to withhold the tax.
         (b)   The failure of an employer, agent of an employer or other payer
to remit to the municipality the tax withheld relieves the employee from
liability for that tax unless the employee colluded with the employer, agent or
other payer in connection with the failure to remit the tax withheld.
      (6)   Compensation deferred before 6-26-2003 is not subject to any
municipal corporation income tax or municipal income tax withholding
requirement to the extent the deferred compensation does not constitute
qualifying wages at the time the deferred compensation is paid or distributed.
      (7)   Each employer, agent of an employer or other payer required to
withhold taxes is liable for the payment of that amount required to be
withheld, whether or not such taxes have been withheld, and such amount shall
be deemed to be held in trust for the municipality until such time as the
withheld amount is remitted to the Tax Administrator.
      (8)   On or before the last day of February of each year, an employer
shall file a withholding reconciliation return with the Tax Administrator
listing the names, addresses and Social Security numbers of all employees from
whose qualifying wages tax was withheld or should have been withheld for the
municipality during the preceding calendar year, the amount of tax withheld, if
any, from each such employee’s qualifying wage, the total amount of qualifying
wages paid to such employee during the preceding calendar year, the name of
every other municipal corporation for which tax was withheld or should have
been withheld from such employee during the preceding calendar year, any other
information required for Federal income tax reporting purposes on Internal
Revenue Service form W-2 or its equivalent form with respect to such employee,
and other information as may be required by the Tax Administrator.
      (9)   The officer or the employee of the employer, agent of an employer
or other payer with control or direct supervision of or charged with the
responsibility for withholding the tax or filing the reports and making
payments as required by this section, shall be personally liable for a failure
to file a report or pay the tax due as required by this section. The
dissolution of an employer, agent of an employer or other payer does not
discharge the officer’s or employee’s liability for a failure of the employer,
agent of an employer or other payer to file returns or pay any tax due.
      (10)   An employer is required to deduct and withhold municipal income
tax on tips and gratuities received by the employer’s employees and
constituting qualifying wages only to the extent that the tips and gratuities
are under the employer’s control. For the purposes of this division (A)(10), a
tip or gratuity is under the employer’s control if the tip or gratuity is paid
by the customer to the employer for subsequent remittance to the employee, or
if the customer pays the tip or gratuity by credit card, debit card or other
electronic means.
      (11)   A Tax Administrator shall consider any tax withheld by an employer
at the request of an employee when such tax is not otherwise required to be
withheld by this chapter to be tax required to be withheld and remitted for the
purposes of this section.
(Prior Code, § 880.051)
   (B)   Collection at source; occasional entrant.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (B), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         EMPLOYER. Includes a person that is a related member to or of an
employer.
         FIXED LOCATION. A permanent place of doing business in the state, such
as an office, warehouse, storefront or similar location owned or controlled by
an employer.
         PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK.
            1.   The fixed location to which an employee is required to report
for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis. If the employee is not
required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a
fixed location, PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK means the worksite location in the
state to which the employee is required to report for employment duties on a
regular and ordinary basis. If the employee is not required to report for
employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a fixed location or
worksite location, PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK means the location in the state at
which the employee spends the greatest number of days in a calendar year
performing services for or on behalf of the employee’s employer.
            2.   If there is not a single municipal corporation in which the
employee spent the “greatest number of days in a calendar year” performing
services for or on behalf of the employer, but instead there are two or more
municipal corporations in which the employee spent an identical number of days
that is greater than the number of days the employee spent in any other
municipal corporation, the employer shall allocate any of the employee’s
qualifying wages subject to division (B)(2)(a)1. below among those two or more
municipal corporations. The allocation shall be made using any fair and
reasonable method, including, but not limited to, an equal allocation among
such municipal corporations or an allocation based upon the time spent or sales
made by the employee in each such municipal corporation. A municipal
corporation to which qualifying wages are allocated under this division shall
be the employee’s PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK with respect to those qualifying
wages for the purposes of this section.
            3.   For the purposes of this division, the location at which an
employee spends a particular day shall be deemed in accordance with division
(B)(2) below; except that, “location” shall be substituted for “municipal
corporation” wherever “municipal corporation” appears in that division.
      (2)   (a)   Subject to divisions (B)(5), (B)(6) and (B)(7) below, an
employer is not required to withhold municipal income tax on qualifying wages
paid to an employee for the performance of personal services in a municipal
corporation that imposes such a tax if the employee performed such services in
the municipal corporation on 20 or fewer days in a calendar year, unless one of
the following conditions applies:
            1.   The employee’s principal place of work is located in the
municipality;
            2.   The employee performed services at one or more presumed
worksite locations in the municipality. For the purposes of this division,
“presumed worksite location” means a construction site or other temporary
worksite in the state at which the employer provides services that can
reasonably be expected by the employer to last more than 20 days in a calendar
year. Services can “reasonably be expected by the employer to last more than 20
days” if either of the following applies at the time the services commence:
               a.   The nature of the services are such that it will require
more than 20 days of actual services to complete the services;
               b.   The agreement between the employer and its customer to
perform services at a location requires the employer to perform actual services
at the location for more than 20 days.
            3.   The employee is a resident of the municipality and has
requested that the employer withhold tax from the employee’s qualifying wages
as provided in division (A) above; and
            4.   The employee is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer or public figure, and the qualifying wages are paid for the
performance of services in the employee’s capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer or public figure within the municipality.
         (b)   For the purposes of division (B)(2)(a) above, an employee shall
be considered to have spent a day performing services in a municipal
corporation only if the employee spent more time performing services for or on
behalf of the employer in that municipal corporation than in any other
municipal corporation on that day. For the purposes of determining the amount
of time an employee spent in a particular location, the time spent performing
one or more of the following activities shall be considered to have been spent
at the employee’s principal place of work:
            1.   Traveling to the location at which the employee will first
perform services for the employer for the day;
            2.   Traveling from a location at which the employee was performing
services for the employer to any other location;
            3.   Traveling from any location to another location in order to
pick up or load, for the purpose of transportation or delivery, property that
has been purchased, sold, assembled, fabricated, repaired, refurbished,
processed, remanufactured or improved by the employee’s employer;
            4.   Transporting or delivering property described in division (B)
(2)(b)3. above; provided that, upon delivery of the property, the employee does
not temporarily or permanently affix the property to real estate owned, used or
controlled by a person other than the employee’s employer;
            5.   Traveling from the location at which the employee makes the
employee’s final delivery or pick-up for the day to either the employee’s
principal place of work or a location at which the employee will not perform
services for the employer.
      (3)   If the principal place of work of an employee is located in a
municipal corporation that imposes an income tax in accordance with this
chapter, the exception from withholding requirements described in division (B)
(2)(a) above shall apply only if, with respect to the employee’s qualifying
wages described in that division, the employer withholds and remits tax on such
qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employee’s principal
place of work is located.
      (4)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(4)(b) below, if, during a
calendar year, the number of days an employee spends performing personal
services in a municipal corporation exceeds the twenty-day threshold described
in division (B)(2)(a) above, the employer shall withhold and remit tax to that
municipal corporation for any subsequent days in that calendar year on which
the employer pays qualifying wages to the employee for personal services
performed in that municipal corporation.
         (b)   An employer required to begin withholding tax for a municipal
corporation under division (B)(4)(a) above may elect to withhold tax for that
municipal corporation for the first 20 days on which the employer paid
qualifying wages to the employee for personal services performed in that
municipal corporation.
         (c)   If an employer makes the election described in division (B)(4)
(a) above, the taxes withheld and paid by such an employer during those first
20 days to the municipal corporation in which the employee’s principal place of
work is located are refundable to the employee.
      (5)   Without regard to the number of days in a calendar year on which an
employee performs personal services in any municipal corporation, an employer
shall withhold municipal income tax on all of the employee’s qualifying wages
for a taxable year and remit that tax only to the municipal corporation in
which the employer’s fixed location is located if the employer qualifies as a
small employer as defined in §
880.03 of this chapter. To determine whether an employer qualifies as a small
employer for a taxable year, a Tax Administrator may require the employer to
provide the Tax Administrator with the employer’s federal income tax return for
the preceding taxable year.
      (6)   Divisions (B)(2)(a) and (B)(4) above shall not apply to the extent
that a Tax Administrator and an employer enter into an agreement regarding the
manner in which the employer shall comply with the requirements of division (A)
above.
         PROFESSIONAL ATHLETE. An athlete who performs services in a
professional athletic event for wages or other remuneration.
         PROFESSIONAL ENTERTAINER. A person who performs services in the
professional performing arts for wages or other remuneration on a per-event
basis.
         PUBLIC FIGURE. A person of prominence who performs services at
discrete events, such as speeches, public appearances or similar events, for
wages or other remuneration on a per-event basis.
         WORKSITE LOCATION. A construction site or other temporary worksite in
the state at which the employer provides services for more than 20 days during
the calendar year. WORKSITE LOCATION does not include the home of an employee.
(Prior Code, § 880.052)
   (C)   Collection at source; casino and VLT.
      (1)   The municipality shall require a casino facility or a casino
operator, as defined in § 6(C)(9) of Art. XV, Ohio Constitution, and Ohio R.C.
3772.01, respectively, or a lottery sales agent conducting video lottery
terminals sales on behalf of the state to withhold and remit municipal income
tax with respect to amounts other than qualifying wages as provided in this
section.
      (2)   If a person’s winnings at a casino facility are an amount for which
reporting to the Internal Revenue Service of the amount is required by I.R.C. §
6041, as amended, the casino operator shall deduct and withhold municipal
income tax from the person’s winnings at the rate of the tax imposed by the
municipal corporation in which the casino facility is located.
      (3)   Amounts deducted and withheld by a casino operator are held in
trust for the benefit of the municipal corporation to which the tax is owed.
         (a)   On or before the tenth day of each month, the casino operator
shall file a return electronically with the Tax Administrator of the
municipality, providing the name, address and Social Security number of the
person from whose winnings amounts were deducted and withheld, the amount of
each such deduction and withholding during the preceding calendar month, the
amount of the winnings from which each such amount was withheld, the type of
casino gaming that resulted in such winnings and any other information required
by the Tax Administrator. With this return, the casino operator shall remit
electronically to the municipality all amounts deducted and withheld during the
preceding month.
         (b)   Annually, on or before January 31, a casino operator shall file
an annual return electronically with the Tax Administrator of the municipal
corporation in which the casino facility is located, indicating the total
amount deducted and withheld during the preceding calendar year. The casino
operator shall remit electronically with the annual return any amount that was
deducted and withheld and that was not previously remitted. If the name,
address or Social Security number of a person or the amount deducted and
withheld with respect to that person was omitted on a monthly return for that
reporting period, that information shall be indicated on the annual return.
         (c)   Annually, on or before January 31, a casino operator shall issue
an information return to each person with respect to whom an amount has been
deducted and withheld during the preceding calendar year. The information
return shall show the total amount of municipal income tax deducted from the
person’s winnings during the preceding year. The casino operator shall provide
to the Tax Administrator a copy of each information return issued under this
division (C)(3). The Administrator may require that such copies be transmitted
electronically.
         (d)   A casino operator that fails to file a return and remit the
amounts deducted and withheld shall be personally liable for the amount
withheld and not remitted. Such personal liability extends to any penalty and
interest imposed for the late filing of a return or the late payment of tax
deducted and withheld.
         (e)   If a casino operator sells the casino facility or otherwise
quits the casino business, the amounts deducted and withheld along with any
penalties and interest thereon are immediately due and payable. The successor
shall withhold an amount of the purchase money that is sufficient to cover the
amounts deducted and withheld along with any penalties and interest thereon
until the predecessor casino operator produces either of the following:
            1.   A receipt from the Tax Administrator showing that the amounts
deducted and withheld and penalties and interest thereon have been paid; and
            2.   A certificate from the Tax Administrator indicating that no
amounts are due. If the successor fails to withhold purchase money, the
successor is personally liable for the payment of the amounts deducted and
withheld and penalties and interest thereon.
         (f)   The failure of a casino operator to deduct and withhold the
required amount from a person’s winnings does not relieve that person from
liability for the municipal income tax with respect to those winnings.
      (4)   If a person’s prize award from a video lottery terminal is an
amount for which reporting to the Internal Revenue Service is required by
I.R.C. § 6041, as amended, the video lottery sales agent shall deduct and
withhold municipal income tax from the person’s prize award at the rate of the
tax imposed by the municipal corporation in which the video lottery terminal
facility is located.
      (5)   Amounts deducted and withheld by a video lottery sales agent are
held in trust for the benefit of the municipal corporation to which the tax is
owed.
         (a)   The video lottery sales agent shall issue to a person from whose
prize award an amount has been deducted and withheld a receipt for the amount
deducted and withheld, and shall obtain from the person receiving a prize award
the person’s name, address and Social Security number in order to facilitate
the preparation of returns required by this section.
         (b)   On or before the tenth day of each month, the video lottery
sales agent shall file a return electronically with the Tax Administrator of
the municipality providing the names, addresses and Social Security numbers of
the persons from whose prize awards amounts were deducted and withheld, the
amount of each such deduction and withholding during the preceding calendar
month, the amount of the prize award from which each such amount was withheld,
and any other information required by the Tax Administrator. With the return,
the video lottery sales agent shall remit electronically to the Tax
Administrator all amounts deducted and withheld during the preceding month.
         (c)   A video lottery sales agent shall maintain a record of all
receipts issued under this division (C)(5) and shall make those records
available to the Tax Administrator upon request. Such records shall be
maintained in accordance with Ohio R.C. 5747.17 and any rules adopted pursuant
thereto.
         (d)   Annually, on or before January 31, each video lottery terminal
sales agent shall file an annual return electronically with the Tax
Administrator of the municipal corporation in which the facility is located
indicating the total amount deducted and withheld during the preceding calendar
year. The video lottery sales agent shall remit electronically with the annual
return any amount that was deducted and withheld and that was not previously
remitted. If the name, address or Social Security number of a person or the
amount deducted and withheld with respect to that person was omitted on a
monthly return for that reporting period, that information shall be indicated
on the annual return.
         (e)   Annually, on or before January 31, a video lottery sales agent
shall issue an information return to each person with respect to whom an amount
has been deducted and withheld during the preceding calendar year. The
information return shall show the total amount of municipal income tax deducted
and withheld from the person’s prize award by the video lottery sales agent
during the preceding year. A video lottery sales agent shall provide to the Tax
Administrator of the municipal corporation a copy of each information return
issued under this division (C)(5)(e). The Tax Administrator may require that
such copies be transmitted electronically.
         (f)   A video lottery sales agent who fails to file a return and remit
the amounts deducted and withheld is personally liable for the amount deducted
and withheld and not remitted. Such personal liability extends to any penalty
and interest imposed for the late filing of a return or the late payment of tax
deducted and withheld.
      (6)   If a video lottery sales agent ceases to operate video lottery
terminals, the amounts deducted and withheld along with any penalties and
interest thereon are immediately due and payable. The successor of the video
lottery sales agent that purchases the video lottery terminals from the agent
shall withhold an amount from the purchase money that is sufficient to cover
the amounts deducted and withheld and any penalties and interest thereon until
the predecessor video lottery sales agent operator produces either of the
following:
         (a)   A receipt from the Tax Administrator showing that the amounts
deducted and withheld and penalties and interest thereon have been paid;
         (b)   A certificate from the Tax Administrator indicating that no
amounts are due. If the successor fails to withhold purchase money, the
successor is personally liable for the payment of the amounts deducted and
withheld and penalties and interest thereon.
      (7)   The failure of a video lottery sales agent to deduct and withhold
the required amount from a person’s prize award does not relieve that person
from liability for the municipal income tax with respect to that prize award.
      (8)   If a casino operator or lottery sales agent files a return late,
fails to file a return, remits amounts deducted and withheld late, or fails to
remit amounts deducted and withheld as required under this section, the Tax
Administrator of a municipal corporation may impose the following applicable
penalty:
         (a)   For the late remittance of, or failure to remit, tax deducted
and withheld under this section, a penalty equal to 50% of the tax deducted and
withheld;
         (b)   For the failure to file, or the late filing of, a monthly or
annual return, a penalty of $500 for each return not filed or filed late.
Interest shall accrue on past due amounts deducted and withheld at the rate
prescribed in Ohio R.C. 5703.47.
      (9)   Amounts deducted and withheld on behalf of a municipal corporation
shall be allowed as a credit against payment of the tax imposed by the
municipal corporation and shall be treated as taxes paid for purposes of §
880.07 of this chapter. This division (C)(9) applies only to the person for
whom the amount is deducted and withheld.
      (10)   The Tax Administrator shall prescribe the forms of the receipts
and returns required under this division (C).
(Prior Code, § 880.053)
(Ord. 182-2015, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 880.06 INCOME SUBJECT TO NET PROFIT TAX.
   (A)   Determining municipal taxable income for taxpayers who are not
individuals. Municipal taxable income for a taxpayer who is not an individual
for the municipality is calculated as follows: income reduced by exempt income
to the extent otherwise included in income, multiplied by apportionment,
further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward equals
municipal taxable income.
      (1)   “Income” for a taxpayer that is not an individual means the net
profit of the taxpayer.
         (a)   “Net profit” for a person other than an individual is defined in
§
880.03 of this chapter.
         (b)   “Adjusted Federal taxable income” is defined in §
880.03 of this chapter.
      (2)   “Exempt income” is defined in §
880.03 of this chapter.
      (3)   “Apportionment” means the apportionment as determined by §
880.06(B) of this chapter.
      (4)   “Pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward” is defined in §
880.03 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 880.061)
   (B)   Net profit; income subject to net profit tax; alternative
apportionment. This section applies to any taxpayer engaged in a business or
profession in the municipality unless the taxpayer is an individual who resides
in the municipality or the taxpayer is an electric company, combined company or
telephone company that is subject to and required to file reports under Ohio
R.C. Ch. 5745.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (B)(2) and (B)(9) of this
section, net profit from a business or profession conducted both within and
without the boundaries of the municipality shall be considered as having a
taxable situs in the municipality for purposes of municipal income taxation in
the same proportion as the average ratio of the following:
         (a)   The average original cost of the real property and tangible
personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession
in the municipality during the taxable period to the average original cost of
all of the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in
the business or profession during the same period, wherever situated. As used
in the preceding paragraph, tangible personal or real property shall include
property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value of such property shall
be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon by eight;
         (b)   Wages, salaries and other compensation paid during the taxable
period to individuals employed in the business or profession for services
performed in the municipality to wages, salaries and other compensation paid
during the same period to individuals employed in the business or profession,
wherever the individual’s services are performed, excluding compensation from
which taxes are not required to be withheld under §
880.05(B) of this chapter; and
         (c)   Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales
and rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in the
municipality to total gross receipts of the business or profession during the
same period from sales, rentals and services, wherever made or performed.
      (2)   (a)   If the apportionment factors described in division (B)(1) of
this section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer’s business
activity in the municipality, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax
Administrator of the municipality may require, that the taxpayer use, with
respect to all or any portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative
apportionment method involving one or more of the following:
            1.   Separate accounting;
            2.   The exclusion of one or more of the factors;
            3.   The inclusion of one or more additional factors that would
provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to the
municipality; and/or
            4.   A modification of one or more of the factors.
         (b)   A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method
shall be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an
assessment or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the
requested alternative method unless the Tax Administrator denies the request in
an assessment issued within the period prescribed by §
880.19(A) of this chapter.
         (c)   A Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer to use an alternative
apportionment method as described in division (B)(2)(a) above only by issuing
an assessment to the taxpayer within the period prescribed by §
880.19(A) of this chapter.
         (d)   Nothing in this division (B)(2) nullifies or otherwise affects
any alternative apportionment arrangement approved by a Tax Administrator or
otherwise agreed upon by both the Tax Administrator and taxpayer before 1-1-
2016.
      (3)   As used in division (B)(1)(b) of this section, “wages, salaries and
other compensation” includes only wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
an employee for services performed at any of the following locations:
         (a)   A location that is owned, controlled or used by, rented to or
under the possession of one of the following:
            1.   The employer;
            2.   A vendor, customer, client or patient of the employer, or a
related member of such a vendor, customer, client or patient; and
            3.   A vendor, customer, client or patient of a person described
herein or a related member of such a vendor, customer, client or patient.
         (b)   Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation,
inquiry, review, court-martial or similar administrative, judicial or
legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted; provided that, the
compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of, the employer
or that the employee’s presence at the location directly or indirectly benefits
the employer;
         (c)   Any other location, if the Tax Administrator determines that the
employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other location in
lieu of a location described in divisions (B)(3)(a) or (B)(3)(b) above solely
in order to avoid or reduce the employer’s municipal income tax liability. If a
Tax Administrator makes such a determination, the employer may dispute the
determination by establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Tax
Administrator’s determination was unreasonable.
      (4)   For the purposes of division (B)(1)(c) above, and except as
provided in division (B)(9) of this section, receipts from sales and rentals
made and services performed shall be sitused to a municipal corporation as
follows:
         (a)   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property shall
be sitused to the municipal corporation in which the sale originated. For the
purposes of this division (B)(4), a sale of property originates in a municipal
corporation if, regardless of where title passes, the property meets any of the
following criteria:
            1.   The property is shipped to or delivered within the municipal
corporation from a stock of goods located within the municipal corporation;
            2.   The property is delivered within the municipal corporation
from a location outside the municipal corporation, provided the taxpayer is
regularly engaged through its own employees in the solicitation or promotion of
sales within such municipal corporation and the sales result from such
solicitation or promotion; and
            3.   The property is shipped from a place within the municipal
corporation to purchasers outside the municipal corporation; provided that, the
taxpayer is not, through its own employees, regularly engaged in the
solicitation or promotion of sales at the place where delivery is made.
         (b)   Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be sitused to the
municipal corporation to the extent that such services are performed in the
municipal corporation;
         (c)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale
of real property located in the municipal corporation shall be sitused to the
municipal corporation;
         (d)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents and
royalties from real property located in the municipal corporation shall be
sitused to the municipal corporation; and
         (e)   Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal
property shall be sitused to the municipal corporation based upon the extent to
which the tangible personal property is used in the municipal corporation.
      (5)   The net profit received by an individual taxpayer from the rental
of real estate owned directly by the individual or by a disregarded entity
owned by the individual shall be subject to tax only by the municipal
corporation in which the property generating the net profit is located and the
municipal corporation in which the individual taxpayer that receives the net
profit resides. A municipal corporation shall allow such taxpayers to elect to
use separate accounting for the purpose of calculating net profit sitused under
this division to the municipal corporation in which the property is located.
      (6)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(6)(b) below, commissions
received by a real estate agent or broker relating to the sale, purchase or
lease of real estate shall be sitused to the municipal corporation in which the
real estate is located. Net profit reported by the real estate agent or broker
shall be allocated to a municipal corporation based upon the ratio of the
commissions the agent or broker received from the sale, purchase or lease of
real estate located in the municipal corporation to the commissions received
from the sale, purchase or lease of real estate everywhere in the taxable year.
         (b)   An individual who is a resident of a municipal corporation that
imposes a municipal income tax shall report the individual’s net profit from
all real estate activity on the individual’s annual tax return for that
municipal corporation. The individual may claim a credit for taxes the
individual paid on such net profit to another municipal corporation to the
extent that such credit is allowed under §
880.08(A) of this chapter.
      (7)   If, in computing a taxpayer’s adjusted federal taxable income, the
taxpayer deducted any amount with respect to a stock option granted to an
employee, and if the employee is not required to include in the employee’s
income any such amount or a portion thereof because it is exempted from
taxation under §
880.03 of this chapter, by a municipal corporation to which the taxpayer has
apportioned a portion of its net profit, the taxpayer shall add the amount that
is exempt from taxation to the taxpayer’s net profit that was apportioned to
that municipal corporation. In no case shall a taxpayer be required to add to
its net profit that was apportioned to that municipal corporation any amount
other than the amount upon which the employee would be required to pay tax were
the amount related to the stock option not exempted from taxation. This
division applies solely for the purpose of making an adjustment to the amount
of a taxpayer’s net profit that was apportioned to a municipal corporation
under this section.
      (8)   When calculating the ratios described in division (B)(1) above for
the purposes of that division or division (B)(2) above, the owner of a
disregarded entity shall include in the owner’s ratios the property, payroll
and gross receipts of such disregarded entity.
      (9)   (a)   As used in this division:
            1.   "Qualifying remote employee or owner" means an individual who
is an employee of a taxpayer or who is a partner or member holding an ownership
interest in a taxpayer that is treated as a partnership for federal income tax
purposes, provided that the individual meets both of the following criteria:
                 A.   The taxpayer has assigned the individual to a qualifying
reporting location.
               B.   The individual is permitted or required to perform services
for the taxpayer at a qualifying remote work location.
            2.   "Qualifying remote work location" means a permanent or
temporary location at which an employee or owner chooses or is required to
perform services for the taxpayer, other than a reporting location of the
taxpayer or any other location owned or controlled by a customer or client of
the taxpayer. "Qualifying remote work location" may include the residence of an
employee or owner and may be located outside of a municipal corporation that
imposes an income tax in accordance with this chapter. An employee or owner may
have more than one qualifying remote work location during a taxable year.
            3.   "Reporting location" means either of the following:
               A.   A permanent or temporary place of doing business, such as
an office, warehouse, storefront, construction site, or similar location, that
is owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the taxpayer;
               B.   Any location in this state owned or controlled by a
customer or client of the taxpayer, provided that the taxpayer is required to
withhold taxes under §
880.04, on qualifying wages paid to an employee for the performance of personal
services at that location.
            4.   "Qualifying reporting location" means one of the following:
               A.   The reporting location in this state at which an employee
or owner performs services for the taxpayer on a regular or periodic basis
during the taxable year;
               B.   If no reporting location exists in this state for an
employee or owner under division (A)(9)4.A. of this section, the reporting
location in this state at which the employee's or owner's supervisor regularly
or periodically reports during the taxable year;
               C.   If no reporting location exists in this state for an
employee or owner under division (A)(9)4.A. or B. of this section, the location
that the taxpayer otherwise assigns as the employee's or owner's qualifying
reporting location, provided the assignment is made in good faith and is
recorded and maintained in the taxpayer's business records. A taxpayer may
change the qualifying reporting location designated for an employee or owner
under this division at any time.
         (b)   For tax years ending on or after December 31, 2023, a taxpayer
may elect to apply the provisions of this division to the apportionment of its
net profit from a business or profession. For taxpayers that make this
election, the provisions of division (A)(6) of this section apply to such
apportionment except as otherwise provided in this division.
         A taxpayer shall make the election allowed under this division in
writing on or with the taxpayer's net profit return or, if applicable, a timely
filed amended net profit return or a timely filed appeal of an assessment. The
election applies to the taxable year for which that return or appeal is filed
and for all subsequent taxable years, until the taxpayer revokes the election.
         The taxpayer shall make the initial election with the Tax
Administrator of each municipal corporation with which, after applying the
apportionment provisions authorized in this division, the taxpayer is required
to file a net profit tax return for that taxable year. A taxpayer shall not be
required to notify the Tax Administrator of a municipal corporation in which a
qualifying remote employee's or owner's qualifying remote work location is
located, unless the taxpayer is otherwise required to file a net profit return
with that municipal corporation due to business operations that are unrelated
to the employee's or owner's activity at the qualifying remote work location.
         After the taxpayer makes the initial election, the election applies to
every municipal corporation in which the taxpayer conducts business. The
taxpayer shall not be required to file a net profit return with a municipal
corporation solely because a qualifying remote employee's or owner's qualifying
remote work location is located in such municipal corporation.
         Nothing in this division prohibits a taxpayer from making a new
election under this division after properly revoking a prior election.
         (c)   For the purpose of calculating the ratios described in division
(B)(1) of this section, all of the following apply to a taxpayer that has made
the election described in division (A)(9)(b):
            1.   For the purpose of division (B)(1) of this section, the
average original cost of any tangible personal property used by a qualifying
remote employee or owner at that individual's qualifying remote work location
shall be sitused to that individual's qualifying reporting location.
            2.   For the purpose of division (B)(2) of this section, any wages,
salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable period to a qualifying
remote employee or owner for services performed at that individual's qualifying
remote work location shall be sitused to that individual's qualifying reporting
location.
            3.   For the purpose of division (B)(3) of this section, and
notwithstanding division (A)(4) of this section, any gross receipts of the
business or profession from services performed during the taxable period by a
qualifying remote employee or owner for services performed at that individual's
qualifying remote work location shall be sitused to that individual's
qualifying reporting location.
         (d)   Nothing in this division prevents a taxpayer from requesting, or
a Tax Administrator from requiring, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all
or a portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method
as described in division (A)(2) of this section. However, a Tax Administrator
shall not require an alternative apportionment method in such a manner that it
would require a taxpayer to file a net profit return with a municipal
corporation solely because a qualifying remote employee's or owner's qualifying
remote work location is located in that municipal corporation.
         (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, nothing in this
division is intended to affect the withholding of taxes on qualifying wages
pursuant to §
880.04.
(Prior Code, § 880.062)
   (C)   Consolidated federal income tax return.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (C), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         AFFILIATED GROUP OF CORPORATIONS. An affiliated group as defined in
I.R.C. § 1504; except that, if such a group includes at least one incumbent
local exchange carrier that is primarily engaged in the business of providing
local exchange telephone service in the state, the affiliated group shall not
include any incumbent local exchange carrier that would otherwise be included
in the group.
         CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN. A consolidated return filed
for federal income tax purposes pursuant to I.R.C. § 1501.
         CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME. The consolidated taxable income
of an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the purposes of filing
a consolidated federal income tax return, before consideration of net operating
losses or special deductions. CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME does not
include income or loss of an incumbent local exchange carrier that is excluded
from the affiliated group under this division (C)(1).
         INCUMBENT LOCAL EXCHANGE CARRIER. The same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
4927.01.
         LOCAL EXCHANGE TELEPHONE SERVICE. The same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
5727.01.
      (2)   (a)   For taxable years beginning on or after 1-1-2016, a taxpayer
that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations may elect to file a
consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year if at least one
member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to the municipal
income tax in that taxable year and if the affiliated group of corporations
filed a consolidated federal income tax return with respect to that taxable
year:
            1.   The election is binding for a five-year period beginning with
the first taxable year of the initial election unless a change in the reporting
method is required under federal law;
            2.   The election continues to be binding for each subsequent five-
year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing consolidated
municipal income tax returns under this division (B)(2)(a) above; or
            3.   A taxpayer receives permission from the Tax Administrator. The
Tax Administrator shall approve such a request for good cause shown.
         (b)   An election to discontinue filing consolidated municipal income
tax returns under this section must be made in the first year following the
last year of a five-year consolidated municipal income tax return election
period in effect under division (C)(2)(a) above. The election to discontinue
filing a consolidated municipal income tax return is binding for a five-year
period beginning with the first taxable year of the election.
         (c)   An election made under divisions (C)(2)(a) or (C)(2)(b) above is
binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations subject to a
municipal income tax.
      (3)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations
that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a taxable year shall
file a consolidated municipal income tax return for that taxable year if the
Tax Administrator determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that
intercompany transactions have not been conducted at arm’s length and that
there has been a distortive shifting of income or expenses with regard to
allocation of net profits to the municipal corporation. A taxpayer that is
required to file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year
shall file a consolidated municipal income tax return for all subsequent
taxable years unless the taxpayer requests and receives written permission from
the Tax Administrator to file a separate return or a taxpayer has experienced a
change in circumstances.
      (4)   A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated municipal income tax return
in the same manner as is required under the United States Department of
Treasury regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the
consolidated federal income tax return required to be filed by the common
parent of the affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member.
      (5)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (C)(5)(b), (C)(5)
(c) and (C)(5)(d) below, corporations that file a consolidated municipal income
tax return shall compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined in §
880.03 of this chapter, by substituting “consolidated Federal taxable income”
for “federal taxable income” wherever “federal taxable income” appears in that
division and by substituting “an affiliated group of corporation’s” for “a C
corporation’s” wherever “a C corporation’s” appears in that division.
         (b)   No corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax return
shall make any adjustment otherwise required under §
880.03 of this chapter to the extent that the item of income or deduction
otherwise subject to the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in the
computation of consolidated federal taxable income.
         (c)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at
least 80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly
or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group’s consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, the
corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax return shall do one of
the following with respect to that pass-through entity’s net profit or loss for
that taxable year:
            1.   Exclude the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in division (B) above, exclude the
property, payroll and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the
computation of the affiliated group’s net profit sitused to a municipal
corporation. If the entity’s net profit or loss is so excluded, the entity
shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the
entity’s net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
            2.   Include the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in division (B) above, include the
property, payroll and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the
computation of the affiliated group’s net profit sitused to a municipal
corporation. If the entity’s net profit or loss is so included, the entity
shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the
entity’s net profits that are included in the consolidated federal taxable
income of the affiliated group.
         (d)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less
than eighty percent of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled,
directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in
that affiliated group’s consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year,
all of the following shall apply.
            1.   The corporation filing the consolidated municipal income tax
return shall exclude the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purposes of making the computations required in division (B) above, exclude the
property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the
computation of the affiliated group’s net profit sitused to a municipal
corporation;
            2.   The pass-through entity shall be subject to municipal income
taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with this chapter on the basis of
the entity’s net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
      (6)   Corporations filing a consolidated municipal income tax return
shall make the computations required under division (B) above by substituting
“consolidated federal taxable income attributable to” for “net profit from”
wherever “net profit from” appears in that section and by substituting
“affiliated group of corporations” for “taxpayer” wherever “taxpayer” appears
in that section.
      (7)   Each corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax return
is jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines,
charges or other amounts imposed by a municipal corporation in accordance with
this chapter on the corporation, an affiliated group of which the corporation
is a member for any portion of the taxable year or any one or more members of
such an affiliated group.
      (8)   Corporations and their affiliates that made an election or entered
into an agreement with a municipal corporation before 1-1-2016, to file a
consolidated or combined tax return with such municipal corporation may
continue to file consolidated or combined tax returns in accordance with such
election or agreement for taxable years beginning on and after 1-1-2016.
(Prior Code, § 880.063)
   (D)   Tax credit for businesses that foster new jobs in Ohio. The
municipality, by ordinance, may grant a refundable or non-refundable credit
against its tax on income to a taxpayer to foster job creation in the
municipality. If a credit is granted under this section, it shall be measured
as a percentage of the new income tax revenue the municipality derives from new
employees of the taxpayer and shall be for a term not exceeding 15 years.
Before the municipality passes an ordinance granting a credit, the municipality
and the taxpayer shall enter into an agreement specifying all the conditions of
the credit.
(Prior Code, § 880.064)
   (E)   Tax credits to foster job retention. The municipality, by ordinance,
may grant a refundable or non- refundable credit against its tax on income to a
taxpayer for the purpose of fostering job retention in the municipality. If a
credit is granted under this section, it shall be measured as a percentage of
the income tax revenue the municipality derives from the retained employees of
the taxpayer, and shall be for a term not exceeding 15 years. Before the
municipality passes an ordinance allowing such a credit, the municipality and
the taxpayer shall enter into an agreement specifying all the conditions of the
credit.
(Prior Code, § 880.065)
(Ord. 182-2015, passed 11-23-2015; Ord. 147- 2023, passed 11-13-2023)
§ 880.07 DECLARATION OF ESTIMATED TAX.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ESTIMATED TAXES. The amount that the taxpayer reasonably estimates to be
the taxpayer’s tax liability for a municipal corporation’s income tax for the
current taxable year.
      TAX LIABILITY. The total taxes due to a municipal corporation for the
taxable year, after allowing any credit to which the taxpayer is entitled and
after applying any estimated tax payment, withholding payment or credit from
another taxable year.
   (B)   (1)   Every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for
the current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the Tax Administrator, if
the amount payable as estimated taxes is at least $200. For the purposes of
this section:
         (a)   Taxes withheld from qualifying wages shall be considered as paid
to the municipal corporation for which the taxes were withheld in equal amounts
on each payment date. If the taxpayer establishes the dates on which all
amounts were actually withheld, the amounts withheld shall be considered as
paid on the dates on which the amounts were actually withheld;
         (b)   An overpayment of tax applied as a credit to a subsequent
taxable year is deemed to be paid on the date of the postmark stamped on the
cover in which the payment is mailed or, if the payment is made by electronic
funds transfer, the date the payment is submitted. As used in this division (B)
(1)(b), DATE OF THE POSTMARK means, in the event there is more than one date on
the cover, the earliest date imprinted on the cover by the postal service;
         (c)   A taxpayer having a taxable year of less than 12 months shall
make a declaration under rules prescribed by the Tax Administrator; and
         (d)   Taxes withheld by a casino operator or by a lottery sales agent
under Ohio R.C. 718.031 are deemed to be paid to the municipal corporation for
which the taxes were withheld on the date the taxes are withheld from the
taxpayer’s winnings.
      (2)   Taxpayers filing joint returns shall file joint declarations of
estimated taxes.
      (3)   The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before the
date prescribed for the filing of Municipal income tax returns under §
880.09(A)(7) of this chapter or on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth
month of the first taxable year after the taxpayer becomes subject to tax for
the first time.
      (4)   Taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a declaration
on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the beginning of each
fiscal year or period.
      (5)   The original declaration or any subsequent amendment may be
increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment day as
provided in this section.
   (C)   (1)   The required portion of the tax liability for the taxable year
that shall be paid through estimated taxes made payable to the municipality or
Tax Administrator, including the application of tax refunds to estimated taxes
and withholding on or before the applicable payment date, shall be as follows:
         (a)   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 22.5% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         (b)   On or before the fifteenth day of the sixth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 45% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         (c)   On or before the fifteenth day of the ninth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 67.5% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         (d)   On or before the fifteenth day of the twelfth month of the
taxable year, 90% of the tax liability for the taxable year.
      (2)   A taxpayer may amend a declaration under rules prescribed by the
Tax Administrator. When an amended declaration has been filed, the unpaid
balance shown due on the amended declaration shall be paid in equal
installments on or before the remaining payment dates. The amended declaration
must be filed on the next applicable due date as outlined in divisions (C)(1)
(a) through (C)(1)(d) above.
      (3)   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of the year
following that for which the declaration or amended declaration was filed, an
annual return shall be filed and any balance which may be due shall be paid
with the return in accordance with §
880.09(A) of this chapter.
         (a)   For taxpayers who are individuals, or who are not individuals
and are reporting and filing on a calendar year basis, the annual tax return is
due on the same date as the filing of the federal tax return, unless extended
pursuant to division (G) of Ohio R.C. 5747.08.
         (b)   For taxpayers who are not individuals, and are reporting and
filing on a fiscal year basis or any period other than a calendar year, the
annual return is due on the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the end
of the taxable year or period.
      (4)   An amended declaration is required whenever the taxpayer’s
estimated tax liability changes during the taxable year. A change in estimated
tax liability may either increase or decrease the estimated tax liability for
the taxable year.
   (D)   (1)   In the case of any underpayment of any portion of a tax
liability, penalty and interest may be imposed pursuant to §
880.10 of this chapter upon the amount of underpayment for the period of
underpayment, unless the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described
in division (E) below. The amount of the underpayment shall be determined as
follows:
         (a)   For the first payment of estimated taxes each year, 22.5% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         (b)   For the second payment of estimated taxes each year, 45% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         (c)   For the third payment of estimated taxes each year, 67.5% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         (d)   For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each year, 90% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment.
      (2)   The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the estimated
payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is made. For
purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before any payment
date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment only to the
extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the payment
presently required to be paid to avoid any penalty.
   (E)   An underpayment of any portion of tax liability determined under
division (D) above shall be due to reasonable cause and the penalty imposed by
this section shall not be added to the taxes for the taxable year if any of the
following apply:
      (1)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 90% of
the tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by annualizing the
income received during the year up to the end of the month immediately
preceding the month in which the payment is due;
      (2)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 100%
of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the preceding
taxable year; provided that, the immediately preceding taxable year reflected a
period of 12 months and the taxpayer filed a return with the municipal
corporation under §
880.09(A) of this chapter for that year.
      (3)   The taxpayer is an individual who resides in the municipality but
was not domiciled there on January 1 of the calendar year that includes the
first day of the taxable year.
   (F)   A Tax Administrator may waive the requirement for filing a declaration
of estimated taxes for any class of taxpayers after finding that the waiver is
reasonable and proper in view of administrative costs and other factors.
(Prior Code, § 880.07) (Ord. 182-2015, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 880.08 CREDIT FOR TAX PAID.
   (A)   Credit for tax paid to another municipality. When a resident of the
city is subject to a municipal income tax of another municipality or joint
economic development district, he or she shall not pay a total municipal income
tax on the same income greater than the tax imposed at the higher rate. The
credit shall not exceed the tax assessed by this chapter on the earned income
in such other municipality or municipalities or joint economic development
districts where the tax is paid.
(Prior Code, § 880.081)
   (B)   Refundable credit for qualifying loss.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (B), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         NON-QUALIFIED DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN. A compensation plan
described in I.R.C. § 3121(v)(2)(C).
         QUALIFYING LOSS.
            1.   Except as provided in division 2. below, QUALIFYING LOSS means
the excess, if any, of the total amount of compensation the payment of which is
deferred pursuant to a non-qualified deferred compensation plan over the total
amount of income the taxpayer has recognized for federal income tax purposes
for all taxable years on a cumulative basis as compensation with respect to the
taxpayer’s receipt of money and property attributable to distributions in
connection with the non-qualified deferred compensation plan.
            2.   If, for one or more taxable years, the taxpayer has not paid
to one or more municipal corporations income tax imposed on the entire amount
of compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a non-qualified
deferred compensation plan, then the “qualifying loss” is the product of the
amount resulting from the calculation described in division 1. above computed
without regard to this division 2. and a fraction the numerator of which is the
portion of such compensation on which the taxpayer has paid income tax to one
or more municipal corporations and the denominator of which is the total amount
of compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a non-qualified
deferred compensation plan.
            3.   With respect to a non-qualified deferred compensation plan,
the taxpayer sustains a qualifying loss only in the taxable year in which the
taxpayer receives the final distribution of money and property pursuant to that
non-qualified deferred compensation plan.
         QUALIFYING TAX RATE. The applicable tax rate for the taxable year for
which the taxpayer paid income tax to a municipal corporation with respect to
any portion of the total amount of compensation the payment of which is
deferred pursuant to a non-qualified deferred compensation plan. If different
tax rates applied for different taxable years, then the “qualifying tax rate”
is a weighted average of those different tax rates. The weighted average shall
be based upon the tax paid to the municipal corporation each year with respect
to the non-qualified deferred compensation plan.
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(4) below, a refundable
credit shall be allowed against the income tax imposed by a municipal
corporation for each qualifying loss sustained by a taxpayer during the taxable
year. The amount of the credit shall be equal to the product of the qualifying
loss and the qualifying tax rate.
         (b)   A taxpayer shall claim the credit allowed under this section
from each municipal corporation to which the taxpayer paid municipal income tax
with respect to the non-qualified deferred compensation plan in one or more
taxable years.
         (c)   If a taxpayer has paid tax to more than one municipal
corporation with respect to the non- qualified deferred compensation plan, the
amount of the credit that a taxpayer may claim from each municipal corporation
shall be calculated on the basis of each municipal corporation’s proportionate
share of the total municipal corporation income tax paid by the taxpayer to all
municipal corporations with respect to the non- qualified deferred compensation
plan.
         (d)   In no case shall the amount of the credit allowed under this
section exceed the cumulative income tax that a taxpayer has paid to a
municipal corporation for all taxable years with respect to the non- qualified
deferred compensation plan.
      (3)   (a)   For purposes of this section, municipal corporation income
tax that has been withheld with respect to a non-qualified deferred
compensation plan shall be considered to have been paid by the taxpayer with
respect to the non-qualified deferred compensation plan.
         (b)   Any municipal income tax that has been refunded or otherwise
credited for the benefit of the taxpayer with respect to a non-qualified
deferred compensation plan shall not be considered to have been paid to the
municipal corporation by the taxpayer.
      (4)   The credit allowed under this division (B) is allowed only to the
extent the taxpayer’s qualifying loss is attributable to:
         (a)   The insolvency or bankruptcy of the employer who had established
the non-qualified deferred compensation plan; or
         (b)   The employee’s failure or inability to satisfy all of the
employer’s terms and conditions necessary to receive the non-qualified deferred
compensation.
(Prior Code, § 880.082)
   (C)   Credit for person working in joint economic development district or
zone. A municipality shall grant a credit against its tax on income to a
resident of the municipality who works in a joint economic development zone
created under Ohio R.C. 715.691 or a joint economic development district
created under Ohio R.C. 715.70, 715.71 or 715.72 to the same extent that it
grants a credit against its tax on income to its residents who are employed in
another municipal corporation, pursuant to division (A) above.
(Prior Code, § 880.083)
   (D)   Credit for tax beyond statute for obtaining refund.
      (1)   Income tax that has been deposited or paid to the municipality, but
should have been deposited or paid to another municipal corporation, is
allowable by the municipality as a refund, but is subject to the three-year
limitation on refunds as provided in §
880.09(F) of this chapter.
      (2)   Income tax that should have been deposited or paid to the
municipality, but was deposited or paid to another municipal corporation, shall
be subject to collection and recovery by the municipality. To the extent a
refund of such tax or withholding is barred by the limitation on refunds as
provided in §
880.09(F) of this chapter, the municipality will allow a non-refundable credit
equal to the tax or withholding paid to the other municipality against the
income tax the municipality claims is due. If the municipality’s tax rate is
higher, the tax representing the net difference of the tax rates is also
subject to collection by the municipality, along with any penalty and interest
accruing during the period of non-payment.
      (3)   No carryforward of credit will be permitted when the overpayment is
beyond the three-year limitation for refunding of same as provided in §
880.09(F) of this chapter.
      (4)   Nothing in this section requires a municipality to allow credit for
tax paid to another municipal corporation if the municipality has reduced
credit for tax paid to another municipal corporation. Division (A) above
regarding any limitation on credit shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 880.084)
   (E)   Credit for disabled or retired resident. A credit in the amount of the
tax liability to a maximum of $50 shall be awarded to disabled or retired
resident individuals as per rules and regulations prescribed by the Tax
Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 880.085)
(Ord. 182-2015, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 880.09 ANNUAL RETURN.
   (A)   Return and payment of tax.
      (1)   (a)   An annual municipal income tax return shall be completed and
filed by every taxpayer for each taxable year for which the taxpayer is subject
to the tax, whether or not a tax is due thereon.
         (b)   The Tax Administrator shall accept on behalf of all non-resident
individual taxpayers a return filed by an employer, agent of an employer or
other payer located in the municipality under §
880.05(A)(3) of this chapter when the non-resident individual taxpayer’s sole
income subject to the tax is the qualifying wages reported by the employer,
agent of an employer, or other payer, and no additional tax is due to the
municipality.
         (c)   All resident individual taxpayers, 18 years of age and older,
shall file an annual municipal income tax return with the municipality,
regardless of income or liability.
      (2)   If an individual is deceased, any return or notice required of that
individual shall be completed and filed by that decedent’s executor,
administrator or other person charged with the property of that decedent.
      (3)   If an individual is unable to complete and file a return or notice
required by the municipality in accordance with this chapter, the return or
notice required of that individual shall be completed and filed by the
individual’s duly authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary or other
person charged with the care of the person or property of that individual. Such
duly authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary or other person charged
with the care of the person or property of that individual shall provide, with
the filing of the return, appropriate documentation to support that they are
authorized to file a return or notice on behalf of the taxpayer. This notice
shall include any legally binding authorizations, and contact information
including name, address and phone number of the duly authorized agent,
guardian, conservator, fiduciary or other person.
      (4)   Returns or notices required of an estate or a trust shall be
completed and filed by the fiduciary of the estate or trust. Such fiduciary
shall provide, with the filing of the return, appropriate documentation to
support that they are authorized to file a return or notice on behalf of the
taxpayer. This notice shall include any legally binding authorizations and
contact information including name, address and phone number of the fiduciary.
      (5)   No municipal corporation shall deny spouses the ability to file a
joint return.
      (6)   (a)   Each return required to be filed under this section shall
contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer’s duly authorized agent
and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer, and shall include
the taxpayer’s Social Security number or taxpayer identification number. Each
return shall be verified by a declaration under penalty of perjury.
         (b)   A taxpayer who is an individual is required to include, with
each annual return, amended return or request for refund required under this
section, copies of only the following documents: all of the taxpayer’s Internal
Revenue Service form W-2, “Wage and Tax Statements”, including all information
reported on the taxpayer’s Federal W-2, as well as taxable wages reported or
withheld for any municipal corporation; the taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service
form 1040 or, in the case of a return or request required by a qualified
municipal corporation, Ohio IT 1040; and, with respect to an amended tax return
or refund request, any other documentation necessary to support the refund
request or the adjustments made in the amended return. An individual taxpayer
who files the annual return required by this section electronically is not
required to provide paper copies of any of the foregoing to the Tax
Administrator unless the Tax Administrator requests such copies after the
return has been filed.
         (c)   A taxpayer that is not an individual is required to include,
with each annual net profit return, amended net profit return, or request for
refund required under this section, copies of only the following documents: the
taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service form 1041, form 1065, form 1120, form 1120-
REIT, form 1120F or form 1120S, and, with respect to an amended tax return or
refund request, any other documentation necessary to support the refund request
or the adjustments made in the amended return.
         (d)   A taxpayer that is not an individual and that files an annual
net profit return electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway or in some
other manner shall either mail the documents required under this division to
the Tax Administrator at the time of filing or, if electronic submission is
available, submit the documents electronically through the Ohio Business
Gateway or a portal provided by the municipality. The Department of Taxation
shall publish a method of electronically submitting the documents required
under this division through the Ohio Business Gateway on or before 1-1-2016.
The Department shall transmit all documents submitted electronically under this
division (A)(6) to the appropriate Tax Administrator.
         (e)   After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax Administrator shall
request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements or
documents required by the municipality to determine and verify the taxpayer’s
municipal income tax liability. The requirements imposed under this division
(A)(6) apply regardless of whether the taxpayer files on a generic form or on a
form prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
         (f)   Any other documentation, including schedules, other municipal
income tax returns, or other supporting documentation necessary to verify
credits, income, losses or other pertinent factors on the return shall also be
included to avoid delay in processing, or disallowance by the Tax Administrator
of undocumented credits or losses.
      (7)   (a)   1.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each
individual income tax return required to be filed under this section shall be
completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator on or before the date
prescribed for the filing of state individual income tax returns under division
(G) of Ohio R.C. 5747.08. The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or
notice on forms prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms,
together with remittance made payable to the municipality or Tax Administrator.
            2.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each annual net
profit income tax return required to be filed under this section by a taxpayer
that is not an individual shall be completed and filed as required by the Tax
Administrator on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the
end of the taxpayer’s taxable year or period. The taxpayer shall complete and
file the return or notice on forms prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on
generic forms, together with remittance made payable to the municipality or Tax
Administrator.
            3.   In the case of individual income tax return required to be
filed by an individual, and net profit income tax return required to be filed
by a taxpayer who is not an individual, no remittance is required if the amount
shown to be due is $10 or less.
         (b)   If the Tax Administrator considers it necessary in order to
ensure the payment of the tax imposed by the municipality in accordance with
this chapter, the Tax Administrator may require taxpayers to file returns and
make payments otherwise than as provided in this section, including taxpayers
not otherwise required to file annual returns.
         (c)   With respect to taxpayers to whom Section 880.092 applies, to
the extent that any provision in this division (A)(7) conflicts with any
provision in division (B) below, the provision in division (B) below prevails.
      (8)   (a)   For taxable years beginning after 2015, the municipality
shall not require a taxpayer to remit tax with respect to net profits if the
amount due is $10 or less.
         (b)   Any taxpayer not required to remit tax to the municipality for a
taxable year pursuant to division (A)(8)(a) above shall file with the
municipality an annual net profit return under divisions (B)(6)(c) and (B)(6)
(d) above.
      (9)   This division (A)(9) shall not apply to payments required to be
made under §
880.05(A)(2)(a)2. or (A)(2)(a)3. of this chapter.
         (a)   If any report, claim, statement or other document required to be
filed, or any payment required to be made, within a prescribed period or on or
before a prescribed date under this chapter is delivered after that period or
that to the Tax Administrator or other municipal official with which the
report, claim, statement, or other document is required to be filed, or to
which the payment is required to be made, the date of the postmark stamped on
the cover in which the report, claim, statement or other document, or payment
is mailed shall be deemed to be the date of delivery or the date of payment.
The “date of postmark” means, in the event there is more than one date on the
cover, the earliest date imprinted on the cover by the postal service.
         (b)   If a payment is required to be made by electronic funds
transfer, the payment is considered to be made when the payment is credited to
an account designated by the Tax Administrator for the receipt of tax payments;
except that, when a payment made by electronic funds transfer is delayed due to
circumstances not under the control of the taxpayer, the payment is considered
to be made when the taxpayer submitted the payment. For purposes of this
division (A)(9)(b), SUBMITTED THE PAYMENT means the date which the taxpayer has
designated for the delivery of payment, which may or may not be the same date
as the date the payment was initiated by the taxpayer.
      (10)   The amounts withheld for the municipality by an employer, the
agent of an employer, or other payer as described in §
880.05(A) of this chapter shall be allowed to the recipient of the compensation
as credits against payment of the tax imposed on the recipient unless the
amounts withheld were not remitted to the municipality and the recipient
colluded with the employer, agent or other payer in connection with the failure
to remit the amounts withheld.
      (11)   Each return required by the municipality to be filed in accordance
with this section shall include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize
another person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to
communicate with the Tax Administrator about matters pertaining to the return.
The return or instructions accompanying the return shall indicate that by
checking the box the taxpayer authorizes the Tax Administrator to contact the
preparer or other person concerning questions that arise during the examination
or other review of the return and authorizes the preparer or other person only
to provide the Tax Administrator with information that is missing from the
return, to contact the Tax Administrator for information about the examination
or other review of the return or the status of the taxpayer’s refund or
payments, and to respond to notices about mathematical errors, offsets, or
return preparation that the taxpayer has received from the Tax Administrator
and has shown to the preparer or other person. Authorization by the taxpayer of
another person to communicate with the Tax Administrator about matters
pertaining to the return does not preclude the Tax Administrator from
contacting the taxpayer regarding such matters.
      (12)   The Tax Administrator of the municipality shall accept for filing
a generic form of any income tax return, report or document required by the
municipality in accordance with this chapter, provided that the generic form,
once completed and filed, contains all of the information required by
ordinances, resolutions or rules adopted by the municipality or Tax
Administrator; and, provided that, the taxpayer or tax return preparer filing
the generic form otherwise complies with the provisions of this chapter and of
the municipality’s ordinance or resolution governing the filing of returns,
reports or documents.
      (13)   When income tax returns, reports or other documents require the
signature of a tax return preparer, the Tax Administrator shall accept a
facsimile of such a signature in lieu of a manual signature.
      (14)   (a)   As used in this division, “worksite location” has the same
meaning as in §
880.05(B) of this chapter.
         (b)   A person may notify a Tax Administrator that the person does not
expect to be a taxpayer with respect to the municipal corporation for a taxable
year if both of the following conditions apply.
            1.   The person was required to file a tax return with the
municipal corporation for the immediately preceding taxable year because the
person performed services at a worksite location within the municipal
corporation, and the person has filed all appropriate and required returns and
remitted all applicable income tax and withholding payments as provided by this
chapter. The Tax Administrator is not required to accept an affidavit from a
taxpayer who has not complied with the provisions of this chapter.
            2.   The person no longer provides services in the municipal
corporation, and does not expect to be subject to the municipal corporation’s
income tax for the taxable year. The person shall provide the notice in a
signed affidavit that briefly explains the person’s circumstances, including
the location of the previous worksite location and the last date on which the
person performed services or made any sales within the municipal corporation.
The affidavit also shall include the following statement: “The affiant has no
plans to perform any services within the municipal corporation, make any sales
in the municipal corporation or otherwise become subject to the tax levied by
the municipal corporation during the taxable year. If the affiant does become
subject to the tax levied by the municipal corporation for the taxable year,
the affiant agrees to be considered a taxpayer and to properly register as a
taxpayer with the municipal corporation, if such a registration is required by
the municipal corporation’s resolutions, ordinances or rules.” The person shall
sign the affidavit under penalty of perjury.
            3.   If a person submits an affidavit described in this division
(A)(14)(b), the Tax Administrator shall not require the person to file any tax
return for the taxable year unless the Tax Administrator possesses information
that conflicts with the affidavit or if the circumstances described in the
affidavit change, or the taxpayer has engaged in activity which results in work
being performed, services provided, sales made or other activity that results
in municipal taxable income reportable to the municipality in the taxable year.
It shall be the responsibility of the taxpayer to comply with the provisions of
this chapter relating to the reporting and filing of municipal taxable income
on an annual municipal income tax return, even if an affidavit has been filed
with the Tax Administrator for the taxable year. Nothing in this division (A)
(14) prohibits the Tax Administrator from performing an audit of the person.
(Prior Code, § 880.091)
   (B)   Return and payment of tax; individuals serving in combat zone.
      (1)   Each member of the national guard of any state and each member of a
reserve component of the Armed Forces of the United States called to active
duty pursuant to an executive order issued by the President of the United
States or an act of the Congress of the United States, and each civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the Armed Forces, may apply to the Tax Administrator of the
municipality for both an extension of time for filing of the return and an
extension of time for payment of taxes required by the municipality in
accordance with this chapter during the period of the member’s or civilian’s
duty service and for 180 days thereafter. The application shall be filed on or
before the one hundred-eightieth day after the member’s or civilian’s duty
terminates. An applicant shall provide such evidence as the Tax Administrator
considers necessary to demonstrate eligibility for the extension.
      (2)   (a)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is
qualified for an extension under this section, the Tax Administrator shall
enter into a contract with the applicant for the payment of the tax in
installments that begin on the one hundred eighty-first day after the
applicant’s active duty or service terminates. Except as provided in division
(B)(2)(c) below, the Tax Administrator may prescribe such contract terms as the
Tax Administrator considers appropriate.
         (b)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is
qualified for an extension under this section, the applicant shall neither be
required to file any return, report or other tax document nor be required to
pay any tax otherwise due to the municipality before the one hundred eighty-
first day after the applicant’s active duty or service terminates.
         (c)   Taxes paid pursuant to a contract entered into under division
(B)(2)(a) above are not delinquent. The Tax Administrator shall not require any
payments of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the
extension period.
      (3)   (a)   Nothing in this division (B) denies to any person described
in this division the application of divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) above.
         (b)   1.   A qualifying taxpayer who is eligible for an extension
under the Internal Revenue Code shall receive both an extension of time in
which to file any return, report or other tax document and an extension of time
in which to make any payment of taxes required by the municipality in
accordance with this chapter. The length of any extension granted under this
division (B)(c)(b)1. shall be equal to the length of the corresponding
extension that the taxpayer receives under the Internal Revenue Code. As used
in this section, QUALIFYING TAXPAYER means a member of the national guard or a
member of a reserve component of the Armed Forces of the United States called
to active duty pursuant to either an executive order issued by the President of
the United States or an act of the Congress of the United States, or a civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the Armed Forces.
            2.   Taxes the payment of which is extended in accordance with
division (B)(3)(b)1. above are not delinquent during the extension period. Such
taxes become delinquent on the first day after the expiration of the extension
period if the taxes are not paid prior to that date. The Tax Administrator
shall not require any payment of penalties or interest in connection with those
taxes for the extension period. The Tax Administrator shall not include any
period of extension granted under division (B)(3)(b)1. above in calculating the
penalty or interest due on any unpaid tax.
      (4)   For each taxable year to which divisions (B)(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3)
above applies to a taxpayer, the provisions of divisions (B)(2)(a) and (B)(2)
(c) or (B)(3) above, as applicable, apply to the spouse of that taxpayer if the
filing status of the spouse and the taxpayer is married filing jointly for that
year.
(Prior Code, § 880.092)
   (C)   Use of Ohio Business Gateway; types of filings authorized.
      (1)   Any taxpayer subject to municipal income taxation with respect to
the taxpayer’s net profit from a business or profession may file any municipal
income tax return or, estimated municipal income tax return, or extension for
filing a municipal income tax return, and may make payment of amounts shown to
be due on such returns, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (2)   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer may report the
amount of municipal income tax withheld from qualifying wages, and may make
remittance of such amounts, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (3)   Nothing in this section affects the due dates for filing employer
withholding tax returns or deposit of any required tax.
      (4)   The use of the Ohio Business Gateway by municipal corporations,
taxpayers or other persons does not affect the legal rights of municipalities
or taxpayers as otherwise permitted by law. The state shall not be a party to
the administration of municipal income taxes or to an appeal of a municipal
income tax matter, except as otherwise specifically provided by law.
      (5)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting or removing
the authority of any municipal corporation to administer, audit and enforce the
provisions of its municipal income tax.
(Prior Code, § 880.093)
   (D)   Extension of time to file.
      (1)   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal income tax
return. The extended due date of the municipal income tax return shall be the
fifteenth day of the tenth month after the last day of the taxable year to
which the return relates. For tax years ending on or after January 1, 2023, the
extended due date of the municipal income tax return for a taxpayer that is not
an individual shall be the fifteenth day of the eleventh month after the last
day of the taxable year to which the return relates.
         (a)   A copy of the federal extension request shall be included with
the filing of the municipal income tax return.
      (2)   Any taxpayer that qualifies for an automatic federal extension for
a period other than six-months for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax
return shall automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal
income tax return. The extended due date of the municipal income tax return
shall be the same as that of the extended federal income tax return.
      (3)   A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month extension
for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return may request that the Tax
Administrator grant the taxpayer a six-month extension of the date for filing
the taxpayer’s municipal income tax return. If the request is received by the
Tax Administrator on or before the date the municipal income tax return is due,
the Tax Administrator shall grant the taxpayer’s requested extension.
      (4)   An extension of time to file under this chapter is not an extension
of the time to pay any tax due unless the Tax Administrator grants an extension
of that date.
      (5)   If the State Tax Commissioner extends for all taxpayers the date
for filing state income tax returns under division (G) of Ohio R.C. 5747.08, a
taxpayer shall automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal
income tax return. The extended due date of the municipal income tax return
shall be the same as the extended due date of the state income tax return.
      (6)   (a)   If a taxpayer receives an extension for the filing of a
municipal income tax return under divisions (D)(1) or (D)(2) of this section or
division (A)(7)(a)2., the Tax Administrator shall not make any inquiry or send
any notice to the taxpayer with regard to the return on or before the date the
taxpayer files the return or on or before the extended due date to file the
return, whichever occurs first.
         (b)   If a Tax Administrator violates division (D)(6) of this section,
the municipal corporation shall reimburse the taxpayer for any reasonable costs
incurred to respond to such inquiry or notice, up to $150.
         (c)   Division (D)(6) of this section does not apply to an extension
received under division (D)(1) of this section if the Tax Administrator has
actual knowledge that the taxpayer failed to file for a federal extension as
required to receive the extension under division (D)(1) of this section or
failed to file for an extension under division (D)(3) of this section.
(Prior Code, § 880.094)
   (E)   Amended returns.
      (1)   (a)   A taxpayer shall file an amended return with the Tax
Administrator in such form as the Tax Administrator requires if any of the
facts, figures, computations or attachments required in the taxpayer’s annual
return to determine the tax due levied by the municipality in accordance with
this chapter must be altered.
         (b)   Within 60 days after the final determination of any federal or
state tax liability affecting the taxpayer’s municipal tax liability, that
taxpayer shall make and file an amended municipal return showing income subject
to the municipal income tax based upon such final determination of federal or
state tax liability, and pay any additional municipal income tax shown due
thereon or make a claim for refund of any overpayment, unless the tax or
overpayment is $10 or less.   
         (c)   If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated municipal
income tax return, or to amend its type of return from a separate return to a
consolidated return, based on the taxpayer’s consolidated federal income tax
return, the taxpayer shall notify the Tax Administrator before filing the
amended return.
      (2)   (a)   In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be
accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due together with any
penalty and interest thereon. If the combined tax shown to be due is $10 or
less, such amount need not accompany the amended return. Except as provided
under division (E)(2)(b) below, the amended return shall not reopen those
facts, figures, computations, or attachments from a previously filed return
that are not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the
taxpayer’s federal or state income tax return unless the applicable statute of
limitations for civil actions or prosecutions under §
880.19 of this chapter has not expired for a previously filed return.
         (b)   The additional tax to be paid shall not exceed the amount of tax
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations and attachments were
reopened.
      (3)   (a)   In the case of an overpayment, a request for refund may be
filed under this division (E)(3) within the period prescribed by §
880.19(E) of this chapter for filing the amended return even if it is filed
beyond the period prescribed in that division if it otherwise conforms to the
requirements of that division. If the amount of the refund is $10 or less, no
refund need be paid by the municipality to the taxpayer. Except as set forth in
division (E)(3)(b) below, a request filed under this division (E)(3) shall
claim refund of overpayments resulting from alterations to only those facts,
figures, computations or attachments required in the taxpayer’s annual return
that are affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the
taxpayer’s federal or state income tax return unless it is also filed within
the time prescribed in division (F) below. Except as set forth in division (E)
(3)(b) below, the request shall not reopen those facts, figures, computations,
or attachments that are not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the
adjustment to the taxpayer’s federal or state income tax return.
         (b)   The amount to be refunded shall not exceed the amount of refund
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations and attachments were
reopened.
(Prior Code, § 880.095)
   (F)   Refunds.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a request for a refund, the Tax Administrator of
the municipality, in accordance with this section, shall refund to employers,
agents of employers, other payers or taxpayers, with respect to any income or
withholding tax levied by the municipality:
         (a)   Overpayments of more than $10; and
         (b)   Amounts paid erroneously if the refund requested exceeds $10.
      (2)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, returns setting
forth a request for refund shall be filed with the Tax Administrator, within
three years after the tax was due or paid, whichever is later. Any
documentation that substantiates the taxpayer’s claim for a refund must be
included with the return filing. Failure to remit all documentation, including
schedules, other municipal income tax returns, or other supporting
documentation necessary to verify credits, income, losses or other pertinent
factors on the return will cause delay in processing, and/or disallowance of
undocumented credits or losses.
         (b)   On filing of the refund request, the Tax Administrator shall
determine the amount of refund due and certify such amount to the appropriate
municipal corporation official for payment. Except as provided in division (F)
(2)(c) below, the Administrator shall issue an assessment to any taxpayer whose
request for refund is fully or partially denied. The assessment shall state the
amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the denial and
instructions for appealing the assessment.
         (c)   If a Tax Administrator denies in whole or in part a refund
request included within the taxpayer’s originally filed annual income tax
return, the Tax Administrator shall notify the taxpayer, in writing, of the
amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the denial and
instructions for requesting an assessment that may be appealed under §
880.18 of this chapter.
      (3)   A request for a refund that is received after the last day for
filing specified in division (F)(2) above shall be considered to have been
filed in a timely manner if any of the following situations exist:
         (a)   The request is delivered by the postal service, and the earliest
postal service postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed is not
later than the last day for filing the request;
         (b)   The request is delivered by the postal service, the only
postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed was affixed by a private
postal meter, the date of that postmark is not later than the last day for
filing the request and the request is received within seven days of such last
day; and
         (c)   The request is delivered by the postal service, no postmark date
was affixed to the cover in which the request is enclosed or the date of the
postmark so affixed is not legible and the request is received within seven
days of the last day for making the request.
      (4)   Interest shall be allowed and paid on any overpayment by a taxpayer
of any municipal income tax obligation from the date of the overpayment until
the date of the refund of the overpayment; except that, if any overpayment is
refunded within 90 days after the final filing date of the annual return or 90
days after the completed return is filed, whichever is later, no interest shall
be allowed on the refund. For the purpose of computing the payment of interest
on amounts overpaid, no amount of tax for any taxable year shall be considered
to have been paid before the date on which the return on which the tax is
reported is due, without regard to any extension of time for filing that
return. Interest shall be paid at the interest rate described in §
880.10(A)(4) of this chapter.
      (5)   As used in this section, “withholding tax” has the same meaning as
in §
880.10 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 880.096)
(Ord. 182-2015, passed 11-23-2015; Ord. 147- 2023, passed 11-13-2023)
§ 880.10 PENALTY, INTEREST, FEES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      APPLICABLE LAW. This chapter, the resolutions, ordinances, codes,
directives, instructions and rules adopted by the municipality provided such
resolutions, ordinances, codes, directives, instructions and rules impose or
directly or indirectly address the levy, payment, remittance or filing
requirements of a municipal income tax.
      FEDERAL SHORT-TERM RATE. The rate of the average market yield on
outstanding marketable obligations of the United States with remaining periods
to maturity of three years or less, as determined under I.R.C. § 1274, for July
of the current year.
      INCOME TAX, ESTIMATED INCOME TAX and WITHHOLDING TAX. Any income tax,
estimated income tax, and withholding tax imposed by a municipal corporation
pursuant to applicable law, including at any time before 1-1-2016.
      INTEREST RATE AS DESCRIBED IN DIVISION (A) OF THIS SECTION. The Federal
short-term rate, rounded to the nearest whole number percent, plus 5%. The rate
shall apply for the calendar year next following the July of the year in which
the federal short-term rate is determined in accordance herewith.
      RETURN. Includes any tax return, report, reconciliation, schedule and
other document required to be filed with a Tax Administrator or municipal
corporation by a taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer or any other
payer pursuant to applicable law, including at any time before 1-1-2016.
      UNPAID ESTIMATED INCOME TAX. Estimated income tax due but not paid by the
date the tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      UNPAID INCOME TAX. Income tax due but not paid by the date the income tax
is required to be paid under applicable law.
      UNPAID WITHHOLDING TAX. Withholding tax due but not paid by the date the
withholding tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      WITHHOLDING TAX. Includes amounts an employer, any agent of an employer,
or any other payer did not withhold in whole or in part from an employee’s
qualifying wages, but that, under applicable law, the employer, agent or other
payer is required to withhold from an employee’s qualifying wages.
   (B)   (1)   This section shall apply to the following:
         (a)   Any return required to be filed under applicable law for taxable
years beginning on or after 1-1-2016; and
         (b)   Income tax, estimated income tax and withholding tax required to
be paid or remitted to the municipality on or after 1-1-2016 for taxable years
beginning on or after 1-1-2016.
      (2)   This section does not apply to returns required to be filed or
payments required to be made before 1-1-2016, regardless of the filing or
payment date. Returns required to be filed or payments required to be made
before 1-1-2016, but filed or paid after that date shall be subject to the
ordinances or rules, as adopted from time to time before 1-1-2016 of the
municipality.
   (C)   The municipality shall impose on a taxpayer, employer, any agent of
the employer and any other payer, and will attempt to collect, the interest
amounts and penalties prescribed in this section when the taxpayer, employer,
any agent of the employer or any other payer for any reason fails, in whole or
in part, to make to the municipality timely and full payment or remittance of
income tax, estimated income tax, or withholding tax or to file timely with the
municipality any return required to be filed.
      (1)   Interest shall be imposed at the rate defined as “interest rate as
described in division (A) of this section”, per annum, on all unpaid income
tax, unpaid estimated income tax, and unpaid withholding tax. This imposition
of interest shall be assessed per month, or fraction of a month.
      (2)   With respect to unpaid income tax and unpaid estimated income tax,
a penalty equal to 15% of the amount not timely paid shall be imposed.
      (3)   With respect to any unpaid withholding tax, a penalty equal to 50%
of the amount not timely paid shall be imposed.
      (4)   For tax years ending on or before December 31, 2022,with respect to
returns other than estimated income tax returns, the municipality shall impose
a monthly penalty of $25 for each failure to timely file each return,
regardless of the liability shown thereon for each month, or any fraction
thereof, during which the return remains unfiled regardless of the liability
shown thereon. The penalty shall not exceed a total of $150 in assessed penalty
for each failure to timely file a return.
      (5)   For tax years ending on or after January 1, 2023, with respect to
returns other than estimated income tax returns, the Municipality may impose a
penalty not exceeding $25 for each failure to timely file each return,
regardless of the liability shown thereon, except that Municipality shall abate
or refund the penalty assessed on a taxpayer’s first failure to timely file a
return after the taxpayer files that return.
   (D)   With respect to income taxes, estimated income taxes, withholding
taxes and returns, the municipality shall not impose, seek to collect or
collect any penalty, amount of interest, charges or additional fees not
described in this section.
   (E)   With respect to income taxes, estimated income taxes, withholding
taxes and returns, the municipality shall not refund or credit any penalty,
amount of interest, charges or additional fees that were properly imposed or
collected before 1-1-2016.
   (F)   The Tax Administrator may, in the Tax Administrator’s sole discretion,
abate or partially abate penalties or interest imposed under this section when
the Tax Administrator deems such abatement or partial abatement to be
appropriate. Such abatement or partial abatement shall be properly documented
and maintained on the record of the taxpayer who received benefit of such
abatement or partial abatement.
   (G)   The Municipality may impose on the taxpayer, employer, any agent of
the employer or any other payer the municipality’s post-judgment collection
costs and fees, including attorney’s fees.
(Prior Code, § 880.10) (Ord. 182-2015, passed 11- 23-2015; Ord. 147-2023,
passed 11-13-2023)
§ 880.11 AUDIT.
   (A)   At or before the commencement of an audit, as defined in §
880.03 of this chapter, the Tax Administrator shall provide to the taxpayer a
written description of the roles of the Tax Administrator and of the taxpayer
during an audit and a statement of the taxpayer’s rights, including any right
to obtain a refund of an overpayment of tax. At or before the commencement of
an audit, the Tax Administrator shall inform the taxpayer when the audit is
considered to have commenced.
   (B)   Except in cases involving suspected criminal activity, the Tax
Administrator shall conduct an audit of a taxpayer during regular business
hours and after providing reasonable notice to the taxpayer. A taxpayer who is
unable to comply with a proposed time for an audit on the grounds that the
proposed time would cause inconvenience or hardship must offer reasonable
alternative dates for the audit.
   (C)   (1)   At all stages of an audit by the Tax Administrator, a taxpayer
is entitled to be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant,
bookkeeper or other tax practitioner. The Tax Administrator shall prescribe a
form by which a taxpayer may designate such a person to assist or represent the
taxpayer in the conduct of any proceedings resulting from actions by the Tax
Administrator. If a taxpayer has not submitted such a form, the Tax
Administrator may accept other evidence, as the Tax Administrator considers
appropriate, that a person is the authorized representative of a taxpayer.
      (2)   A taxpayer may refuse to answer any questions asked by the person
conducting an audit until the taxpayer has an opportunity to consult with the
taxpayer’s attorney, accountant, bookkeeper or other tax practitioner. This
division (C) does not authorize the practice of law by a person who is not an
attorney.
   (D)   A taxpayer may record, electronically or otherwise, the audit
examination.
   (E)   The failure of the Tax Administrator to comply with a provision of
this section shall neither excuse a taxpayer from payment of any taxes owed by
the taxpayer nor cure any procedural defect in a taxpayer’s case.
   (F)   If the Tax Administrator fails to substantially comply with the
provisions of this section, the Tax Administrator, upon application by the
taxpayer, shall excuse the taxpayer from penalties and interest arising from
the audit.
(Prior Code, § 880.11) (Ord. 182-2015, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 880.12 ROUNDING.
   A person may round to the nearest whole dollar all amounts the person is
required to enter on any return, report, voucher or other document required
under this chapter. Any fractional part of a dollar that equals or exceeds
$0.50) shall be rounded to the next whole dollar, and any fractional part of a
dollar that is less than $0.50 shall be dropped, rounding down to the nearest
whole dollar. If a person chooses to round amounts entered on a document, the
person shall round all amounts entered on the document.
(Prior Code, § 880.12) (Ord. 182-2015, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 880.13 AUTHORITY AND POWERS OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Authority of Tax Administrator; administrative powers of the Tax
Administrator. The Tax Administrator has the authority to perform all duties
and functions necessary and appropriate to implement the provisions of this
chapter, including without limitation:
      (1)   Exercise all powers whatsoever of an inquisitorial nature as
provided by law, including, the right to inspect books, accounts, records,
memorandums and federal and state income tax returns, to examine persons under
oath, to issue orders or subpoenas for the production of books, accounts,
papers, records, documents and testimony, to take depositions, to apply to a
court for attachment proceedings as for contempt, to approve vouchers for the
fees of officers and witnesses, and to administer oaths; provided that, the
powers referred to in this division (A)(1) shall be exercised by the Tax
Administrator only in connection with the performance of the duties
respectively assigned to the Tax Administrator under a municipal corporation
income tax ordinance or resolution adopted in accordance with this chapter;
      (2)   Appoint agents and prescribe their powers and duties;
      (3)   Confer and meet with officers of other municipal corporations and
states and officers of the United States on any matters pertaining to their
respective official duties as provided by law;
      (4)   Exercise the authority provided by law, including orders from
bankruptcy courts, relative to remitting or refunding taxes, including
penalties and interest thereon, illegally or erroneously imposed or collected,
or for any other reason overpaid, and, in addition, the Tax Administrator may
investigate any claim of overpayment and make a written statement of the Tax
Administrator’s findings, and, if the Tax Administrator finds that there has
been an overpayment, approve and issue a refund payable to the taxpayer, the
taxpayer’s assigns or legal representative as provided in this chapter;
      (5)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to consenting to
the compromise and settlement of tax claims;
      (6)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to the use of
alternative apportionment methods by taxpayers in accordance with §
880.06(B) of this chapter;
      (7)   Make all tax findings, determinations, computations, assessments
and orders the Tax Administrator is by law authorized and required to make and,
pursuant to time limitations provided by law, on the Tax Administrator’s own
motion, review, re-determine or correct any tax findings, determinations,
computations, assessments or orders the Tax Administrator has made, but the Tax
Administrator shall not review, re-determine or correct any tax finding,
determination, computation, assessment or order which the Tax Administrator has
made for which an appeal has been filed with the Local Board of Tax Review or
other appropriate tribunal, unless such appeal or application is withdrawn by
the appellant or applicant, is dismissed or is otherwise final;
      (8)   Destroy any or all returns or other tax documents in the manner
authorized by law; and
      (9)   Enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to simplify the withholding
obligations described in §
880.05(A) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 880.131)
   (B)   Authority of Tax Administrator; compromise of claim and payment over
time.
      (1)   As used in this division (B), CLAIM means a claim for an amount
payable to the municipality that arises pursuant to the municipal income tax
imposed in accordance with this chapter.
      (2)   The Tax Administrator may do either of the following if such action
is in the best interests of the municipality:
         (a)   Compromise a claim; and
         (b)   Extend for a reasonable period the time for payment of a claim
by agreeing to accept monthly or other periodic payments, upon such terms and
conditions as the Tax Administrator may require.
      (3)   The Tax Administrator’s rejection of a compromise or payment-over-
time agreement proposed by a person with respect to a claim shall not be
appealable.
      (4)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be binding upon and shall inure to the benefit of only the parties to the
compromise or agreement, and shall not extinguish or otherwise affect the
liability of any other person.
      (5)   (a)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a
claim shall be void if the taxpayer defaults under the compromise or agreement
or if the compromise or agreement was obtained by fraud or by misrepresentation
of a material fact. Any amount that was due before the compromise or agreement
and that is unpaid shall remain due, and any penalties or interest that would
have accrued in the absence of the compromise or agreement shall continue to
accrue and be due.
         (b)   The Tax Administrator shall have sole discretion to determine
whether or not penalty, interest, charges or applicable fees will be assessed
through the duration of any compromise or payment-over- time agreement.
      (6)   The Tax Administrator may require that the taxpayer provide
detailed financial documentation and information, in order to determine whether
or not a payment-over-time agreement will be authorized. The taxpayer’s failure
to provide the necessary and required information by the Tax Administrator
shall preclude consideration of a payment-over-time agreement.
(Prior Code, § 880.132)
   (C)   Authority of Tax Administrator; right to examine.
      (1)   The Tax Administrator, or any authorized agent or employee thereof
may examine the books, papers, records and federal and state income tax returns
of any employer, taxpayer or other person that is subject to, or that the Tax
Administrator believes is subject to, the provisions of this chapter for the
purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if no return was
filed, to ascertain the tax due under this chapter. Upon written request by the
Tax Administrator or a duly authorized agent or employee thereof, every
employer, taxpayer or other person subject to this section is required to
furnish the opportunity for the Tax Administrator, authorized agent or employee
to investigate and examine such books, papers, records and federal and state
income tax returns at a reasonable time and place designated in the request.
      (2)   The records and other documents of any taxpayer, employer or other
person that is subject to, or that a Tax Administrator believes is subject to,
the provisions of this chapter shall be open to the Tax Administrator’s
inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a period of six
years following the end of the taxable year to which the records or documents
relate, unless the Tax Administrator, in writing, consents to their destruction
within that period, or by order requires that they be kept longer. The Tax
Administrator of a municipal corporation may require any person, by notice
served on that person, to keep such records as the Tax Administrator determines
necessary to show whether or not that person is liable, and the extent of such
liability, for the income tax levied by the municipality or for the withholding
of such tax.
      (3)   The Tax Administrator may examine under oath any person that the
Tax Administrator reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that
was or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to
affect such income. The Tax Administrator may, for this purpose, compel any
such person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books,
papers, records and federal and state income tax returns in such person’s
possession or control. The person may be assisted or represented by an
attorney, accountant, bookkeeper or other tax practitioner at any such hearing
or examination. This division (C)(3) does not authorize the practice of law by
a person who is not an attorney.
      (4)   No person issued written notice by the Tax Administrator compelling
attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers,
records or federal and state income tax returns under this division (C) shall
fail to comply.
(Prior Code, § 880.133)
   (D)   Authority of Tax Administrator; requiring identifying information.
      (1)   The Tax Administrator may require any person filing a tax document
with the Tax Administrator to provide identifying information, which may
include the person’s Social Security number, federal employer identification
number or other identification number requested by the Tax Administrator. A
person required by the Tax Administrator to provide identifying information
that has experienced any change with respect to that information shall notify
the Tax Administrator of the change before, or upon, filing the next tax
document requiring the identifying information.
      (2)   (a)   If the Tax Administrator makes a request for identifying
information and the Tax Administrator does not receive valid identifying
information within 30 days of making the request, nothing in this chapter
prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty upon the person to whom
the request was directed pursuant to §
880.10 of this chapter, in addition to any applicable penalty described in §
880.99 of this chapter.
         (b)   If a person required by the Tax Administrator to provide
identifying information does not notify the Tax Administrator of a change with
respect to that information as required under division (D)(1) above within 30
days after filing the next tax document requiring such identifying information,
nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty
pursuant to §
880.10 of this chapter.
         (c)   The penalties provided for under divisions (D)(2)(a) and (D)(2)
(b) above may be billed and imposed in the same manner as the tax or fee with
respect to which the identifying information is sought and are in addition to
any applicable criminal penalties described in §
880.99 of this chapter for a violation of §
880.15 of this chapter, and any other penalties that may be imposed by the Tax
Administrator by law.
(Prior Code, § 880.134)
(Ord. 182-2015, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 880.14 CONFIDENTIALITY.
   (A)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings or verifications required or authorized by Ohio R.C. Ch. 718 or by the
charter or ordinance of the municipality is confidential, and no person shall
access or disclose such information except in accordance with a proper judicial
order or in connection with the performance of that person’s official duties or
the official business of the municipality as authorized by Ohio R.C. Ch. 718 or
the charter or ordinance authorizing the levy. The Tax Administrator of the
municipality or a designee thereof may furnish copies of returns filed or
otherwise received under this chapter and other related tax information to the
Internal Revenue Service, the State Tax Commissioner and Tax Administrators of
other municipal corporations.
   (B)   This section does not prohibit the municipality from publishing or
disclosing statistics in a form that does not disclose information with respect
to particular taxpayers.
(Prior Code, § 880.14) (Ord. 182-2015, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 880.15 FRAUD.
   No person shall knowingly make, present, aid or assist in the preparation or
presentation of a false or fraudulent report, return, schedule, statement,
claim or document authorized or required by municipal corporation ordinance or
state law to be filed with the Tax Administrator, or knowingly procure, counsel
or advise the preparation or presentation of such report, return, schedule,
statement, claim or document, or knowingly change, alter or amend, or knowingly
procure, counsel or advise such change, alteration or amendment of the records
upon which such report, return, schedule, statement, claim or document is based
with intent to defraud the municipality or the Tax Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 880.15) (Ord. 182-2015, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 880.16 OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   An OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR means an opinion issued under this
section with respect to prospective Municipal income tax liability. It does not
include ordinary correspondence of the Tax Administrator.
   (B)   A taxpayer may submit a written request for an opinion of the Tax
Administrator as to whether or how certain income, source of income or a
certain activity or transaction will be taxed. The written response of the Tax
Administrator shall be an opinion of the Tax Administrator and shall bind the
Tax Administrator, in accordance with divisions (C), (G) and (H) below;
provided, all of the following conditions are satisfied:
      (1)   The taxpayer’s request fully and accurately describes the specific
facts or circumstances relevant to a determination of the taxability of the
income, source of income, activity or transaction and, if an activity or
transaction, all parties involved in the activity or transaction are clearly
identified by name, location or other pertinent facts;
      (2)   The request relates to a tax imposed by the municipality in
accordance with this chapter; and
      (3)   The Tax Administrator’s response is signed by the Tax Administrator
and designated as an opinion of the Tax Administrator.
   (C)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator shall remain in effect and shall
protect the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and who reasonably
relies on it from liability for any taxes, penalty, or interest otherwise
chargeable on the activity or transaction specifically held by the Tax
Administrator’s opinion to be taxable in a particular manner or not to be
subject to taxation for any taxable years that may be specified in the opinion
or until the earliest of the following dates:
      (1)   The effective date of a written revocation by the Tax Administrator
sent to the taxpayer by certified mail, return receipt requested. The effective
date of the revocation shall be the taxpayer’s date of receipt or one year
after the issuance of the opinion, whichever is later;
      (2)   The effective date of any amendment or enactment of a relevant
section of the Ohio Revised Code, uncodified State law, or the municipality’s
income tax ordinance that would substantially change the analysis and
conclusion of the opinion of the Tax Administrator;
      (3)   The date on which a court issues an opinion establishing or
changing relevant case law with respect to the Ohio Revised Code, uncodified
state law or the municipality’s income tax ordinance;
      (4)   If the opinion of the Tax Administrator was based on the
interpretation of federal law, the effective date of any change in the relevant
federal statutes or regulations, or the date on which a court issues an opinion
establishing or changing relevant case law with respect to federal statutes or
regulations;
      (5)   The effective date of any change in the taxpayer’s material facts
or circumstances; and
      (6)   The effective date of the expiration of the opinion, if specified
in the opinion.
   (D)   (1)   A taxpayer is not relieved of tax liability for any activity or
transaction related to a request for an opinion that contained any
misrepresentation or omission of one or more material facts.
      (2)   If the taxpayer knowingly has misrepresented the pertinent facts or
omitted material facts with intent to defraud the municipality in order to
obtain a more favorable opinion, the taxpayer may be in violation of §
880.15 of this chapter.
   (E)   If a Tax Administrator provides written advice under this section, the
opinion shall include a statement that:
      (1)   The tax consequences stated in the opinion may be subject to change
for any of the reasons stated in division (C) above; and
      (2)   It is the duty of the taxpayer to be aware of such changes.
   (F)   A Tax Administrator may refuse to offer an opinion on any request
received under this section.
   (G)   This section binds a Tax Administrator only with respect to opinions
of the Tax Administrator issued on or after 1-1-2016.
   (H)   An opinion of a Tax Administrator binds that Tax Administrator only
with respect to the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and does not
bind the Tax Administrator of any other municipal corporation.
   (I)   A Tax Administrator shall make available the text of all opinions
issued under this section, except those opinions prepared for a taxpayer who
has requested that the text of the opinion remain confidential. In no event
shall the text of an opinion be made available until the Tax Administrator has
removed all information that identifies the taxpayer and any other parties
involved in the activity or transaction.
   (J)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator issued under this section or a
refusal to offer an opinion under division (F) above may not be appealed.
(Prior Code, § 880.16) (Ord. 182-2015, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 880.17 ASSESSMENT; APPEAL BASED ON PRESUMPTION OF DELIVERY.
   (A)   (1)   The Tax Administrator shall serve an assessment either by
personal service, by certified mail or by a delivery service authorized under
Ohio R.C. 5703.056.
      (2)   The Tax Administrator may deliver the assessment through
alternative means as provided in this section, including, but not limited to,
delivery by secure electronic mail. Such alternative delivery method must be
authorized by the person subject to the assessment.
      (3)   Once service of the assessment has been made by the Tax
Administrator or other municipal official, or the designee of either, the
person to whom the assessment is directed may protest the ruling of that
assessment by filing an appeal with the Local Board of Tax Review within 60
days after the receipt of service. The delivery of an assessment of the Tax
Administrator as prescribed in Ohio R.C. 718.18 is prima facie evidence that
delivery is complete and that the assessment is served.
   (B)   (1)   A person may challenge the presumption of delivery and service
as set forth in this division (B). A person disputing the presumption of
delivery and service under this section bears the burden of proving by a
preponderance of the evidence that the address to which the assessment was sent
was not an address with which the person was associated at the time the Tax
Administrator originally mailed the assessment by certified mail. For the
purposes of this section, a person is associated with an address at the time
the Tax Administrator originally mailed the assessment if, at that time, the
person was residing, receiving legal documents or conducting business at the
address; or if, before that time, the person had conducted business at the
address and, when the assessment was mailed, the person’s agent or the person’s
affiliate was conducting business at the address. For the purposes of this
section, a person’s affiliate is any other person that, at the time the
assessment was mailed, owned or controlled at least 20%, as determined by
voting rights, of the addressee’s business.
      (2)   If a person elects to appeal an assessment on the basis described
in division (B)(1) above, and if that assessment is subject to collection and
is not otherwise appealable, the person must do so within 60 days after the
initial contact by the Tax Administrator or other municipal official, or the
designee of either, with the person. Nothing in this division (B)(2) prevents
the Tax Administrator or other official from entering into a compromise with
the person if the person does not actually file such an appeal with the Local
Board of Tax Review.
(Prior Code, § 880.17) (Ord. 182-2015, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 880.18 LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW; APPEAL TO LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW.
   (A)   (1)   The legislative authority of the municipality shall maintain a
Local Board of Tax Review to hear appeals as provided in Ohio R.C. Ch. 718.
      (2)   The Local Board of Tax Review shall consist of three members. The
three members of the Local Board of Tax Review may be domiciled in the
municipality, but the appointing authority may consider membership from
individuals who are not domiciled within the municipality. Two members shall be
appointed by the legislative authority of the municipality, and may not be
employees, elected officials or contractors with the municipality at any time
during their term or in the five years immediately preceding the date of
appointment. One member shall be appointed by the top administrative official
of the municipality. This member may be an employee of the municipality, but
may not be the Director of Finance or equivalent officer, or the Tax
Administrator or other similar official or an employee directly involved in
municipal tax matters, or any direct subordinate thereof.
      (3)   The term for members of the Local Board of Tax Review appointed by
the legislative authority of the municipality shall be two years. There is no
limit on the number of terms that a member may serve should the member be
reappointed by the legislative authority. The Board member appointed by the top
administrative official of the municipality shall serve at the discretion of
the administrative official.
      (4)   Members of the Board of Tax Review appointed by the legislative
authority may be removed by the legislative authority as set forth in Ohio R.C.
718.11(A)(4).
      (5)   A member of the Board who, for any reason, ceases to meet the
qualifications for the position prescribed by this section shall resign
immediately by operation of law.
      (6)   A vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled in the same manner
as the original appointment within 60 days of when the vacancy was created. Any
member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the
term for which the member’s predecessor was appointed shall hold office for the
remainder of such term. No vacancy on the Board shall impair the power and
authority of the remaining members to exercise all the powers of the Board.
      (7)   If a member is temporarily unable to serve on the Board due to a
conflict of interest, illness, absence or similar reason, the legislative
authority or top administrative official that appointed the member shall
appoint another individual to temporarily serve on the Board in the member’s
place. This appointment shall be subject to the same requirements and
limitations as are applicable to the appointment of the member temporarily
unable to serve.
      (8)   No member of the Local Board of Tax Review shall receive
compensation, fee or reimbursement of expenses for service on the Board.
      (9)   A member of a Local Board of Tax Review shall not be appointed to
or serve on another such Board simultaneously.
   (B)   Whenever a Tax Administrator issues an assessment, the Tax
Administrator shall notify the taxpayer in writing at the same time of the
taxpayer’s right to appeal the assessment, the manner in which the taxpayer may
appeal the assessment and the address to which the appeal should be directed
and to whom the appeal should be directed.
   (C)   Any person who has been issued an assessment may appeal the assessment
to the Board by filing a request with the Board. The request shall be in
writing, shall specify the reason or reasons why the assessment should be
deemed incorrect or unlawful, and shall be filed within 60 days after the
taxpayer receives the assessment.
   (D)   The Local Board of Tax Review shall schedule a hearing to be held
within 60 days after receiving an appeal of an assessment under division (C)
above, unless the taxpayer requests additional time to prepare or waives a
hearing. If the taxpayer does not waive the hearing, the taxpayer may appear
before the Board and/or may be represented by an attorney at law, certified
public accountant or other representative. The Board may allow a hearing to be
continued as jointly agreed to by the parties. In such a case, the hearing must
be completed within 120 days after the first day of the hearing unless the
parties agree otherwise.
   (E)   The Board may affirm, reverse or modify the Tax Administrator’s
assessment or any part of that assessment. The Board shall issue a final
determination on the appeal within 90 days after the Board’s final hearing on
the appeal, and send a copy of its final determination by ordinary mail to all
of the parties to the appeal within 15 days after issuing the final
determination. The taxpayer or the Tax Administrator may appeal the Board’s
final determination as provided in Ohio R.C. 5717.011.
   (F)   The Local Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this section shall
adopt rules governing its procedures, including a schedule of related costs,
and shall keep a record of its transactions. The rules governing the Local
Board of Tax Review procedures shall be in writing, and may be amended as
needed by the Local Board of Tax Review. Such records are not public records
available for inspection under Ohio R.C. 149.43. For this reason, any
documentation, copies of returns or reports, final determinations, or working
papers for each case must be maintained in a secure location under the control
of the Tax Administrator. No member of the Local Board of Tax Review may remove
such documentation, copies of returns or reports, final determinations or
working papers from the hearing. Hearings requested by a taxpayer before a
Local Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this section are not meetings of
a public body subject to Ohio R.C. 121.22. For this reason, such hearings shall
not be open to the public, and only those parties to the case may be present
during the hearing.
(Prior Code, § 880.18) (Ord. 182-2015, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 880.19 ACTIONS TO RECOVER; STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   (a)   Civil actions to recover municipal income taxes and
penalties and interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought within the
latter of:
            1.   Three years after the tax was due or the return was filed,
whichever is later; or
            2.   One year after the conclusion of the qualifying deferral
period, if any.
         (b)   The time limit described in division (A)(1)(a) above may be
extended at any time if both the Tax Administrator and the employer, agent of
the employer, other payer or taxpayer consent in writing to the extension. Any
extension shall also extend for the same period of time the time limit
described in division (C) below.
      (2)   As used in this section, QUALIFYING DEFERRAL PERIOD means a period
of time beginning and ending as follows:
         (a)   Beginning on the date a person who is aggrieved by an assessment
files with a Local Board of Tax Review the request described in §
880.18 of this chapter. That date shall not be affected by any subsequent
decision, finding or holding by any administrative body or court that the Local
Board of Tax Review with which the aggrieved person filed the request did not
have jurisdiction to affirm, reverse or modify the assessment or any part of
that assessment.
         (b)   Ending the later of the sixtieth day after the date on which the
final determination of the Local Board of Tax Review becomes final or, if any
party appeals from the determination of the Local Board of Tax Review, the
sixtieth day after the date on which the final determination of the Local Board
of Tax Review is either ultimately affirmed in whole or in part or ultimately
reversed and no further appeal of either that affirmation, in whole or in part,
or that reversal is available or taken.
   (B)   Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under a resolution or
ordinance imposing an income tax shall be commenced within three years after
the commission of the offense; provided that, in the case of fraud, failure to
file a return or the omission of 25% or more of income required to be reported,
prosecutions may be commenced within six years after the commission of the
offense.
   (C)   A claim for a refund of municipal income taxes shall be brought within
the time limitation provided in §
880.09(F) of this chapter.
   (D)   (1)   Notwithstanding the fact that an appeal is pending, the
petitioner may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject of
the appeal. The acceptance of a payment by the municipality does not prejudice
any claim for refund upon final determination of the appeal.
      (2)   If upon final determination of the appeal an error in the
assessment is corrected by the Tax Administrator, upon an appeal so filed or
pursuant to a final determination of the Local Board of Tax Review created
under §
880.18 of this chapter, of the Ohio Board of Tax Appeals, or any court to which
the decision of the Ohio Board of Tax Appeals has been appealed, so that the
amount due from the party assessed under the corrected assessment is less than
the amount paid, there shall be issued to the appellant or to the appellant’s
assigns or legal representative a refund in the amount of the overpayment as
provided by §
880.09(F) of this chapter, with interest on that amount as provided by this
division (D).
   (E)   No civil action to recover municipal income tax or related penalties
or interest shall be brought during either of the following time periods:
      (1)   The period during which a taxpayer has a right to appeal the
imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties; and
      (2)   The period during which an appeal related to the imposition of that
tax or interest or those penalties is pending.
(Prior Code, § 880.19) (Ord. 182-2015, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 880.20 ADOPTION OF RULES.
   (A)   (1)   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 718.30, the municipality, pursuant to this
chapter, grants authority to the Tax Administrator, to adopt rules to
administer the income tax imposed by the municipality.
      (2)   All rules adopted under this section shall be published and posted
on the internet.
(Prior Code, § 880.20)
   (B)   Contractors must have tax ID. At the time a contractor or
subcontractor applies for a building permit, he or she must obtain and supply a
municipal tax identification number to the Building Department.
(Prior Code, § 880.201)
   (C)   New municipal utility service registration. At the time a deed holder
signs for municipality utility service in the municipality, he or she shall be
required to complete a form giving all information necessary to determine the
income tax status for all persons living or working at that address.
(Prior Code, § 880.202)
(Ord. 182-2015, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 880.21 ELECTION TO BE SUBJECT TO R.C. 718.80 TO 718.95.
   (A)   The municipality hereby adopts and incorporates herein by reference
Ohio R.C. 718.80 to 718.95 for tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2018.
   (B)   A taxpayer, as defined in division (C) of this section, may elect to
be subject to Ohio R.C. 718.80 to 718.95 in lieu of the provisions of this
chapter.
   (C)   “Taxpayer” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 718.01, except that
“taxpayer” does not include natural persons or entities subject to the tax
imposed under Ohio R.C. Chapter 5745. “Taxpayer” may include receivers,
assignees, or trustees in bankruptcy when such persons are required to assume
the role of a taxpayer.
(Ord. 147-2023, passed 11-13-2023)
§ 880.22 COLLECTION AFTER TERMINATION OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   This chapter shall continue in full force and effect insofar as the
levy of taxes is concerned until repealed, and insofar as the collection of
taxes levied hereunder and actions and proceedings for collecting any tax so
levied or enforcing any provisions of this chapter are concerned, it shall
continue in full force and effect until all of the taxes levied in the
aforesaid period are fully paid and any and all suits and prosecutions for the
collection of taxes or for the punishment of violations of this chapter have
been fully terminated, subject to the limitations contained in §
880.19 of this chapter.
   (B)   Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective year of
this chapter shall be due on the date provided in §
880.09(A) of this chapter as though the same were continuing.
(Prior Code, § 880.97) (Ord. 182-2015, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 880.23 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter, or any tax imposed
against, or exemption from tax granted to, any taxpayer or forms of income
specified herein is found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such
unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall affect only such clause,
sentence, section or part of this chapter so found and shall not affect or
impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or other
parts of this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the
legislative authority of the municipality that this chapter would have been
adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section
or part thereof not been included in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 880.98) (Ord. 182-2015, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 880.99 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, whoever violates §§
880.05(A),
880.14(A) or
880.15 of this chapter by failing to remit municipal income taxes deducted and
withheld from an employee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree
and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a
term of up to six months, or both. In addition, the violation is punishable by
dismissal from office or discharge from employment, or both.
   (B)   Any person who discloses information received from the Internal
Revenue Service in violation of I.R.C. §§ 7213(a), 7213A, or 7431 shall be
guilty of a felony of the fifth degree and shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $5,000, plus the costs of prosecution, or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding five years, or both. In addition, the violation is punishable by
dismissal from office or discharge from employment, or both.
   (C)   Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of §
880.14(A) of this chapter constitutes a separate offense.
   (D)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which violation no
penalty is otherwise provided is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree on
a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense,
the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree; on each subsequent
offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. By way of an illustrative enumeration,
violations of this chapter shall include but not be limited to the following
acts, conduct and/or omissions:
      (1)   Fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or declaration required
by this chapter;
      (2)   Knowingly make any incomplete return;
      (3)   Willfully fail, neglect, or refuse to pay the tax, penalties and
interest, or any combination thereof, imposed by this chapter;
      (4)   Cause to not be remitted the municipal income tax withheld from
qualifying wages of employees to the municipality as required by §
880.05(A) of this chapter;
      (5)   Neglect or refuse to withhold or remit municipal income tax from
employees;
      (6)   Refuse to permit the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized agent
or employee to examine his or her books, records, papers, federal and state
income tax returns, or any documentation relating to the income or net profits
of a taxpayer;
      (7)   Fail to appear before the Tax Administrator and to produce his or
her books, records, papers, federal and state income tax returns, or any
documentation relating to the income or net profits of a taxpayer upon order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator;
      (8)   Refuse to disclose to the Tax Administrator any information with
respect to such person’s income or net profits, or in the case of a person
responsible for maintaining information relating to his or her employers’
income or net profits, such person’s employer’s income or net profits;
      (9)   Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator;
      (10)   To avoid imposition or collection of municipal income tax,
willfully give to an employer or prospective employer false information as to
his or her true name, correct Social Security number and residence address or
willfully fail to promptly notify an employer or a prospective employer of any
change in residence address and date thereof;
      (11)   Fail, as an employer, agent of an employer or other payer, to
maintain proper records of employees residence addresses, total qualifying
wages paid and municipal tax withheld, or to knowingly give the Tax
Administrator false information;
      (12)   Willfully fail, neglect or refuse to make any payment of estimated
municipal income tax for any taxable year or any part of any taxable year in
accordance with this chapter;
      (13)   Attempt to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment of the
whole or any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this chapter;
      (14)   For purposes of this section, any violation that does not specify
a culpable mental state or intent shall be one of strict liability and no
culpable mental state or intent shall be required for a person to be guilty of
that violation; and
      (15)   For purposes of this section, the term PERSON shall, in addition
to the meaning prescribed in §
880.03 of this chapter, include in the case of a corporation, association,
pass-through entity or unincorporated business entity not having any resident
owner or officer within the municipality, any employee or agent of such
corporation, association, pass-through entity or unincorporated business entity
who has control or supervision over or is charged with the responsibility of
filing the municipal income tax returns and making the payments of the
municipal income tax as required by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 880.99) (Ord. 182-2015, passed 11-23-2015)
CHAPTER 884: MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSE TAX
Section
884.01   License tax levied.
884.02   Tax rate.
884.03   Definition.
884.04   Effective date of tax imposition.
884.05   Payment of tax.
884.06   Use of moneys.
§ 884.01 LICENSE TAX LEVIED.
   There is hereby levied an annual license tax upon the operation of motor
vehicles on the public roads or highways pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4504.172, for
the purposes of paying the costs and expenses of enforcing and administering
the tax provided for in this chapter and to provide additional revenue for the
purposes set forth in Ohio R.C. 4504.06 and to supplement revenue already
available for such purposes.
(Prior Code, § 881.01) (Ord. 195-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 884.02 TAX RATE.
   The tax shall be at the rate of $5 per motor vehicle on each and every motor
vehicle the district of registration of which, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4503.10,
is the City of Barberton, Ohio.
(Prior Code, § 881.02) (Ord. 195-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 884.03 DEFINITION.
   As used in this chapter, the term MOTOR VEHICLE means any and all vehicles
included within the definition of motor vehicles in Ohio R.C. 4501.01 and
4505.01.
(Prior Code, § 881.03) (Ord. 195-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 884.04 EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX IMPOSITION.
   The tax imposed by this chapter shall apply to and be in effect for the
registration year commencing 1-1-2016 and shall continue to effect and
application during each registration year thereafter.
(Prior Code, § 881.04) (Ord. 195-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 884.05 PAYMENT OF TAX.
   The tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid to the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles of the state or to a Deputy Registrar at the time application for
registration of a motor vehicle is made as provided in Ohio R.C. 4503.10.
(Prior Code, § 881.05) (Ord. 195-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 884.06 USE OF MONEYS.
   All moneys derived from the tax hereinbefore levied shall be used by the
city for the purposes specified in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 881.06) (Ord. 195-2015, passed 12-21-2015)
PART TEN: STREETS, UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICES CODE
   Chapter
TITLE TWO: STREET AND SIDEWALK AREAS
      
1020.   Excavations
      
1024.   Street Classifications and Pavement
      
1028.   Sidewalks
      
1032.   Number of Buildings
TITLE FOUR: UTILITIES
      
1040.   Sewers
      
1044.   Water
      
1048.   Gas
      
1052.   Electricity
      
1054.   Industrial Waste Discharges
      
1056.   Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination Program
      
1058.   General Lighting Utility
TITLE SIX: OTHER PUBLIC SERVICES
      
1060.   Refuse Collection and Disposal
      
1062.   Alarm Systems
      
1064.   Metro Regional Transit Authority
      
1068.   Parks and Recreation Areas
      
1072.   Barberton Reservoir; Wolf Creek
      
1074.   Management, Administration and Control of the Use of the City’s Public
Rights-of-Way
TITLE TWO: STREET AND SIDEWALK AREAS
CHAPTER 1020: EXCAVATIONS
Section
1020.01   Permit required; fee; liability insurance; exemption.
1020.02   Cash deposit required.
1020.03   Responsibility of parties; street classifications.
1020.04   Inspection charges.
1020.05   Contracts with city.
1020.06   Prerequisites to issuance of permits.
1020.07   Notification of work; street closings.
1020.08   General procedure.
1020.09   Trenching, tunneling and backfilling.
1020.10   Temporary and permanent restorations.
1020.11   Restoration of unpaved areas.
1020.12   Restoration of paved areas.
1020.13   Material to be deposited so as not to inconvenience public.
1020.14   Restoration of surface; costs.
1020.15   Guarding excavations; signal lights.
1020.16   Transportation of materials over streets; deposit required.
1020.17   Traffic control.
1020.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Barricades and warning lights, see GEN. OFF.
668.08 
   Contracts and franchises, see CHTR. §§ 9.01, 10.02
   Dangerous, abandoned excavations, see GEN. OFF.
660.16 
   Digging, excavating and piling earth on streets, see Ohio R.C. 5589.10
   Excavation liability, see Ohio R.C. 723.49 et seq.
   Openings by the municipality, see Ohio R.C. 723.02
   Pavement requirements for various street classifications, see S.U. & P.S.
1024.01
   Power to establish and care for streets, see Ohio R.C. 715.19, 717.01,
723.01
   Protecting streets and sidewalks, see GEN. OFF.
668.03 et seq.
   Protection of trees, lawns and vegetation, see GEN. OFF.
642.06 
   Surface treatment, see Ohio R.C. 723.23, 723.31
§ 1020.01 PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE; LIABILITY INSURANCE; EXEMPTION.
   (A)   No person, other than a duly authorized officer or employee of the
city, shall make an excavation or boring in any street, alley, sidewalk or
public ground for any purpose whatever unless he or she has obtained a permit
in writing therefor from the City Engineer and unless he or she has paid a
uniform fee of $50 for each and every such permit issued. A paid appropriate
performance deposit in the amounts of $70/square foot (minimum of $2,000) for
asphalt roads and $100/square foot (minimum of $21,500) for concrete roads and
main roads is required for each opening. Sidewalk deposit shall be $10/square
foot (minimum of $1,000). If unpaved roadway, deposit to be $1,000.
   (B)   No person shall make an excavation or boring in any street, alley,
sidewalk or public ground for any purpose whatever until such person has filed
with the Director of Public Service a public liability policy, indemnifying the
city and its officials, in the sum of $300,000 for the injury or death of any
person and $100,000 for property damage. The only exemption will be homeowners
doing their own sidewalk and/or driveway apron installation and/or repairs.
Homeowners must sign a disclaimer acknowledging responsibility for damages to
all public and private utilities.
(Prior Code, § 1020.01) (Ord. 144-1998, passed 7-27-1998; Ord. 144-2015, passed
10-12-2015)
§ 1020.02 CASH DEPOSIT REQUIRED.
    Any person to whom a permit is granted, under §
1020.01 of this chapter, shall furnish a cash deposit in the amount of $70/
square foot (minimum of $2,000) for asphalt roads and $100/square foot (minimum
of $2,500) for concrete roads and main roads is required for each opening.
Sidewalk deposit shall be $10/square foot (minimum of $1,000). If unpaved,
deposit to be $1,000 to cover the cost of filling such excavation and of
restoring to its former condition such street, alley, sidewalk or public ground
where the same has been excavated, and for the payment of all expenses, if any,
incurred by the city in replacing or supplying the material disturbed or
removed by such excavation.
(Prior Code, § 1020.02) (Ord. 38-1955, passed 4-4-1955; Ord. 144-2015, passed
10-12-2015)
§ 1020.03 RESPONSIBILITY OF PARTIES; STREET CLASSIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Street opening permits shall not be issued to a property owner unless
such property owner is utilizing his or her own labor and equipment in making
the street opening. If a contractor is to perform the work, it will be the
responsibility of the contractor to obtain the necessary permit.
   (B)   Streets are divided into two classes only, as follows.
      (1)   Improved streets. This class includes all streets having a brick,
concrete, asphalt, macadam or stabilized surface, as well as those streets
which have received a seal coat or temporary surfacing.
      (2)   Unimproved streets. This class includes all streets having a dirt,
cinder or gravel surface, even though such streets may have received
applications of oil or calcium chloride for control of dust. Utility companies,
contractors or individuals shall be charged a flat charge for such permits,
based on the area of the opening to be made and the type of street surface.
   (C)   A flat charge shall apply to all street openings having an area of one
to five square yards. Openings having an area of less than one square yard
shall be considered as being one square yard and shall be charged accordingly.
Openings having an area in excess of five square yards shall be handled by
mutual agreement between the utility, contractor or individual and the Director
of Public Service, the City Engineer and the Superintendent of Streets. A
permit charge of $50 shall be made for all applications for street openings as
provided in §
1020.01 of this chapter.
   (D)   All charges required to be deposited, pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter, shall be deposited with the City Treasurer.
   (E)   Utility companies holding a franchise with the city are exempt from
paying the $50 permit charge. They shall, however, pay the restoration costs as
specified above.
(Prior Code, § 1020.03) (Ord. 89-1992, passed 6-8-1992; Ord. 144-2015, passed
10-12-2015)
§ 1020.04 INSPECTION CHARGES.
   (A)   The Division of Engineering shall make an inspection charge in the
case of restoration work done by a utility, contractor or individual, but no
inspection charge shall be made on restoration work done by the city.
   (B)   On openings of such size that an inspector is required to be present
continually, the permittee shall be charged as determined by the Director of
Public Service.
(Prior Code, § 1020.04) (Ord. 38-1955, passed 4-4-1955; Ord. 231-1974, passed
7-1-1974)
§ 1020.05 CONTRACTS WITH CITY.
   Contracts under the supervision of any city department which involve an
opening in a street must contain as a part of their contract specifications a
reference to this chapter, and such departments shall require their contractors
to secure a permit and perform all work in connection with such an opening in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1020.05) (Ord. 38-1955, passed 4-4-1955)
§ 1020.06 PREREQUISITES TO ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Street opening applications must be completed and turned into the
Engineering Department along with payment of the permit fee and deposit a
minimum of 48 hours prior to construction starting unless work is being done on
an emergency basis and verified by the Engineering Department. Failure to
follow any of these rules will result in forfeiture of permit and remedy of
conditions by the city at the applicants expense and will result in contractor
losing ability to be considered a registered contractor in good standing. The
city reserves the right to mandate a preconstruction meeting prior to issuing a
permit.
   (B)   Permits shall be issued only for openings to be made within ten days
from the date of issue. The period of time allowed for closing the opening
shall be no more than five days. Additional time may be granted by the Service
Director or his or her designated appointee pending unforeseen circumstances or
weather conditions. All applications shall be accompanied by a plan and typical
cross section, which shall show, as nearly as possible from records available,
the location of the existing underground structures and the location of the
proposed structure. A permit shall be issued when one of the following
provisions is involved:
      (1)   The applicant has made application, paid permit fee and paid a cash
deposit as outlined in §
1020.02 of this chapter;
      (2)   The applicant is a contractor for the city on a contract involving
the opening of streets, in which case he may obtain a permit without a cash
deposit. However, the restoration work, if done by such contractor, must be
approved by the Director of Public Service and all inspection charges must be
paid before such contractor receives his or her final estimate. If the
restoration work is done by the city, all such charges against the contractor
must be paid before he or she receives his or her final estimate;
      (3)   The applicant is a city, county or state department or division
whose functions require the installation and maintenance of underground
structures; or
      (4)   The applicant is a corporation whose franchise authorizes it to
make its own restoration. Such permits will be issued only when the restoration
work keeps fully apace with the openings being made. Such corporation must pay
promptly all bills for inspection by the city and all bills for restoration if
it desires to avail itself of the facilities of the city for restoring
pavements.
(Prior Code, § 1020.06) (Ord. 38-1955, passed 4-4-1955; Ord. 231-1974, passed
7-1-1974; Ord. 144-2015, passed 10-12-2015)
§ 1020.07 NOTIFICATION OF WORK; STREET CLOSINGS.
   (A)   The permittee shall notify the Division of Engineering a minimum of 48
hours prior to when the opening is to be made, when backfilling is to commence,
when temporary restoration has been made and when permanent restoration can be
made.
   (B)   (1)   If it is necessary to close a street completely and detour
traffic, at least 48 hours’ advance notice shall be given the Director of
Public Service and the Director of Public Safety. The Police and Fire Divisions
shall also be notified whenever a street is to be closed or whenever the work
may interfere with their functions.
      (2)   The permittee shall also notify all utility companies that may be
concerned by reason of adjacent installations.
(Prior Code, § 1020.07) (Ord. 38-1955, passed 4-4-1955; Ord. 231-1974, passed
7-1-1974; Ord. 144-2015, passed 10-12-2015)
§ 1020.08 GENERAL PROCEDURE.
   The most recent revision of General Roadway Notes and Water Service
Regulations for the City of Barberton must be adhered to for all work being
completed in a city road or right-of-way.
   (A)   The permittee must carry out the work authorized by the permit or
define in the preconstruction meeting in such a manner as to cause a minimum of
interference with traffic of all kinds. On main thoroughfares and in the
congested districts, there must be sufficient traffic lanes open to permit a
substantially normal traffic flow or else the work hours must be between 7:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day. In case of a special emergency, a
serious leak or a major impairment of service, it will be necessary to make
special arrangements so that police officers may be assigned to handle traffic
at the contractor’s expense.
   (B)   When it is necessary to close a street completely and detour traffic,
special arrangements with the Director of Public Service and Director of Public
Safety must be made in advance. Every person making openings in city streets
shall keep the Director or his or her designee informed as to whom to call in
case of emergencies, such as settlements or washouts resulting from severe
storms.
   (C)   Access to fire hydrants must be provided at all times. Gutters and
catch basins must be kept open and drainage maintained as far as possible. When
it is necessary to close a gutter or cut off a catch basin, drainage must be
maintained by the use of pumps, flumes or culverts.
   (D)   Tools, equipment, shanties and materials must be stored at locations
where they will cause the least inconvenience to traffic and adjoining
property. Walks, driveways and entrances to buildings must be kept open. Steel
plates of adequate size shall be furnished to cover small paving cuts and to
provide crossings over trenches on main thoroughfares and at important
intersections. The plates shall be securely fastened in place to prevent
movement under traffic. If necessary, temporary walks or bridges shall be
provided for pedestrians.
   (E)   The work site shall be protected with bracing, barricades and lights
per OSHA regulations and traffic control in accordance with the Ohio Manual of
Uniform Traffic-Control Devices. The applicant shall save the city and its
agents harmless from any and all damage or injury resulting from the
prosecution of the work.
   (F)   Sightly and sufficient sanitary conveniences for the use of workers on
the job, properly secluded from public observation, shall be provided and
maintained in a sanitary condition.
   (G)   Excavated materials shall be promptly removed and disposed of when the
materials are not suitable for backfill or when, due to the location of the
work, there is not sufficient room to permit the storing of the excavated
materials. When the storage of excavated materials is permitted at the site of
the work, such materials shall be compactly piled, using plank bins or
retaining walls if necessary, to prevent dirt from spreading over the
pavements.
   (H)   Lawns, trees and other vegetation shall be protected from damage.
Trees must not be removed or disturbed, except with the approval of the
Director and his instructions regarding the laying of pipes or conduits under
trees shall be followed.
   (I)   Whenever it is necessary to cross over or under work close to other
utility installations, such as tracks, mains, ducts, pipes and the like,
notification must be given to that utility and it shall be the duty of the
applicant to properly protect such other utility property in a safe condition
so that the public may not be endangered or unnecessarily inconvenienced. All
trenches and tunnels shall be braced to protect workers, the public and
property. This bracing shall be sufficient to protect all surface and
subsurface structures and to prevent the undermining of adjacent pavement,
curbs and sidewalks. House connections, water mains, gas mains, conduit lines
and drain pipe shall be supported across trenches.
   (J)   A permit for drawing water from fire hydrants must be secured from the
Division of Utilities.
   (K)   The permittee shall comply with the rules of the Division of Utilities
governing the furnishing of water from the city mains.
   (L)   In any case where this section is silent or presents conflict, the
latest revision of the City of Barberton General Roadway Notes and Utility
Regulations shall be followed.
(Prior Code, § 1020.08) (Ord. 38-1955, passed 4-4-1955; Ord. 144-2015, passed
10-12-2015)
§ 1020.09 TRENCHING, TUNNELING AND BACKFILLING.
   (A)   The length, width and location of a trench and the manner in which the
work is done shall be under the control of the city. A detailed scope should be
submitted at the time of application.
   (B)   If, in excavating a trench or laying pipe and appurtenances, the
pavement along the sides of the trench is or becomes undermined and
unsupported, such pavement shall be broken down, removed and replaced at the
expense of the permittee.
   (C)   The opening cut through the pavement must be in compliance with the
latest version of General Roadway Notes.
   (D)   Tunneling may be necessary in certain locations. However, the
permittee shall not do any tunneling, except by permission from the city. If
city departments do the tunneling, they shall notify the Division of Streets of
the same and shall be subject to the same requirements regarding backfilling as
permittees.
   (E)   When tunneling has been done, the permittee shall backfill the tunnel,
except as noted below, with a mixture of sand, gravel and cement in the
proportion of one bag of cement to not over 20 cubic feet of aggregate. The
mixture shall be of such consistency that it will hold together when formed
into a ball in the hands.
   (F)   Around the pipe and for a distance of not more than 12 inches above
the top of the pipe, fine material wetted and tamped or well compacted clay may
be used.
   (G)   During the period from December 1 to March 31, or during freezing
weather at any other time, the backfilling of all openings in paved streets or
alleys shall be made with sand, bank run gravel or other fine granular
material, all of which shall be free of front or excess moisture and thoroughly
compacted.
   (H)   During the period from April 1 to November 30, the excavated material,
if suitable and in proper condition, may be used for backfilling.
   (I)   Under no circumstances shall wet clay, silt or similar material be
used for back-filling within the area of any city street.
   (J)   Loose, broken rock shall not be considered suitable backfill material
unless sufficient fine material is added to more than fill the voids.
   (K)   All backfilled trenches shall be consolidated either by flushing or
power tamping, depending upon the nature of the material used.
   (L)   In any case where this section is silent or presents conflict, the
latest revision of the City of Barberton General Roadway Notes and Utility
Regulations shall be followed.
(Prior Code, § 1020.09) (Ord. 38-1955, passed 4-4-1955; Ord. 144-2015, passed
10-12-2015)
§ 1020.10 TEMPORARY AND PERMANENT RESTORATIONS.
   (A)   Temporary restorations shall be made by the permittee in accordance
with the requirements of §
1020.14 of this chapter, and the permittee shall be responsible for maintaining
the backfilled opening in a safe and usable condition until such time as the
permanent restoration can be made. Until the openings have been taken over by
the Division of Streets for permanent restoration, each permittee shall, after
each heavy rain and during thawing periods, check over all openings and
temporary restorations made by him or her and shall make such repairs as may be
necessary or, if such repairs cannot be promptly made, shall provide barricades
and lights for the protection of the public. The work site must always be
protected with bracing, barricades and lights per OSHA regulations and traffic
control in accordance with Ohio Manual of Uniform Traffic-Control Devices.
   (B)   Complete restoration, including pavement base and surface, must be
completed after the permittee has completed the backfill and made temporary
restoration to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Service or his
designee.
   (C)   Partial restoration up to and including the pavement base may be done
by the permittee subject to the Director’s approval. All such work must conform
to the current edition of the State of Ohio, Department of Transportation,
Construction and Material Specifications.
   (D)   Unless otherwise ordered, the permittee shall make complete
restoration of all unpaved areas in accordance with the requirements of §
1020.11 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1020.10) (Ord. 38-1955, passed 4-4-1955; Ord. 144-2015, passed
10-12-2015)
§ 1020.11 RESTORATION OF UNPAVED AREAS.
   (A)   Upon completion of the underground work, the permittee shall, within
five days, restore all unpaved areas to their former condition as far as
possible. All excess dirt shall be removed and disposed of; all ditches shall
be cleaned; drainage structures shall be restored and left in an operating
condition; dirt streets shall be left in a smooth usable condition; cinder or
gravel surfaces shall be restored; if surfaces have been treated with dust
laying or other bituminous materials, the same shall be replaced; all lawn
strips or sodded areas shall be replaced; and all sidewalks and driveways shall
be replaced. Patching of sidewalk blocks is not permitted and the replacement
of the entire block is required.
   (B)   In any case where this section is silent or presents conflict, the
latest revision of the City of Barberton General Roadway Notes and Utility
Regulations shall be followed.
(Prior Code, § 1020.11) (Ord. 38-1955, passed 4-4-1955; Ord. 144-2015, passed
10-12-2015)
§ 1020.12 RESTORATION OF PAVED AREAS.
   (A)   All paved areas, together with the adjacent curbs, manhole and valve
box castings and any other appurtenances within the street, shall be restored
by one of the methods mentioned in this chapter. So far as practicable, the
restored base and surface shall be of the type existing before the openings
were made; except that, when concrete is used for restoring the base course,
the new concrete base shall not be less than eight inches thick, regardless of
whether or not a base course of such thickness or mixture existed at the time
the pavement opening was made.
   (B)   In the case of streets having stabilized base courses or macadam base
courses, the Division of Streets reserves the option of substituting
penetration macadam base course and premixed bituminous surface course for
restoration purposes or concrete base and bituminous surface course. In all
other cases, the original type of surface material is to be used.
   (C)   The permittee responsible for the opening shall be charged the actual
cost, plus 15%, of all labor, material and equipment required to restore the
pavement and appurtenances. The city shall charge only for the area actually
disturbed due to the pavement opening or for disturbances resulting therefrom.
   (D)   When the permittee makes the backfill, he or she shall be held
responsible for any settlement. No time limit shall be considered as releasing
him or her from this obligation.
   (E)   In any case where this section is silent or presents conflict, the
latest revision of the City of Barberton General Roadway Notes and Utility
Regulations shall be followed.
(Prior Code, § 1020.12) (Ord. 38-1955, passed 4-4-1955; Ord. 144-2015, passed
10-12-2015)
§ 1020.13 MATERIAL TO BE DEPOSITED SO AS NOT TO INCONVENIENCE PUBLIC.
   In removing pavement or other material from streets, alleys, sidewalks or
public grounds, for any purpose whatever, the material dug up must be deposited
in such manner as to guard against inconvenience to the public by obstructing
streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds.
(Prior Code, § 1020.13) (Ord. 38-1955, passed 4-4-1955)
§ 1020.14 RESTORATION OF SURFACE; COSTS.
   All places where pavement or other material is removed from streets, alleys,
sidewalks or public grounds shall be restored to their former condition within
five days or as soon as practicable, either by the city or by the person
causing such pavement to be removed, as may be directed by the Director of
Public Service. The cost shall be paid by the person causing such pavement to
be removed or, in default thereof, shall be deducted from the cash deposit
referred to in §
1020.02 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1020.14) (Ord. 38-1955, passed 4-4-1955; Ord. 144-2015, passed
10-12-2015)
§ 1020.15 GUARDING EXCAVATIONS; SIGNAL LIGHTS.
   No excavation or hole in any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground shall
be left open and unguarded or without signal lights during the night time.
(Prior Code, § 1020.15) (Ord. 38-1955, passed 4-4-1955)
§ 1020.16 TRANSPORTATION OF MATERIALS OVER STREETS; DEPOSIT REQUIRED.
   No contractor, hauler or builder shall transport earth, sand or gravel over
any paved street of the city without first making a cash deposit with the
Director of Public Service. Such deposit shall consist of cash, in an amount
not exceeding $100, to be determined by the Director, and shall be a guarantee
that such contractor, hauler or builder will clean the street of any earth,
sand or gravel which may fall from his or her vehicle. If such contractor,
hauler or builder fails to clean such street, then the city will do so and
deduct the cost of such work from the money deposited as herein required,
returning the balance remaining, if any, to the contractor, hauler or builder
making the deposit.
(Prior Code, § 1020.16)
§ 1020.17 TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   (A)   No person shall commence the performance of any work involving the
opening, closing, blocking, excavating, repairing, tearing up, digging or
otherwise blocking of any street so as to change the normal course of traffic
on the street without first obtaining, from the Chief of Police, a permit for
traffic control thereon.
   (B)   Such person shall apply to the Chief for a permit to implement traffic
control according to a traffic control diagram which is to be submitted to the
Chief and approved by the Chief prior to the issuance of such permit.
   (C)   Such traffic-control diagram shall include therein a provision for the
use of such flag persons or police officers as are necessary, in the judgment
of the Chief, for the adequate and safe control of traffic at the construction
site.
   (D)   Upon the issuance of such permit, the person to whom the permit is
issued shall, at his or her own expense, install and maintain signs, warning
devices, lights, barricades, drums, cones, flag persons or police officers, as
shown on the traffic-control diagram, and failure to install and maintain the
same shall be grounds for the issuance of a stop order or revocation of the
permit by the Chief and/or the revocation of any permit issued by the city.
   (E)   If travel and safety warrant it, the Chief of Police has the authority
to request additional traffic control at the expense of the contractor.
   (F)   Authorized city repair workers are exempted from the provisions of
this section.
(Prior Code, § 1020.17) (Ord. 63-1993, passed 5-10-1993)
§ 1020.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
more than $500 or imprisoned not more than six months, or both. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 1020.99) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
CHAPTER 1024: STREET CLASSIFICATIONS AND PAVEMENT
Section
1024.01   Pavement requirements for various classifications.
1024.02   Adoption of street classifications and map.
1024.03   Petitioned surfacing.
1024.04   Classification of streets.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 178-2004, passed 12-13-2004, enacted a Residential Street Resurfacing
Program and created the Residential Street Resurfacing Fund. Ord. 179-2004,
passed 12-13-2004, established the Permissive Street Resurfacing Program, in
conjunction with the establishment of the Residential Street Resurfacing
Program. Copies of the ordinances and of the programs are available for
inspection in the office of the Clerk of Council. These ordinances have been
amended by Ord. 103-2006 and Ord. 104-2006, both passed 6-26-2006.
Cross-reference:
   Assessments, see Ohio R.C. 701.05, Ch. 727
   Commercial and heavy vehicles; weight limits, see TRAF.
339.01,
339.12
   Dedication and acceptance, see Ohio R.C. 723.03
   Injurious material or obstruction in street, see TRAF.
311.01
   Materials on streets, see GEN. OFF.
668.05
   Power to establish and care for streets, see Ohio R.C. 715.19, 717.01,
723.01
   Surface treatment, see Ohio R.C. 723.23, 723.31
   Unloading on streets, see GEN. OFF.
668.03
§ 1024.01 PAVEMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR VARIOUS CLASSIFICATIONS.
   All streets and sections of streets within the city are hereby classified
with regard to the volume and type of present and anticipated vehicular
traffic. Any pavement to be constructed or reconstructed in any street shall
conform to the design standards set through the Ohio Department of
Transportation (ODOT), reflecting the most current standards and materials.
   (A)   Major street. MAJOR STREET means a through street carrying large
numbers of passenger and commercial vehicles.
   (B)   Secondary street. SECONDARY STREET means a street connecting local
streets or industrial or commercial establishments to major streets and
carrying moderate numbers of passenger and commercial vehicles.
   (C)   Local street - Class I. CLASS I LOCAL STREET means a street designed
for access to residential property and carrying mainly neighborhood traffic
with only incidental commercial vehicles.
   (D)   Local street - Class II. CLASS II LOCAL STREET means a street meeting
the same conditions as a Class I local street; except that, a storm sewer
outlet is not available.
   (E)   Local street - Class III. CLASS III LOCAL STREET means a residential
street that has not been sufficiently developed to warrant a permanent type of
pavement.
(Prior Code, § 1024.01) (Ord. 15-1963, passed 4-1-1963; Ord. 84-2022, passed 6-
13-22)
§ 1024.02 ADOPTION OF STREET CLASSIFICATIONS AND MAP.
   The classification of streets and sections of streets as listed in this
chapter is hereby approved and authorized to be as and for a part of this
chapter and shall be made available to all persons concerned with the planning
of street paving.
(Prior Code, § 1024.02) (Ord. 15-1963, passed 4-1-1963)
§ 1024.03 PETITIONED SURFACING.
   The Director of Public Service is hereby authorized and directed to hard
surface (temporary) any Local Class II or Class III street in the city with a
two-inch bituminous penetration course, as specified in §
1024.01 of this chapter, on the petition of three-fourths of the owners, or the
owners of 60% of the front footage of property abutting upon such designated
street. The cost of such hard surfacing, at the rate of $2 per front foot,
shall be assessed against the petitioning owners and non-petitioning owners
abutting such designated street.
(Prior Code, § 1024.03) (Ord. 215-1968, passed 1-6-1969)
§ 1024.04 CLASSIFICATION OF STREETS.
   Streets and sections of streets in the city are hereby classified as
follows:
   (A)   Major streets.
      (1)   Barber Road;
      (2)   Hopocan Avenue W.;
      (3)   Kenmore Boulevard;
      (4)   Snyder Avenue;
      (5)   State Street E.;
      (6)   Wooster Road W.;
      (7)   Second Street N.W.;
      (8)   Fifth Street S.E.;
      (9)   Thirty-first Street N.W.;
      (10)   Tuscarawas Avenue W. - Eighth Street to the Tuscarawas River;
      (11)   Tuscarawas Avenue E. - Tuscarawas River to Fifth Street N.E.;
      (12)   Van Buren Avenue - Snyder Avenue to Tuscarawas Avenue;
      (13)   Fourth Street N.W. - Hopocan Avenue to Norton Avenue;
      (14)   Fifth Street N.E. - Robinson Avenue to Tuscarawas Avenue;
      (15)   Thirty-first Street S.W. - Haynes Avenue to Wooster Road;
      (16)   Robinson Avenue - Van Buren Avenue to State Street;
      (17)   East Avenue;
      (18)   Hudson Road;
      (19)   Norton Avenue;
      (20)   State Street W.;
      (21)   Waterloo Road;
      (22)   Wooster Road N.;
      (23)   Second Street S.W.;
      (24)   Eighth Street N.W.; and
      (25)   Cleveland - Massillon Road.
   (B)   Secondary streets.
      (1)   Barberton - Southern Road;
      (2)   Brady Avenue - Fifteenth Street to Newell Street;
      (3)   Coventry Road - Wooster Road to Waterloo Road;
      (4)   Creedmore Avenue - Sixth Street to Fourth Street;
      (5)   Eastern Road;
      (6)   Fairmount Avenue - State Street to U.S. 224;
      (7)   Fairview Avenue - Coventry Road to State Street;
      (8)   Grand Boulevard - Kenmore Avenue to west corporation line;
      (9)   Hillsdale Avenue - Shannon Avenue to Hopocan Avenue;
      (10)   Hiram Street - Summit Street to State Street;
      (11)   Kenmore Avenue;
      (12)   Lake Avenue W. - Eighth Street to Wooster Road N.;
      (13)   Lloyd Street;
      (14)   Lockwood Road;
      (15)   Morgan Street;
      (16)   Newell Street;
      (17)   Paige Avenue - Third Street to Wooster Road;
      (18)   Park Avenue W. - Eighth Street to Wooster Road;
      (19)   Robinson Avenue - Tuscarawas River to Van Buren Avenue;
      (20)   Shannon Avenue - Thirty-first Street to Twenty-fifth Street;
      (21)   South Avenue - Thirty-first Street to Twenty-seventh Street;
      (22)   Sterling Avenue;
      (23)   Stratford Street - Thirty-first Street to Twenty-first Street;
      (24)   Summit Street - Morgan Street to north corporation line;
      (25)   Taylor Road;
      (26)   Tuscarawas Avenue W. - dead end to Eighth Street N.W.;
      (27)   Van Buren Avenue - south corporation line to Snyder Avenue;
      (28)   Van Buren Avenue - Tuscarawas Avenue to Fairview Avenue;
      (29)   Waltz Drive;
      (30)   Perry Avenue - W. Fifteenth Street to E. Fifteenth Street;
      (31)   Wilbur Avenue - W. Fifteenth Street to E. Fifteenth Street;
      (32)   Third Street N.W. - Wooster Road N. to Hopocan Avenue;
      (33)   Fourth Street N.W. - B & W Plant to Park Avenue - Lake Avenue to
Hopocan Avenue;
      (34)   Fourth Street S.W.;
      (35)   Fifth Street N.E.;
      (36)   Fifth Street N.W. - Wooster Road W. to Park Avenue;
      (37)   Fifth Street N.W. - Lake Avenue to Northern Avenue;
      (38)   Sixth Street N.W.;
      (39)   Seventh Street N.W. - Wooster Road to Holmes Avenue;
      (40)   Ninth Street N.E.;
      (41)   Ninth Street N.W.;
      (42)   Tenth Street N.W. - B & W Plant to Wooster Road W.;
      (43)   Fifteenth Street N.W. - Hopocan Avenue to Norton Avenue;
      (44)   Twenty-fifth Street N.W.;
      (45)   Twenty-first Street S.W.;
      (46)   Twenty-seventh Street N.W. - Wooster Road to South Avenue;
      (47)   Thirty-first Street S.W. - Eastern Road to Haynes Avenue;
      (48)   Holmes Avenue - Seventh Street to Fourth Street; and
      (49)   Burt Street - Summit Street to Wooster Road N.
   (C)   Local Streets - Class I.
      (1)   Alberta Street;
      (2)   Alcorn Drive;
      (3)   Antles Avenue;
      (4)   Auburn Avenue - Thirty-first Street to Twenty-eighth Street;
      (5)   Baird Avenue;
      (6)   Belleview Avenue - Twenty-fifth Street to dead end;
      (7)   Benton Street - Thirty-first Street to Twenty-fifth Street;
      (8)   Borden Street;
      (9)   Brown Street;
      (10)   Camp Street;
      (11)   Cassell Avenue - Tuscora Park to Ninth Street;
      (12)   Central Avenue - Elmwood to State Street;
      (13)   Cherry Street;
      (14)   Columbus Avenue;
      (15)   Columbia Court;
      (16)   Conrad Street;
      (17)   Creedmore Avenue - Fourth Street to Third Street;
      (18)   Diamond Avenue;
      (19)   Elmwood Street - Wooster Road to State Street;
      (20)   Erie Street;
      (21)   Etling Avenue;
      (22)   Fairview Avenue - State Street to corporation line;
      (23)   Fernwood Avenue;
      (24)   Ford Avenue E. - Van Buren Avenue to Ninth Street;
      (25)   Ford Avenue W.;
      (26)   Forrest Drive;
      (27)   Fuller Street;
      (28)   Gale Drive;
      (29)   Glenn Street - Wooster Road to State Street;
      (30)   Goodrich Avenue - Central Avenue to U.S. 224;
      (31)   Hagey Drive;
      (32)   Harden Drive;
      (33)   Harding Avenue;
      (34)   Harrington Avenue;
      (35)   Harvard Avenue;
      (36)   Haynes Street;
      (37)   Hazelwood Avenue;
      (38)   Henigan Avenue;
      (39)   Hiram Street - State Street to Wooster Road;
      (40)   Home Avenue;
      (41)   Homewood Avenue;
      (42)   Hopocan Avenue E. - Fifth Street to Ninth Street;
      (43)   Huron Street;
      (44)   Huston Street W.;
      (45)   Keller Street;
      (46)   King Avenue;
      (47)   Lake Avenue W. - A & BB RR to Eighth Street;
      (48)   Lake Avenue E. - Fifth Street to Ninth Street;
      (49)   Lake Anna Court;
      (50)   Liberty Avenue - Twenty-fifth Street to Twenty-first Street;
      (51)   Lindberg Street;
      (52)   Lucas Street;
      (53)   Maple Street;
      (54)   May Street;
      (55)   Meadow Court;
      (56)   Miami Avenue - Norton Avenue to Summit Street;
      (57)   New Street;
      (58)   Noble Street - Thirty-sixth Street to Twenty-eighth Street;
      (59)   Norman Street;
      (60)   North Azalea Boulevard;
      (61)   North Columbine Drive;
      (62)   Northview Avenue;
      (63)   Norwood Avenue;
      (64)   Oak Avenue - Twenty-fifth Street to Twenty-first Street;
      (65)   Oakwood Street - State Street to Wooster Road;
      (66)   Ontario Street;
      (67)   Orchard Avenue - Wooster Road to Morgan Street;
      (68)   Otterbein Avenue;
      (69)   Paige Avenue W. - A & BB RR to Sixth Street;
      (70)   Paige Avenue E. - Fifth Street to Ninth Street;
      (71)   Park Avenue W. - dead end to Eighth Street;
      (72)   Park Avenue E. - Seventh Street to Ninth Street;
      (73)   Park Drive;
      (74)   Parker Avenue;
      (75)   Parkview Avenue;
      (76)   Paul Place;
      (77)   Pfeiffer Street;
      (78)   Poplar Street;
      (79)   Portage Street;
      (80)   Princeton Avenue - Norton Avenue to Summit Street;
      (81)   Prospect Street - Thirty-first Street to Twenty-fifth Street;
      (82)   Ries Street;
      (83)   Romig Avenue - State Street to Glenn Street;
      (84)   Schwinn Drive;
      (85)   Shannon Avenue - Twenty-fifth Street to Fourteenth Street;
      (86)   Silver Street;
      (87)   Swigart Street;
      (88)   Sylvester Street;
      (89)   Taft Avenue;
      (90)   Tuscarawas Avenue W. - Twenty-second Street to Fourteenth Street;
      (91)   Tuscarawas Avenue E. - Fifth Street, N.E. to corporation line;
      (92)   Union Street;
      (93)   Valley Avenue;
      (94)   Van Street;
      (95)   Walter Avenue - except from Ford Avenue south 155 feet (Class
III);
      (96)   Wayne Street;
      (97)   Wesleyan Avenue - Norton Avenue to Summit Street;
      (98)   Wilson Avenue;
      (99)   Wilsonway Drive;
      (100)   Wisteria Drive;
      (101)   Wunderlich Avenue;
      (102)   Yale Avenue;
      (103)   First Street N.E. - Robinson Avenue to Tuscarawas Avenue;
      (104)   First Street N.W.;
      (105)   Second Street N.E. - Robinson Avenue to Tuscarawas Avenue;
      (106)   Third Street N.E. - Robinson Avenue to Tuscarawas Avenue;
      (107)   Third Street N.W. - Hopocan Avenue to Fuller Street;
      (108)   Fourth Street N.E. - Robinson Avenue to Tuscarawas Avenue;
      (109)   Fifth Street N.W. - South End to Wooster Road, W.;
      (110)   Sixth Street N.E. - Robinson Avenue to Tuscarawas Avenue;
      (111)   Sixth Street N.E. - Paige Avenue to Huston Street;
      (112)   Seventh Street N.E. - Robinson Avenue to Huston Street;
      (113)   Seventh Street N.W. - B & W Plant to Wooster Road, W.;
      (114)   Eighth Street N.E. - Robinson Avenue to Huston Street;
      (115)   Eighth Street S.E.;
      (116)   Fourteenth Street N.W.;
      (117)   Fifteenth Street N.W. - Wooster Road to Hopocan Avenue;
      (118)   Sixteenth Street N.W.;
      (119)   Nineteenth Street N.W.;
      (120)   Twentieth Street S.W.;
      (121)   Twenty-first Street N.W.;
      (122)   Twenty-second Street N.W. - Wooster Road to Shannon Avenue;
      (123)   Twenty-third Street N.W.;
      (124)   Twenty-third Street S.W.;
      (125)   Twenty-fourth Street N.W.;
      (126)   Twenty-fifth Street S.W.;
      (127)   Twenty-eighth Street S.W.;
      (128)   Twenty-ninth Street S.W.;
      (129)   Thirty-third Street;
      (130)   Thirty-fifth Street;
      (131)   Thirty-sixth Street;
      (132)   Thirty-seventh Street;
      (133)   Short Street; and
      (134)   Holmes Avenue - Fourth Street to Third Street.
   (D)   Local Streets - Class II.
      (1)   Auburn Avenue - Twenty-eighth Street to Hudson Road;
      (2)   Beech Street;
      (3)   Belleview Avenue - Thirty-first Street to Twenty-fifth Street;
      (4)   Benton Street - Twenty-fifth Street to Twenty-first Street;
      (5)   Brady Avenue - Seventeenth Street to Fifteenth Street;
      (6)   Cassell Avenue - Van Buren Avenue to Fifth Street;
      (7)   Charles Avenue;
      (8)   Crawford Avenue;
      (9)   Douglas Avenue - Twenty-eighth Street to Twenty-third Street;
      (10)   Evergreen Street;
      (11)   Franklin Avenue;
      (12)   Frase Avenue;
      (13)   Glenn Street - State Street to corporation line;
      (14)   Graceland Avenue;
      (15)   Grandview Avenue;
      (16)   Hall Avenue;
      (17)   Hermann Street;
      (18)   Highland Avenue - State Street to Grace Avenue;
      (19)   Hiram Street - Newton Street to Summit Street;
      (20)   Hopocan Avenue E. - Second Street to Fifth Street;
      (21)   Huston Street E.;
      (22)   Jefferson Avenue;
      (23)   Lake Avenue E. - Van Buren Avenue to Fifth Street;
      (24)   Liberty Avenue - Thirty-first Street to Twenty-fifth Street;
      (25)   Lincoln Avenue;
      (26)   Miami Avenue - Summit Street to Morgan Street;
      (27)   Mitchell Street;
      (28)   Newton Street;
      (29)   Noble Avenue to dead end;
      (30)   Noble Street - Twenty-eighth Street to Twenty-fifth Street;
      (31)   Oak Avenue - Thirty-first Street to Twenty-fifth Street;
      (32)   Orchard Avenue - Morgan Street to corporation line;
      (33)   Paige Avenue E. - First Street to Fifth Street;
      (34)   Park Avenue E. - Van Buren Avenue to Fifth Street
      (35)   Perry Avenue - west corporation line to Fifteenth Street;
      (36)   Princeton Street - Summit Street to Morgan Street;
      (37)   Prospect Street - Twenty-fifth Street to dead end;
      (38)   Raymond Avenue;
      (39)   Street Clair Avenue;
      (40)   Street John Street;
      (41)   South Avenue - Twenty-seventh Street to Twenty-fifth Street;
      (42)   Stratford Street - Twenty-first Street to dead end.;
      (43)   Summit Street - dead end to Morgan Street Washington Avenue;
      (44)   Way Street;
      (45)   Wesleyan Avenue - Summit Street to north corporation line;
      (46)   Wilbur Avenue - west corporation line to W. Fifteenth Street;
      (47)   Yonker Street;
      (48)   Young Avenue;
      (49)   First Street N.W. - Tuscarawas Avenue to Van Buren Avenue;
      (50)   Second Street N.E. - Tuscarawas Avenue to Van Buren Avenue;
      (51)   Third Street N.E. - Tuscarawas Avenue to Washington Avenue;
      (52)   Fourth Street N.E. - Tuscarawas Avenue to Van Buren Avenue;
      (53)   Sixth Street N.E. - Huston Street to Hardin Avenue;
      (54)   Seventh Street N.E. - Huston Street to Taft Avenue;
      (55)   Eighth Street N.E. - Huston Street to dead end;
      (56)   Seventeenth Street N.W. - Perry Avenue to Norton Avenue;
      (57)   Twenty-third Street S.W.;
      (58)   Twenty-fifth Street S.W.;
      (59)   Twenty-sixth Street N.W.;
      (60)   Twenty-seventh Street NW - South Avenue to Shannon Avenue;
      (61)   Twenty-eighth Street N.W.;
      (62)   Twenty-ninth Street N.W.;
      (63)   Thirtieth Street N.W.;
      (64)   Grace Avenue;
      (65)   Grant Avenue;
      (66)   Macy Avenue; and
      (67)   Milo Avenue.
   (E)   Local Streets - Class III.
      (1)   Arthur Avenue;
      (2)   Ashland Court;
      (3)   Audrey Street;
      (4)   Belcher Avenue;
      (5)   Bell Street;
      (6)   Broadview Avenue;
      (7)   Burt Street - Way Street to alley;
      (8)   Canal Street;
      (9)   Case Avenue;
      (10)   Cassell Avenue - Ninth Street to State Street;
      (11)   Central Avenue - Hazelwood to Elmwood - State Street to
corporation line;
      (12)   College Street;
      (13)   Cordelia Avenue;
      (14)   Coventry Road - Waterloo Road to U.S. 224;
      (15)   Dale Avenue;
      (16)   Dan Street;
      (17)   Davies Court;
      (18)   Douglas Avenue - Twenty-eighth Street, S.W. to Twenty-ninth
Street, S.W.;
      (19)   Dunn Avenue;
      (20)   Elmwood Street - State Street to corporation line;
      (21)   Elson Avenue;
      (22)   Ettle Drive;
      (23)   Eva Avenue;
      (24)   Edward Avenue;
      (25)   Fairmount Avenue - U.S. 224 to corporation line;
      (26)   Ford Avenue E.;
      (27)   A & BB RR to Van Buren Avenue;
      (28)   Ford Avenue - east of Ninth Street to dead end;
      (29)   Frank Avenue;
      (30)   Frisby Street;
      (31)   Fritz Street;
      (32)   George Street;
      (33)   Grand Boulevard - U.S. 224 to Kenmore Avenue;
      (34)   Green Street;
      (35)   Gum Street;
      (36)   Hillsdale Avenue - Hopocan Avenue to Perry Avenue;
      (37)   Harold Avenue;
      (38)   Harter Avenue;
      (39)   Haven Avenue;
      (40)   Highland Avenue - Grace Avenue to A & BB RR;
      (41)   Hopocan Avenue - Seventh Street to Eighth Street;
      (42)   Horn Street;
      (43)   Irish Lane;
      (44)   Joseph Avenue;
      (45)   Kilgore Avenue;
      (46)   Krancz Drive;
      (47)   Kreider Avenue;
      (48)   Lamberton Avenue;
      (49)   Lincoln Court;
      (50)   Louise Court;
      (51)   Mack Avenue;
      (52)   Madison Avenue;
      (53)   Marston Court;
      (54)   North Court;
      (55)   Ohio Avenue;
      (56)   Orchard Court;
      (57)   Paige Avenue - Ninth Street to State Street;
      (58)   Palmer Avenue;
      (59)   Poe Avenue;
      (60)   Portsmouth Avenue;
      (61)   Quincy Avenue;
      (62)   Robinson Street;
      (63)   Romig Avenue - Glenn Street to U.S. 224;
      (64)   Rubber Street;
      (65)   Russell Avenue;
      (66)   Shaw Avenue;
      (67)   Spring Avenue;
      (68)   Spring Street;
      (69)   Stanley Avenue;
      (70)   Tracy Avenue;
      (71)   Wade Avenue;
      (72)   Walter Avenue - Ford Avenue south 155 feet;
      (73)   Wuchter Avenue;
      (74)   First Street S.E. - Ford Avenue to Robinson Avenue;
      (75)   Second Street S.E.;
      (76)   Third Street S.E.;
      (77)   Eighth Street N.E. - Tuscarawas Avenue to Hopocan Avenue; and
      (78)   Tenth Street N.W. - Brady Avenue to North Avenue.
(Prior Code, § 1024.04) (Ord. 15-1963, passed 4-1-1963; Ord. 100-1964, passed
6-29-1964; Ord. 150-1968, passed 7-29-1968; Ord. 159-1968, passed 9-3-1968;
Ord. 144-1969, passed 6-16-1969; Ord. 156-1969, passed 7-7-1969; Ord. 157-1969,
passed 7-7-1969; Ord. 85-1970, passed 4-20-1970)
CHAPTER 1028: SIDEWALKS
Section
1028.01   Widths and location of sidewalks.
1028.02   Construction; surfacing.
1028.03   Grading.
1028.04   Improvements; permit required; inspection.
1028.05   Establishing grade.
1028.06   Deposit and permit required.
1028.07   Installation of sidewalks on existing properties.
1028.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Construction and repair at owner’s expense, see Ohio R.C. 729.01 et seq.
   Driving on sidewalks, see TRAF.
331.37
   Littering, see GEN. OFF.
660.03,
660.05,
668.04
   Maintenance, protection and repair, see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 668
   Notice to construct or repair sidewalks, see Ohio R.C. 729.03 et seq.
   Sidewalks and gutters, see Ohio R.C. 729.01 et seq.
§ 1028.01 WIDTHS AND LOCATION OF SIDEWALKS.
   The Development Code, Ch. 1240, “Other Planning and Improvement Standards”,
of this code of ordinances shall govern all widths and locations of sidewalks.
(Prior Code, § 1028.01) (Ord. 109-2001, passed 5-29-2001)
§ 1028.02 CONSTRUCTION; SURFACING.
   (A)   Sidewalks are required to be constructed in the street right-of-way
adjacent to property on which any new buildings are constructed after 6-1-2001.
   (B)   All sidewalks improved by placing walks with a permanent surfacing on
any public highway or street within the city shall be so improved by
constructing the sidewalks with concrete or other acceptable surface as
described in Ch. 1240 of the Development Code and in accordance with the
specifications prescribed by the Director of Public Service and/or the City
Engineer and shall be of the width prescribed by Ch. 1240 of the Development
Code. The sidewalk shall be so laid that the top surface shall be properly
roughened to prevent it from becoming slippery when wet, and the roughened
finish shall be of such character as, in the judgment of the Director of Public
Service and/or the City Engineer, will effectively prevent the slippery
condition of such walks at all times.
(Prior Code, § 1028.02) (Ord. 109-2001, passed 5-29-2001)
§ 1028.03 GRADING.
   (A)   Any grading necessary between the walk as laid and the curb line, or
between the walk and the edge of the sidewalk space as herein established,
shall be done at the time of the laying of the walks, so as to leave the
sidewalk space at the grade hereinafter described.
   (B)   The sidewalks, as improved, shall conform with the line described as
follows: beginning at the curb line with the established curb grade as
determined by the Director of Public Service and/or the City Engineer; thence
extending to the street line at right angles to the curb line, with a rise of
three-eighths of an inch to the foot; except that, at street intersections,
where the grade of the intersecting street prevents compliance with the above
provisions, the walk shall be laid under the direction and to the acceptance of
the Director of Public Service and/or the City Engineer.
   (C)   No sidewalk heretofore laid shall be raised or lowered without the
approval of the City Engineer and all sidewalks hereafter laid shall be in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and under the supervision of the
Director of Public Service and/or the City Engineer.
   (D)   No curb line or grade for a curb shall be changed, except by the
direction and upon the written consent of the Director of Public Service and/or
the City Engineer.
   (E)   Any sidewalk laid on any public street within the city in a manner
inconsistent with the provisions of this section shall, upon the recommendation
of the Director of Public Service and/or the City Engineer, be ordered relaid
to the proper grade. Upon the failure of the property owner to make the change
so ordered within the time specified in the notice, the city shall make such
change and the costs of such work shall be certified to the County Auditor for
placement on the tax duplicate, to be collected as other taxes.
(Prior Code, § 1028.03) (Ord. 109-2001, passed 5-29-2001)
§ 1028.04 IMPROVEMENTS; PERMIT REQUIRED; INSPECTION.
   No sidewalk shall be improved as herein provided, nor shall any sidewalk be
repaired or relaid, unless a permit to do so has first been obtained from the
City Engineer. The permit shall specify the kind of surfacing or walk to be
laid, the extent of same and the sublot and house number, or adequate
measurements identifying the location where no such numbers have been
established, in front of which the work is to be done. All concrete surfacing
of sidewalks shall be subject to the inspection of the Director of Public
Service and/or the City Engineer, whose duty it shall be to undertake the
fulfilling of the requirements of the approved specifications for such sidewalk
surfacing. For furnishing such inspection, there may be collected from the
property owner an amount or fee not to exceed the cost thereof.
(Prior Code, § 1028.04) (Ord. 109-2001, passed 5-29-2001)
§ 1028.05 ESTABLISHING GRADE.
   The owner of land in front of which a permit to improve the sidewalk has
been given may request that the Director of Public Service and/or the City
Engineer establish the grade or line upon which the improvement is to be made.
(Prior Code, § 1028.05) (Ord. 109-2001, passed 5-29-2001)
§ 1028.06 DEPOSIT AND PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Each homeowner who engages in the work of laying, relaying or
repairing sidewalks shall, before engaging in any such work or employment, make
a cash refundable deposit of $100 to guarantee restoration to the satisfaction
of the City Engineer and/or the Director of Public Service.
   (B)   (1)   Before any person who is entitled to lay, relay or repair
sidewalks undertakes to do such work, he or she shall obtain a permit from the
City Engineer.
      (2)   The application for such permit shall specify the owner of the
property in front of which the sidewalk is to be laid and the probable time for
beginning and finishing the work to lay, relay or repair such sidewalk.
      (3)   Separate permits shall be required for each continuous stretch of
sidewalk to be laid.
      (4)   The cash deposit, less any expense which may have been charged
against the same by the city, shall be returned whenever the person entitled to
lay, relay or repair sidewalks, having made such deposit in accordance with the
provisions herein prescribed, signifies in writing to the Director his or her
intention to no longer engage in such work.
(Prior Code, § 1028.06) (Ord. 109-2001, passed 5-29-2001)
§ 1028.07 INSTALLATION OF SIDEWALKS ON EXISTING PROPERTIES.
   (A)   The Director of Public Service and/or the City Engineer may require a
property owner to install sidewalks of an existing property if any or all of
the following parameters are met:
      (1)   The property is located on a major street;
      (2)   The property is located on a secondary street;
      (3)   The property is located on a local street with a minimum of 75% of
the properties on the block having existing sidewalks; and
      (4)   The property owner(s) request that sidewalks be installed on his,
her or their property by filing an application with the City Engineer.
   (B)   The Director of Public Service or the City Engineer will send to all
property owners who are required to install sidewalks a notice indicating that
they have 60 days to install a sidewalk abutting their property according to
the standards set forth by the City Engineer.
   (C)   After the 60 days has expired, the Director of Public Service or the
City Engineer may have the sidewalk installed for the property owner.
   (D)   After the completion of the installation of the new sidewalk, the
Finance Director shall send the property owner an invoice for services rendered
and request payment in full, indicating that if the payment is not received in
30 days, the balance of payment will be forwarded onto their property tax.
   (E)   (1)   The city shall establish a fund to assist in the cost of
installing new fill-in sidewalks for residential property owners.
      (2)   Council will establish the amount that the city will contribute
annually.
(Prior Code, § 1028.07) (Ord. 164-1996, passed 11-12-1996; Ord. 109-2001,
passed 5-29-2001)
§ 1028.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
more than $500 or imprisoned not more than six months, or both. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 1028.99) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957; Ord. 109-2001, passed
5-29-2001)
CHAPTER 1032: NUMBER OF BUILDINGS
Section
1032.01   Method of numbering.
1032.02   Place and size of numbers.
1032.03   Non-compliance; remedy of city.
1032.04   Damaging or defacing numbers.
1032.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Criminal mischief, see GEN. OFF.
642.11
   Power to regulate building numbering, see Ohio R.C. 715.26
§ 1032.01 METHOD OF NUMBERING.
   All houses, shops and store buildings in the city shall be numbered as
hereinafter provided, in numbering buildings located upon streets running east
and west, the Tuscarawas River shall be used as the base line, and all
buildings on such streets shall be numbered east and west therefrom, allowing
one number for each ten feet, all even numbers to be on the south side of the
street and all odd numbers to be on the north side of the street. Wooster Road
West and Robinson Avenue and its extension shall be the base line for the
numbering of buildings on all other streets. Even numbers shall be on the west
side and odd numbers on the east side of all streets running north and south
and on all other streets even numbers shall be on the south side and odd
numbers on the north side, allowing one number for each ten feet.
(Prior Code, § 1032.01)
§ 1032.02 PLACE AND SIZE OF NUMBERS.
   The owner of each building fronting upon any street in the city shall place
or cause to be placed, above the door or transom or in some other conspicuous
place upon the front of the building, the proper number as shown by the survey
made therefor or as ascertained from the City Engineer. These numbers shall be
not less than three inches in length.
(Prior Code, § 1032.02)
§ 1032.03 NON-COMPLIANCE; REMEDY OF CITY.
   If the owner fails to number or cause to be numbered any building fronting
on any street in the city, as required by §
1032.02 of this chapter, the city shall cause the numbering to be done and the
cost and expense thereof, shall be assessed against the lots or lands on which
such number is placed, the same to be collected in the same manner as other
assessments. Such remedy shall be in addition to the penalty provided in §
1032.99 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1032.03)
§ 1032.04 DAMAGING OR DEFACING NUMBERS.
   No person shall knowingly or purposely obstruct or interfere with any person
employed or instructed by the city to place numbers, as provided in this
chapter, or tear down, remove, cover or deface such numbers.
(Prior Code, § 1032.04)
§ 1032.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
more than $500 or imprisoned not more than six months, or both. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 1032.99) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
TITLE FOUR: UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1040: SEWERS
Section
1040.01   Construction of water mains and sewers; permission from Council
required.
1040.02   Main sanitary sewer extensions.
1040.03   Sanitary sewer laterals.
1040.04   Sanitary Sewer Construction Fund.
1040.05   Connection of storm water conveyances to sanitary sewers.
1040.06   Mandatory connection to sanitary sewer.
1040.07   Sewer openings to be sealed; demolition deposit.
1040.08   Dumping of septic tank materials; permit required; fees.
1040.09   Utility Billing Review Board.
1040.10   Tap-in fees.
1040.11   Water and sewer rates for users within joint economic development
zones between City of Barberton and City of Norton.
1040.12   Sewer service and user charges.
Editor’s note:
   Because of the frequency of change, sanitary sewer rental rates are not
codified. Copies of the latest relevant legislation may be obtained from the
Clerk of Council or the Division of Utilities.
Cross-reference:
   Compulsory sewer connections, see Ohio R.C. 729.06
   Improper drainage, see GEN. OFF.
660.18
   Industrial Wastewater Review Board, see S.U. & P.S.
1054.30
   Management and control of sewerage system, see Ohio R.C. 729.50
   Plumbing permit and inspection fees, see B. & H.
1444.03,
1444.06
   Power to construct sewerage system, see Ohio R.C. 715.40, 717.01
   Power to license sewer tappers and vault cleaners, see Ohio R.C. 715.27
   Power to regulate water closets and privies, see Ohio R.C. 715.40
   Regulations to control house sewers and connections, see Ohio R.C. 729.51
   Sewer connections in trailer camps and tourist cabins, see B.R. & T.
860.08
   Sewer layers license, see B. & H. Ch.
1422,
1428.01 et seq.
   Sewerage rates, see Ohio R.C. 729.49, 729.52
   Untreated sewage, see Ohio R.C. 3701.59
§ 1040.01 CONSTRUCTION OF WATER MAINS AND SEWERS; PERMISSION FROM COUNCIL
REQUIRED.
   No person shall construct any water main or sewer in or upon any street,
alley or other public way in the city unless permission to do so is first
obtained from Council.
(Prior Code, § 1040.02)
§ 1040.02 MAIN SANITARY SEWER EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   The owner of any property adjacent to a main sanitary sewer may make
an application to the Director of Public Service for an extension of such sewer
to provide additional service, under the terms and conditions hereinafter
specified. No such extension shall be made unless a public water supply is
available, or unless an adequate private source of water, approved by the
Superintendent of Utilities, is available, and unless provisions are made for
the metering of the private water supply in order to form a basis for sewer
rental charges. Application for an extension of a main sanitary sewer shall be
made to the Director on forms prepared by the Director. The application forms
shall contain the following terms and conditions.
      (1)   The total cost of the extension, including house lateral and street
intersections, manholes and lamp holes, shall be contracted for and paid by the
applicant.
      (2)   The city shall be held harmless and shall not be responsible for
any action, cause of action, damage or claim to person or property, or for any
claim for labor or material arising out of or in any manner connected with the
construction.
      (3)   All construction shall be supervised by and subject to the
inspection and approval of the City Engineer and the sewer, upon completion and
acceptance by the city, shall become the exclusive property of the city,
without reservation, and with the specific right in the city to connect to or
extend the sanitary sewer without payment of any kind to the applicant, his or
her heirs, successors or assigns.
      (4)   Manholes shall be constructed, at the applicant’s expense, at
intervals not to exceed approximately 300 feet or at such intervals as the City
Engineer directs. In the event an extension does not end in a manhole, a lamp
hole must be provided, at the expense of the applicant, to permit cleaning.
      (5)   The applicant shall agree to abide by all the ordinances, rules and
regulations of the city in the construction of the extension and nothing
contained in the application shall be construed to exempt the applicant from
sewer rental charges levied by the city.
   (B)   If the Director approves the application, he or she shall endorse such
approval on such application, issue a permit to open the street and direct the
City Engineer to prepare grades and specifications for such extension. The
permit shall be void 90 days after the date of its issuance.
(Prior Code, § 1040.03) (Ord. 22-1952, passed 3-3-1952)
§ 1040.03 SANITARY SEWER LATERALS.
   (A)   Whenever, by reason of §
1040.02 of this chapter or of the original installation, sewer service is made
available to the owner of any property not participating in the cost of such
extension or original installation, the owner of such property may connect a
lateral to such extension at his or her own expense, under the following terms
and conditions.
   (B)   The owner shall make an application to the City Engineer, on forms
prepared by the Engineer, for a permit to construct the lateral, and the
application shall contain the following terms and conditions.
      (1)   The total cost of the house lateral shall be contracted for and
paid by the applicant.
      (2)   The city shall not be responsible for any action, cause of action,
damage or claim to person or property or for any claim for labor or material
arising out of or in any manner connected with such construction.
      (3)   All construction shall be supervised by the City Engineer and shall
be subject to his or her inspection and approval.
      (4)   Where a house lateral must be connected to an existing sewer, a Y
section shall be inserted by a licensed plumber or sewer tapper or under the
direction of the City Engineer. A 30-degree bend must be attached to the Y, and
the lateral extended to the house at right angles to the main sewer.
      (5)   The construction shall be subject to all the rules, regulations and
ordinances of the city and nothing contained in the application shall be
construed to exempt the applicant from sewer rental charges levied by the city.
      (6)   The city shall not levy any assessment charges for the construction
of a sanitary sewer for the property described in the application, but the
applicant shall pay an amount equal to the latest cash assessment for the
district into which the sanitary sewer feeds, in lieu of such assessment. If a
lateral has not been carried to the curb line, a discount of 10% shall be given
to the applicant to compensate him or her for the cost of carrying such lateral
from the main line.
   (C)   Upon approval of the permit for a lateral connection by the City
Engineer and the payment of the required sum of money into the City Treasury, a
permit for the lateral connection must be obtained from the City Engineer, and
no lateral shall be covered before inspection and approval by the City
Engineer.
   (D)   (1)   All contracts and costs in connection with the construction of
house laterals shall be the sole responsibility of the owner, and the city will
recognize no charges incurred by the owner or private contractors based on
either a claim for failure to locate a lateral or main sewer line or
compensation for the cost of extending a lateral to the curb line.
      (2)   The discount of 10% cash assessment shall be received in full
payment for all such costs.
   (E)   Once installed, inspected and accepted, the property owner is solely
responsible for the maintenance and replacement of any sewer lateral.
(Prior Code, § 1040.04) (Ord. 117-1964, passed 7-6-1964; Ord. 174-2014, passed
1-26-2015)
§ 1040.04 SANITARY SEWER CONSTRUCTION FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby created a fund to be known as the “Sanitary Sewer
Construction Fund”.
   (B)   All payments provided by §
1040.03 of this chapter shall be paid into the Fund and shall be used for the
construction, extension and repair of sanitary sewers exclusively.
(Prior Code, § 1040.05) (Ord. 22-1952, passed 3-3-1952)
§ 1040.05 CONNECTION OF STORM WATER CONVEYANCES TO SANITARY SEWERS.
   No person shall connect, allow to be connected or suffer to remain connected
any roof drain, downspout or other storm water conveyance from any house,
building, apartment or other structure or property owned or used by him or her,
into any sanitary sewer within the city. The Building Commissioner and/or
Superintendent of Utilities shall give written notice to any person violating
this section, ordering such violator to remove such illegal storm sewer
connection from the sanitary sewer. No person shall fail or refuse to comply
with such order. Any person so notified of a violation of this section shall,
not later than three months from the date of such notice, remove from the
sanitary sewer the storm sewer connection constituting the violation of which
he was notified. No person shall refuse to allow the Building Commissioner or
the Superintendent of Utilities to make inspections or to conduct tests to
determine whether or not a violation of this section exists, upon written
request of either of such officials to do so.
(Prior Code, § 1040.06) (Ord. 22-1970, passed 2-2-1970)
§ 1040.06 MANDATORY CONNECTION TO SANITARY SEWER.
   No owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant of any lot or land located
within the city shall establish, construct, maintain or permit to remain a
privy, cesspool or other receptacle for sewage or waste, or a connection to a
private sewer, ditch or other outlet, if such lot or land is accessible to a
public sewer constructed and used for the purpose of conveying sewage and if a
public water main or other water supply satisfactory to permit use of plumbing
is available. When such public sewer and water main or other water supply are
available, a connection to such public sewer shall be established and used by
such owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant within six months after
notification of the availability of such sanitary sewer made by the Board of
Health.
(Prior Code, § 1040.07) (Ord. 140-1954, passed 10-4-1954)
§ 1040.07 SEWER OPENINGS TO BE SEALED; DEMOLITION DEPOSIT.
   All openings to sanitary sewers, made during construction or otherwise,
shall be effectively sealed and kept sealed so as to prevent the entrance of
surface or ground water or foreign materials of any nature. Such seals shall be
maintained whenever any opening is made in a sanitary sewer and shall be
removed only when approved by the City Engineer. Fifty dollars shall be placed
on deposit with the Building Department when permits are written for demolition
of a structure served by a sanitary sewer. The $50 shall be refunded after the
Superintendent of Utilities or his or her agent has inspected the sanitary
sewer laterals or lateral connected to the structure and certified that they
are sealed properly.
(Prior Code, § 1040.08) (Ord. 314-1976, passed 12-6-1976)
§ 1040.08 DUMPING OF SEPTIC TANK MATERIALS; PERMIT REQUIRED; FEES.
   (A)   The Director of Public Service and/or the Superintendent of Public
Utilities are authorized and directed to issue permits for the dumping of
septic tank materials or liquid waste at the City Water Pollution Control
Center, such permits to cost $50 per vehicle per year. No person shall dump or
otherwise dispose of such material at the Water Pollution Control Center
without first obtaining such permit.
   (B)   A charge of $35 per 1,000 gallons shall be assessed for all septic
tank materials dumped at the Barberton Water Pollution Control Center and shall
become effective 1-1-2003. Such charge shall increase to $40 per 1,000 gallons
and shall become effective 1-1-2004.
   (C)   All liquid waste dumped at the Water Pollution Control Center shall
conform to the standards set forth in Ch. 1054 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1040.09) (Ord. 306-1975, passed 8-25-1975; Ord. 351-1978, passed
12-27-1978; Ord. 191-2002, passed 11-12-2002)
§ 1040.09 UTILITY BILLING REVIEW BOARD.
   (A)   (1)   There is hereby established a Utility Billing Review Board,
which shall consist of four persons appointed by the Mayor.
      (2)   Any administrative decision made by any person charged with the
enforcement of water, sewer, storm water or refuse and recycling collection may
be appealed to the Board by any person claiming to be adversely affected by
such decision.
      (3)   Where there are unnecessary hardships due to lack of adequate
income, the Board shall have the power, in specific cases, to authorize an
adjustment for water, sewer, storm water, refuse and recycling so that the
public health, safety and general welfare may be secured and so that
substantial justice may be done.
   (B)   All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall
keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon every
question. If any member is absent or fails to vote, it shall indicate such
fact. The Board shall adopt, from time to time, such rules and regulations as
it deems necessary to implement the provisions of this section.
   (C)   The members of the Board shall be residents of the city, shall serve
without compensation from the city and shall not hold any other public office
with the city.
   (D)   A member shall be appointed for an initial term of one year; another
member shall be appointed for an initial term of two years; and another member
shall be appointed for an initial term of three years, with two options of
renewal. Vacancies for unexpired terms shall be filled within 60 days and in
the same manner as original appointments are made.
   (E)   A non-voting representative of the city’s Utility Billing Department
shall serve as the Secretary to the Board and shall establish the agenda and
keep the minutes.
(Prior Code, § 1040.10) (Ord. 164-1991, passed 10-14-1991; Ord. 202-2000,
passed 10-9-2000; Ord. 68-2010, passed 6-14-2010; Ord. 11-2018, passed 2-12-
2018)
§ 1040.10 TAP-IN FEES.
   (A)   (1)   Determination. Council hereby establishes and determines that
these system development charges (SDCs) shall apply to all sanitary sewer
connection whether directly or indirectly connected to the city sanitary sewer
system, including individual services connected within a bulk service area.
Indirectly connected shall constitute any service laterals discharging to a
sanitary sewer system or portion thereof not owned by the city but ultimately
discharging to the city’s Wastewater Treatment Plant.
      (2)   Conversion tables. Council hereby establishes a system development
charge (SDC) per each equivalent residential unit (ERU) according to the
following conversion tables relating to water meter size:
         (a)   Residential dwellings.
 
Single-Family Water Meter Size ERUs per Dwelling Unit SDC
   5/8”                      1.0                 $1,600
   3/4”                      1.5                 $2,400
   1”                        2.5                 $4,000
 
 
Duplex Water Meter Size ERUs per Dwelling Unit SDC each
   5/8”               0.86                $1,376
   3/4”               1.29                $2,064
 
*Each of the two dwelling units must be metered separately and served by a
separate sewer lateral.
         (b)   Commercial dwellings.
 
Water Meter Size Determined by Owner         ERUs per Dwelling SDC Total
                                          Unit
   3-plex                                 0.86                 $4,128
   4-plex                                 0.86                 $5,504
   Apartment (5 or    more dwelling    0.67                 $1,072 (per    dwelling unit)
units)
 
         (c)   Commercial (other than dwelling), industrial and institutional.
Water Meter Size    ER   SDC
Water Meter Size    ER   SDC
   5/8”        1.   $1,600
   3/4”        1.   $2,400
   1”          2.   $4,000
   1-1/2”      5.   $8,000
   2”          8.   $12,800
   3”          12   $19,200
   4”          16   $25,600
   6”          24   $38,400
 
      (3)   Application rules and guidelines.
         (a)   The use of equivalent residential units (ERUs) is per American
Water Works Association (AWWA) criteria for meter sizes eight-eights inch
through two inches. For water meter sizes larger than two inches, SDC charges
will be proportional to the equivalent residential units (ERUs) established for
that use.
         (b)   The city reserves the right to require a minimum meter size for
any application.
         (c)   Based on historic data, the minimum meter size for a restaurant
shall be a one-inch meter.
         (d)   The city may increase the SDC up to 3% annually.
      (4)   Fee collections.
         (a)   For sanitary sewer customers not connected to the city’s Water
Distribution System (directly or indirectly), it will be necessary for the
customer to install a city water meter and reading device on the well water
supply line directly as it enters the premises. Water meter size and location
shall be approved by the city’s Water Distribution Department. Such meter will
be used to determine monthly sanitary sewer charges.
         (b)   Any modification of the fees set forth in this division (A)(4)
is at the sole discretion of City Council.
      (5)   System development charge administration.
         (a)   Revenues from sanitary sewer system development charges shall be
accounted for separately from other funds. System development charges and
interest earned thereon may be expended only for capital project costs,
including interest expenses.
         (b)   The following situations shall be exempted from payment of the
system development charges:
            1.   Alterations or expansion of an existing building where no
additional or larger water meter connections are requested;
            2.   The replacement of a building or structure with a new building
or structure of the same size and use where no additional or larger water
connections are requested. For the property owner to retain the exemption from
SDCs, the building permit for the replacement structure must be obtained within
one year of the date of water service termination;
            3.   A change in water meter size shall not be exempted from
payment of the system development charge; however, a credit shall be given for
the current system development charge on the old connection size; and
            4.   No system development fee shall be required, nor credited for
a change in water meter size that results in a decrease in meter size.
         (c)   A 50% reduction of the SDCs shall be granted to certain
residents of the city for new residential, owner-occupied, single-family
dwellings. The reduction shall apply for one year from the date of approval.
   (B)   The City Council hereby approves special system development charges
(SDCs) for all water and sewer connections made at any point on the new water
and sewer mains installed to serve the New Haven Project, and any associated
developments served by the new infrastructure, either directly or indirectly,
as defined by the general system development charges established by City
Council. Such fees shall be as follows and may increase by up to 5% annually.
Water and sewer SDCs for water meter sizes in excess of five-eighths inch shall
be proportional to those fees charged under the standard $1,000 base water SDC
(utility rules) and $1,600 base sanitary sewer SDC per the general system
development charges established by City Council:
 
$2,045 Special water SDC per ERU
$1,600 Special sewer SDC per ERU
 
      (1)   The Director of Public Service or Superintendent of Utilities may
establish procedures for three tap-in fee extended payment programs enabling:
         (a)   Financially disadvantaged residents the option of placing the
tap-in fee on their property tax duplicate, without interest, for a period not
to exceed five years;
         (b)   Charitable agencies and public institutions the option of
placing the tap-in fee on their property tax duplicate, without interest, for a
period not to exceed five years; and
         (c)   Community development block grant (CDBG) recipients the option
of placing the tap-in fee on their property tax duplicate, without interest,
for a period not to exceed five years.
      (2)   All tap-in fees approved for the extended payment programs under
division (B)(1) above shall be certified to the County Auditor as provided by
law and placed on the tax list and duplicate, without interest, and collected
as other taxes, payable in semi-annual installments for no more than five years
for financially disadvantaged residents and charitable agencies and public
institutions.
(Prior Code, § 1040.11) (Ord. 184-2004, passed 11-22-2004; Ord. 191-2004,
passed 12-13-2004; Ord. 192-2004, passed 12-13-2004; Ord. 201-2010, passed 12-
20-2010; Ord. 20-2018, passed 2-26-2018)
§ 1040.11 WATER AND SEWER RATES FOR USERS WITHIN JOINT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
ZONES BETWEEN CITY OF BARBERTON AND CITY OF NORTON.
   Rates to be charged for water furnished by and sewer service accepted by the
Utilities Division for all consumers situated within the joint economic
development zones designated in the consolidation agreement for joint economic
development zones between the City of Barberton and the City of Norton are
hereby established as follows:
   (A)   Until 4-1-2001, the Barberton rates as revised from time to time, plus
a surcharge of 50% of those rates; and
   (B)   After 4-1-2001, the Barberton rates as revised from time to time, plus
a surcharge of 22.5% of those rates.
(Prior Code, § 1040.12) (Ord. 48-1996, passed 4-18-1996)
§ 1040.12 SEWER SERVICE AND USER CHARGES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      COMMERCIAL USER. Retail or wholesale businesses or any other business
establishment that discharges wastewater into the public wastewater treatment
system, works or facility.
      DEBT SERVICE. The funds used for the retirement of principal and interest
on bonds and/or notes authorized and issued by the city to construct sewage
system facilities.
      INDUSTRIAL USER. Includes users discharging waste resulting from
manufacturing activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of
materials or substance into other products. These activities occur in
establishments usually described as plants, factories or mills and
characteristically use power-driven machines and material handling equipment.
      INSTITUTIONAL USER. Hospitals, nursing homes, schools, city, county,
state or federal buildings or facilities that discharge wastewater into the
public wastewater treatment system, works or facility.
      OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS. The costs incurred in the act of keeping
all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage, in a
good state of repair and functioning properly, including the replacement of
said facilities when necessary.
      REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed.
      RESIDENTIAL USER. A principal family residence or habitation classified
as a single-family, multi- family or apartment dwelling that discharges
domestic sanitary wastewater having characteristics of 250 milligrams per liter
(mg/l) biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and 250 mg/l suspended solids (SS) into
the public wastewater treatment system.
      SEWER SERVICE CHARGE. The total charge levied against users of the sewage
system for sewer service. The charge shall include user charges, plus the cost
of debt service.
      USER CHARGE. The charge assessed users of the sewage system to recover
the cost of operation, maintenance and replacement of the sewage collection and
sewage treatment system and the cost of rendering bills and collection sewer
service charges.
   (B)   Sanitary sewage rate schedule – based on water usage, effective 9-21-
2016.
 
Gal Per    Norton Rate (Per M Gal)
Month      1.5 times Barberton rate
First 30 M $4.57       $6.86
Over 30 M  $3.66       $5.50
Norton Package Plants: Norton Aces – Brentwood – Frashure Park – Interstate
Industrial Park
           Residential Commercial Industrial
First 30 M $8.20       $9.15      $10.48
Over 30 M  $6.57       $7.33      $8.39
 
      (1)   Rates are subject to increase up to 5% on January 1 of each year,
by Ord. 208-2013.
Minimum Sewage Charge per Month According to Meter Size
Meter Size Water Usage in Gallons Monthly Charge
                                  Norton Rate
            Barberton Rate        1.5 Times Barberton Norton Package Plants
                                  Rate
                                                      Res. Com. Ind.
Minimum Sewage Charge per Month According to Meter Size
Meter Size Water Usage in Gallons Monthly Charge
                                  Norton Rate
                  Barberton Rate  1.5 Times Barberton Norton Package Plants
                                  Rate
                                                      Res.    Com.    Ind.
5/8-inch   2,500  $11.43          $17.15              $20.51  $22.88  $26.20
3/4        6,000  $27.42          $41.16              $49.22  $54.90  $62.87
1          14,000 $63.98          $96.04              $114.85 $128.11 $146.71
1-1/2      19,000 $86.83          $130.34             $155.87 $173.87 $199.10
2          24,000 $109.68         $164.64             $196.89 $219.62 $251.50
3          34,000 $151.74         $227.80             $272.39 $303.84 $347.95
4          50,000 $210.30         $315.80             $377.52 $421.10 $482.23
6          80,000 $320.10         $480.80             $574.63 $640.97 $734.01
 
      (2)   All rates outside the corporate limits of the City of Barberton,
excluding Norton, shall be double the Barberton rates except as authorized by
ordinance.
      (3)   Special rates for Norton package plants are to remain in effect
until debt service is paid in full for the connection to the Barberton Sewer
Collection System.
   (C)   Rates for sewer only.
      (1)   If a residential user, who discharges sanitary sewage into the
city’s sanitary sewage collection system is not a user of water supplied by the
city and water is not measured by a city water meter or by a meter acceptable
to the Superintendent of Utilities, the Superintendent of Utilities shall
estimate the usage in gallons per month of sanitary sewage discharged into the
city’s system and a sewer service charge and use charge shall be billed to the
residential user at the following rates:
 
Flat Rate per Month Based on Number of Residents
No. of Residents   Estimated Usage in Gals Barberton   Norton
                   per Month                           1.5 times Barberton rate
                                           $4.57 per M $6.86 Per M
2 (minimum charge) 4,800                   $21.94      $32.92
3                  7,200                   $32.90      $49.39
4                  9,600                   $43.87      $65.86
Over 4             14,400                  $65.81      $98.79
 
 
Outside City Rates – Excluding Norton – $9.14 per M per Month
2 (minimum charge) 4,800  $43.88
3                  7,200  $65.80
4                  9,600  $87.74
Over 4             14,400 $131.62
 
      (2)   If a multi-family apartment, commercial, industrial or
institutional user, who discharges sanitary sewage into the city’s sewage
collection system, is not a user of water supplied by the city, and it is not
measured by a city water meter or by a meter acceptable to the Superintendent
of Utilities, the Superintendent of Utilities shall estimate the usage in
gallons per month of sanitary sewage discharged into the city’s system or shall
require the installation of a meter to measure such usage and a sewer service
charge and use charge shall be billed to the user at the rate set forth.
      (3)   A minimum charge for a residential, commercial or industrial user,
who discharges sanitary sewage into the city’s sanitary sewage collection
system and is not a user of water supplied by the city and water is not
measured by a city water meter or by a meter acceptable to the Superintendent
of Utilities shall be billed at the following rates:
 
Effective January 1, 2017
Billing Class        Barberton
Per Residential Unit $32.90 (Based on 7,200 gallons/month)
Commercial           $40.62
Industrial           $45.40
 
Effective January 1, 2017
Billing Class        Barberton
                     Effective January 1, 2017 Effective January 1, 2016
Billing Class        Norton                    Norton Package Plants
Per Residential Unit $49.39 (40.32 + 9.07)     $51.55
Commercial           $60.93 (49.76 + 11.17)    $63.82
Industrial           $68.10 (55.62 + 12.48)    $73.22
Special rates for Norton package plants are to remain in effect until debt
service is paid in full for the connection to the Barberton sewer collection
system.
OUTSIDE CITY FLAT RATES – EXCLUDING NORTON
Billing Class        Outside City Rates
Per Residential Unit $65.80
Commercial           $80.93
Industrial           $90.80
 
      (4)   Outside metered city rates – excluding Norton – $9.14 per M.
         (a)   If a multi-family apartment, commercial, industrial or
institutional user, who discharges sanitary sewage into the city’s sewage
collection system, is not a user of water supplied by the city, and it is not
measured by a city water meter or by a meter acceptable to the Superintendent
of Utilities, the Superintendent of Utilities shall estimate the usage in
gallons per month of sanitary sewage discharged into the city’s system or shall
require the installation of a meter to measure such usage and a sewer service
charge and use charge shall be billed to the user at the rate set forth.
         (b)   Flat rate customers may choose to have a water meter and meter
interface unit installed acceptable to the Superintendent of Utilities at the
owner’s expense at the water service entry point into the building being served
and will be charged the applicable metered rate for sanitary sewer services.
      (5)   Customer service:
         Hours: Monday – Friday 8:00 a.m. – 4:15 p.m.
         Phone: 330-753-0328
         Fax: 330-848-6664
   (D)   Late payment charges. Bills for sewer service charges and user charges
that are not paid by the tenth day of the month following the receipt of the
bill shall be subject to a 10% penalty.
   (E)   Right of appeal. All customers shall have the right to appeal bills
rendered for sewer service charges and user charges. If a billing dispute
cannot be resolved by the Utility Billing Department, the Utilities Billing
Review Board shall resolve such dispute.
   (F)   Annual review of charges. The sewer service charges and user charges
shall be reviewed annually by the city in order to determine whether or not
they are sufficient to defray the fixed charges, amortization costs and annual
cost of operation and maintenance of the sewage collection system. If the
difference between the total annual cost is sufficient to justify an increase
or decrease in the sewer service charges or user charges, the city will adjust
the rates as required. The purpose of the annual review is also to maintain a
proportional rate system. Each user is to be notified, at least annually, in
conjunction with a regular bill, regarding the sewer service charge and user
charge rates and that portion of such rates which is attributable to the
operation, maintenance and replacement costs of wastewater treatment services.
(Prior Code, § 1040.13) (Ord. 79-2004, passed 5-10-2004; Ord. 208-2013, passed
12-16-2013; Ord. 187-2015, passed 12-14-2015; Ord. 97-2016, passed 11-14-2016)
§ 1040.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
more than $500 or imprisoned not more than six months, or both. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 1040.99) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957; Ord. 53-1972, passed
3-20-1972)
CHAPTER 1044: WATER
Section
1044.01   Contamination of water supply; preventive measures.
1044.02   Restricting water service for unpaid water bills.
1044.03   Responsibility of property owners.
Editor’s note:
   The Division of Utilities operates the Municipal Water Treatment Plant.
Rules and regulations for the use of city water are available at the office of
the Division.
Cross-reference:
   Compulsory water connections, see Ohio R. C. 727. 05, 743.23
   Management and control of waterworks, see Ohio R. C. 743.02 et seq.
   Plumbing permit fees, see B. & H.
1444.03,
1444.06
   Power to provide and regulate water system, see Ohio R. C. 715.08, 717.01,
743.01
   Tampering with water hydrants, pipes or meters; unauthorized connections,
see Ohio R. C. 4933.22
   Theft of utilities, see GEN. OFF.
642.29
   Water and sewer rates for users within joint economic development zones
between City of Barberton and City of Norton, see S.U. & P.S.
1040.12
   Water connections in dwellings, see Ch.
1478
   Water connections in trailer camps and tourist cabins, see B. R. & T.
860.06,
860.08(c)
   Water contamination in dwellings, see B. & H.
1478.02
   Water pollution in parks and recreation areas, see S. U. & P. S.
1068.03(a)
   Water pollution in watercourses and lakes, see GEN. OFF.
660.04, 660.05(i), 660.18
   Water pollution in Barberton Reservoir - Wolf Creek area, see S. U. & P. S.
1072.02 et seq.
   Waterworks mortgage revenue bonds, see Ohio R. C. 715.09 et seq.
§ 1044.01 CONTAMINATION OF WATER SUPPLY; PREVENTIVE MEASURES.
   (A)   If, in the judgment of the Superintendent of Utilities, an approved
backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water
system, the Superintendent shall give notice to the water consumer to install
such an approved device immediately. The water consumer shall, at his or her
own expense, install such an approved device at a location and in a manner
approved by the Superintendent and shall have such inspections and tests made
of such approved device as are required by the Superintendent.
   (B)   No person shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or
permit to be maintained any connection whereby a private, auxiliary or
emergency water supply, other than the regular public water supply of the city,
may enter the supply or distribution system of the city, unless such private,
auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of
such supply have been approved by the Superintendent and by the Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Superintendent to cause surveys and
investigations to be made of industrial and other properties served by the
public water supply where actual or potential hazards to the public water
supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be made a matter of
public record and shall be repeated as often as the Superintendent deems
necessary.
   (D)   The Superintendent or his or her duly authorized representative shall
have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a
connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the city for
the purpose of inspecting the piping system thereof. On demand, the owner,
lessee or occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the
Superintendent any information which he or she may request regarding the piping
system or water use on such property. The refusal of such information, when
demanded, shall, within the discretion of the Superintendent, be deemed
evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in this section.
   (E)   The Superintendent is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue,
after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service to any
property wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this section
is known to exist and to take such other precautionary measures as he or she
may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water
supply distribution mains. Water service to such property shall not be restored
until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the
provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 1044.02) (Ord. 271-1974, passed 7-22-1974)
§ 1044.02 RESTRICTING WATER SERVICE FOR UNPAID WATER BILLS.
   Water service will not be provided following an interruption in service when
the following conditions are present:
   (A)   There is an outstanding utility bill for any of the following: water;
sewer; trash service; storm water utility or lighting utility at the particular
property regardless of whether or not the prior service was in the name of a
property owner or a tenant;
   (B)   The property owner has city utility bills outstanding, overdue (more
than 60 days’ delinquent) and unpaid for other property owned;
   (C)   The property owner has previously had service denied and/or shut-off
without paying the entire amount due and owing on delinquent accounts;
   (D)   City utility service will not be provided to a tenant, a subtenant, a
sublessee, sublessor, assignee and/or assignor in the event that their
landlord, or owner of the property that is the subject of a tenancy, would be
unable to obtain service independently based upon the existence of one or more
of the above-noted conditions;
   (E)   The Utility Department may enter agreements providing for incremental
payments to be made with the added option of providing current water service
contingent upon compliance with a payment plan agreed to by the Water
Department. The option contained in this division (E) is solely within the
discretion of the Utility Department and need not be offered to those seeking
the provision of water service.
(Prior Code, § 1044.04) (Ord. 182-2007, passed 11-26-2007; Ord. 105-2019,
passed 9-23-2019)
§ 1044.03 RESPONSIBILITY OF PROPERTY OWNERS.
   By virtue of ownership, the water line from the shutoff valve at the “curb
stop” to the structure shall be the responsibility of the property owners.
Repairs/replacements are to be made by a qualified and registered contractor
only, with restoration subject to inspection and acceptance of the city. Final
connection at the curb box and the pressure check are subject to inspections by
the city. A permit is required from the Building Department before work is
initiated, with inspection before backfilling required. Work shall only be
performed by a contractor bonded by the city’s Building Department.
(Prior Code, § 1044.05) (Ord. 8-2013, passed 2-11-2013)
CHAPTER 1048: GAS
Editor’s note:
   There are no sections in this Ch. 1048. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross-references and any future legislation.
Cross-reference:
   Air pollution, see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 610
   Board of Warm-Air Heating Examiners, see B. & H.
1426.03 et seq.
   Heating, air-conditioning, refrigeration and ventilation permit and
inspection fees, see B. & H.
1444.04,
1444.06
   Power to erect gas works, see Ohio R.C. 743.34
   Power to furnish light, power and heat, see Ohio R.C. 715.06, 717.01
   Purchase of gas, see Ohio R.C. 715.07
   Theft of utilities, see GEN. OFF.
642.29
   Venting of heaters and burners, see GEN. OFF.
660.01
   Warm-air heating licensing, see B. & H. Ch.
1422, Ch. 1426
CHAPTER 1052: ELECTRICITY
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 193-2000, passed 10-9-2000, authorized the city to enter into the
Northeast Ohio Public Energy Council of Governments for the purpose of jointly
establishing and implementing an electricity aggregation program. On 11-7-2000,
the voters of the city approved an opt-out electricity aggregation program.
Ord. 226-2000, passed 12-18-2000, adopted the Plan of Operation and Governance
for the Electricity Aggregation Program for the city and the Northeast Ohio
Public Energy Council. Ord. 68-2001, passed 3-26-2001, adopted the Plan of
Operation and Governance for the Electricity Aggregation Program for the City
with First Energy Services Corp. Copies of these ordinances and plans may be
obtained, at cost, from the Clerk of Council.
There are no sections in this Ch. 1052. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross-references and any future legislation.
Cross-reference:
   Electric sign licensing, see B. & H. Ch.
1430 
   Electric wiring permit and inspection fees, see B. & H.
1444.02,
1444.06
   Electrical facilities in kitchens, see B. & H. 1472.08
   Electrical licensing, see B. & H. Ch.
1422, Ch.
1424
   Electrical outlets in dwellings, see B. & H. 1472.07
   Electrified fences, see GEN. OFF.
660.17 
   Power to erect electric works, see Ohio R.C. 743.34
   Power to establish electric light and power rates, see Ohio R.C. 715. 03,
715.06
   Power to furnish light, power and heat, see Ohio R.C. 715. 06, 717. 01
   Public utilities and other companies supplying electrical energy, see B. &
H.
1424.03
   Theft of utilities, see GEN. OFF.
642.29
CHAPTER 1054: INDUSTRIAL WASTE DISCHARGES
Section
1054.01   Definitions.
1054.02   Purposes.
1054.03   Compliance.
1054.04   Prohibited discharges.
1054.05   Determination of    acceptability of discharges.
1054.06   Unacceptable discharges defined.
1054.07   Procedures for unacceptable discharges.
1054.08   Pretreatment of unacceptable discharges.
1054.09   Construction of pretreatment facilities; plan approval.
1054.10   Operation and maintenance of pretreatment facilities.
1054.11   Limitations on wastewater pollutants.
1054.12   Dilution prohibition.
1054.13   Monitoring and flow measurement facilities.
1054.14   Right of access.
1054.15   Requirements for non-categorical wastewater dischargers.
1054.16   Requirements for categorical wastewater dischargers.
1054.17   Requirements applicable to all industrial users.
1054.18   Compliance schedule.
1054.19   Trade secrets and confidentiality.
1054.20   Protection from accidental discharges.
1054.21   Accidental discharge notification and reporting.
1054.22   Charges for damage to system.
1054.23   Treatment system bypasses.
1054.24   Operating upsets.
1054.25   Pretreatment program fees.
1054.26   Surcharges.
1054.27   Administrative orders to control discharges.
1054.28   Requests for reconsideration of Superintendent’s decisions.
1054.29   Notices of violations.
1054.30   Assessment of administrative fees; Industrial Wastewater Review
Board.
1054.31   Emergency suspension of service.
1054.32   Termination of treatment services.
1054.33   Retention of records.
1054.34   Falsifying information.
1054.35   Annual publication of significant non- compliance.
1054.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Compulsory sewer connections, see Ohio R.C. 729.06
   Industrial waste prohibited in Barberton Reservoir and Wolf Creek, see S.U.
& P.S.
1072.02
   Interference with sewage flow, see Ohio R.C. 4933.24
   Sewerage rates, see Ohio R.C. 729.49
   Sewers generally, S.U. & P.S. Ch.
1040
   Untreated sewage, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3718
   Utility Billing Review Board, see S.U. & P.S.
1040.10
§ 1054.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water
Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   APPROVED LABORATORY PROCEDURES. The measurements, tests and analyses of the
characteristics of water and wastes in accordance with analytical procedures
determined acceptable by Federal guidelines as established in 40 C.F.R. part
136, or as approved by the Regional Administrator, U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency.
   AUTHORITY or CONTROL AUTHORITY. The City of Barberton, Ohio, which is
enacting and enforcing this chapter.
   BACKGROUND CONCENTRATION. The concentration of pollutants found in sewerage
system wastewater from city residential areas where only domestic or
uncontrollable wastewater flow is present. The BACKGROUND POLLUTANT
CONCENTRATIONS are to be established by the city and re-evaluated at least
annually.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs. Schedule of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to implement
the prohibitions listed in O.A.C. 3745-3-04. BMPs also include treatment
requirements, operating procedures and practices to control plant site runoff,
spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal or drainage from raw materials
storage.
   BIODEGRADABLE. Material that shall be easily amenable to breakdown to
acceptable levels by biological processes present in the city’s sewerage
treatment system. The Superintendent of Utilities shall determine whether a
material is BIODEGRADABLE if such determination is required.
   BYPASS. The intentional diversion of waste streams away from any portion of
an industrial user’s treatment facilities.
   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. National pretreatment standards
specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties
which may be discharged or introduced into the wastewater treatment system by
specific industrial dischargers designated by federal or state regulations.
Industrial users which are covered by these regulations may be classified in
one of the following three sub- categories:
      (1)   Significant categorical user;
      (2)   Non-significant categorical industrial user; and
      (3)   Mid-tier categorical industrial user.
   COOLING WATER. The wastewater discharged from any system of heat transfer,
such as condensation, air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration.
   DISCHARGE. The introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any non-domestic
source regulated under § 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act.
   INDUSTRIAL USER or USER. Any non-domestic source of pollutants discharged
into the Barberton POTW and regulated under § 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. The solid, liquid or gaseous waste resulting from any
industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process.
   INTERFERENCE. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, both:
      (1)   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or
operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
      (2)   Causes, therefore, a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s
NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation) or the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance
with statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more
stringent state or local regulations).
   mg/l. Milligrams per liter.
   MID-TIER CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER. A categorical user that meets one of
the following:
      (1)   The industrial user must not discharge total categorical wastewater
that exceeds:
         (a)   0.01% of the design dry weather hydraulic capacity of the
receiving POTW;
         (b)   Five thousand gallons per day of total categorical wastewater;
         (c)   0.01% of the design dry weather organic treatment capacity of
the receiving POTW; and
         (d)   0.01% of the maximum allowable headworks loading for any
pollutant regulated by the applicable categorical pretreatment standards for
which a local limit has been developed.
      (2)   The industrial user’s flow must be monitored by a continuous
effluent flow monitoring device unless the user discharges in batches;
      (3)   The industrial user must not have been in significant non-
compliance in the past two years;
      (4)   The daily flow rates, production levels or pollutant levels of the
industrial user cannot vary so significantly that decreasing the reporting
requirement would result in data that are not representative of conditions
occurring during the reporting period;
      (5)   If the industrial user is located upstream of a combined or
sanitary sewer overflow, the issues relating to the overflows must be addressed
through either a long-term control plan, an approved combined sewer system
operation plan implementing the nine minimum controls, or the program
modification request; and
      (6)   The industrial user will be inspected and the effluent randomly
sampled at least one every two years by the city.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface water.
   NEW SOURCE. Any building, structure, facility or installation from which
there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under § 307
(c) of the Act, which will be applicable to such source if such standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section. Construction by an
industrial user will be classified as a NEW SOURCE if:
      (1)   The construction is carried out at a site at which no other source
is located;
      (2)   The construction totally replaces the process or production
equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or
      (3)   The production of wastewater generating processes of the
constructed facility are substantially independent of an existing source at the
same site.
   NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling which does not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or
finished product of a user’s processes, but which still may contain pollutants
that are subject to regulation.
   NON-SIGNIFICANT CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER. A categorical user that meets
one of the following:
      (1)   The industrial user does not discharge more than 100 gallons per
day of total categorical wastewater. That does not include sanitary, non-
contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater unless it is specifically
included in the categorical pretreatment standard;
      (2)   No untreated concentrated wastewater, which is regulated by the
categorical pretreatment standards, may be discharged at any time;
      (3)   The user must certify and provide required justification and
supporting documentation annually that:
         (a)   The facility met the definition of a NON-SIGNIFICANT CATEGORICAL
INDUSTRIAL USER;
         (b)   The facility complied with all applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements during the reporting period (as defined in O.A.C. 3745-30-01
(P)); and
         (c)   The facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total
categorical wastewater on any given day during the reporting period.
      (4)   If the user is located upstream of a combined or sanitary sewer
overflow the following additional requirements must be met for the application
of the classification:
         (a)   The industrial user does not discharge wastewater that is
regulated by categorical pretreatment standards;
         (b)   The industrial user must not have been in significant non-
compliance at any time in the past two years; and
         (c)   Procedures for issues relating to combined or sanitary sewer
overflows must be addressed through either a long-term control plan, an
approved combined sewer system operation plan implementing the nine minimum
controls or the program modification request.
      (5)   The city will evaluate the industrial user annually to determine if
the user still meets the requirements for classification as a NON-SIGNIFICANT
CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER.
   NPDES PERMIT or PERMIT. A permit issued to a POTW pursuant to § 402 of the
Act.
   OHIO EPA. The Ohio Environmental Protection Agency.
   OILS AND GREASES. Those materials extractable from an acidified sample by
hexane or other acceptable solvent in accordance with approved laboratory
procedures.
   ORGANIC. Containing carbon compounds.
   PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the state in
quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirements of
the POTW’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of
a violation).
   pH. The logarithm to the base ten of the reciprocal of the concentration of
the hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
   POTW or PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS. A treatment works owned and operated
by the city, including any devices or system used for conveyance, storage,
treatment or reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature.
POTW also means the municipality which has jurisdiction over the discharges to,
and the discharges from, such a treatment works.
   PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such
pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration may be obtained by
physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes or by other means.
APPROPRIATE PRETREATMENT TECHNOLOGY includes control equipment, such as
equalization tanks or facilities, for protection against surges or slug
loadings that might interfere with or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW.
   PRETREATMENT FACILITY. An arrangement of devices, equipment and structures
for treating and monitoring wastewater prior to discharge to a POTW.
   PROCESS WASTEWATER. Any water which, during manufacturing or processing
operations, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or
use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct or
waste product.
   PUBLIC SEWER. Any sewer owned by the city, including storm and sanitary
sewers.
   RADIOACTIVITY. The spontaneous decay or disintegration of an unstable atomic
nucleus, accompanied by the emission of radiation.
   SANITARY SEWAGE. Sewage containing water-carried wastes contributed from
premises by reasons of human occupancy.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sanitary sewage and/or industrial
wastes and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally
admitted.
   SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE. Substantial physical damage to property, substantial
damage to the treatment facility which would cause it to become inoperable, or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which cannot reasonably be
expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE does not
mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
   SEWER SERVICE CHARGE. The total charge to a sewerage system user.
   SEWERAGE SYSTEM. All of the facilities required to transport sewage from the
premises of the source to a sewage treatment facility and shall include the
treatment and disposal facility.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (2) below, all industrial users
subject to categorical pretreatment standards; and any other industrial user
that: discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process
wastewater to the POTW; contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or
more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW
treatment plant; or has a reasonable potential, in the opinion of the
Superintendent, to adversely affect the POTW’s operation or for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirement.
      (2)   The Superintendent may any time, on his or her own initiative or in
response to a petition received from an industrial user, determine that a non-
categorical industrial user is not a significant industrial user if the
industrial user has no reasonable potential to adversely affect the POTW’s
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
   SLUG DISCHARGE. Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants
(biochemical oxygen demand and the like) released in a discharge at a flow rate
and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the POTW.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer which carries water runoff and drainage and is not to
carry sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted wastewaters.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of Utilities of the City of Barberton.
   TOXIC SUBSTANCES. Those substances or combinations of substances, including
disease causing agents which, after discharge and upon exposure, ingestion,
inhalation or assimilation into any organisms, either directly from the
environment or indirectly by ingestion through food chains, will, on the basis
of information available to the Superintendent, cause death, disease,
behavioral abnormalities, cancer, genetic mutations, physiological malfunctions
(including malfunctions in reproduction) or physical deformations of such
organisms or their offspring.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water to which no constituent has been added, either
intentionally or accidentally, which would render such water unacceptable for
disposal to storm or natural drainages or directly to surface waters.
   UPSET. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
non-compliance with pretreatment standards and limitations because of factors
beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An UPSET does not include
non-compliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive
maintenance or careless or improper operation.
   WASTEWATER. A combination of liquid and water-carried wastes.
   WATERS OF THE STATE. Any water, surface or underground, including saline
waters, within the boundaries of the state, exclusive of water in sewerage
systems.
(Prior Code, § 1054.01) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 62-1993, passed 4-
26-1993; Ord. 149-2013, passed 9-9-2013)
§ 1054.02 PURPOSES.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate industrial user wastewater
and wastewater pollutants discharged to the public sanitary sewers of the city.
   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are to prevent the introduction of
pollutants into the sewerage system which will interfere with treatment
processes, prevent pass through untreated in unacceptable amounts, prevent
established methods of use or disposal of treatment sludge and prevent
practices that would otherwise result in violation of the POTW’s NPDES permit.
Implementation and enforcement of pretreatment standards and requirements will
be carried out through the provisions of this chapter and by administrative
orders issued to individual industrial users by the Superintendent of
Utilities.
(Prior Code, § 1054.02) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
§ 1054.03 COMPLIANCE.
   No industrial user shall discharge any wastewaters or wastewater pollutants
to any sewer within the jurisdiction of the city and/or to the POTW without
having first complied with this chapter.
(Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed 9-9-2013)
§ 1054.04 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   General prohibitions. No user shall discharge to the POTW any
pollutants which cause pass through or interference. This general prohibition
and the specific prohibitions provided in division (B) below apply to each
user, whether or not the user is subject to other national pretreatment
standards or any national, state or local pretreatment requirements.
   (B)   Specific prohibitions. No industrial user shall discharge, or cause to
be discharged, any of the following described pollutants, water or wastes to
any public sewer:
      (1)   Any solid or viscous pollutants, such as construction materials,
ashes, cinders, sand, metal, glass, grease, tar, plastic, wax or wood, in
amounts which cause obstruction to the flow in the POTW resulting in
interference;
      (2)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, pollutants with a closed cup flashpoint of less
than 140°F as determined by closed cup test methods (Pensky- Martens or
Setaflash), specified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.21;
      (3)   Heat in amounts that will inhibit biological activity in the POTW
treatment plant, resulting in interference or causing damage, but in no case
heat in such quantities that the temperature exceeds 40°C (104°F) at the end of
pipe prior to discharge to the POTW treatment plant;
      (4)   Any water or wastes that are acid or alkaline in reaction and
having corrosive properties capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment or city personnel. The pH of such wastes must be neutralized at all
time to range between 6.0 and 10.0 at all times;
      (5)   Any petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil or products of
mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through at
the POTW treatment plant;
      (6)   Any wastewater containing biodegradable oil and grease of animal or
vegetable origin exceeding 200 mg/l;
      (7)   Any slug discharge, which shall mean any pollutant, including
oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD and the like), released in a discharge at a
flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the
POTW;
      (8)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute health and safety
problems to personnel, or prevent entry into the sewerage system for purposes
of inspection, maintenance, or monitoring activities;
      (9)   Any liquids or wastes containing radioactive materials or isotopes;
      (10)   Any trucked or hauled wastes, except septic wastes of residential
origin, which shall be discharged only at the POTW treatment plant septic waste
collection tank, and only by haulers approved by the city. Discharge of any
other wastes, or of septic wastes at any other location, without the express
approval or permission of the Superintendent shall be considered a violation
subject to enforcement action, including fines and penalties allowed under this
chapter;
      (11)   Any wastewater containing surfactants or other foam-causing
material in quantities creating foaming problems at the POTW treatment plant or
in the receiving waters;
      (12)   Any wastewater containing an objectionable color not removed in
the treatment process, caused by, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions;
      (13)   Any wastewater containing noxious or malodorous gases or
substances capable of creating a public nuisance; and
      (14)   Any wastewater containing total phosphorus levels exceeding 100
mg/l.
   (C)   Other prohibitions.
      (1)   No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any natural
outlet or storm sewer within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of
said city, any sanitary wastewater or other polluted water.
      (2)   No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted
wastewater, including, but not limited to, non-contact cooling water, storm
water or roof runoff to any sanitary sewer.
(Prior Code, § 1054.04) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 62-1993, passed 4-
26-1993; Ord. 149-2013, passed 9-9-2013; Ord. 142-2016, passed 12-12-2016)
§ 1054.05 DETERMINATION OF ACCEPTABILITY OF DISCHARGES.
   (A)   No user shall be permitted to connect to or to discharge any
wastewater, except sanitary sewage to the POTW unless it has been determined by
the Superintendent of Utilities that there is sufficient capacity in the system
to collect, convey and treat the wastewater discharge of such user.
   (B)   Determination of acceptability of all questionable discharges shall be
made on a basis of sound engineering and operational evaluations, taking into
consideration the nature and concentration of the discharge, point of entry
into the sewerage system, compatibility with other discharges in the system and
compatibility with the treatment processes. All discharges the Superintendent
deems acceptable cannot exceed the applicable limits or standards set forth
under federal or state laws (including categorical pretreatment standards) or
under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1054.05) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
§ 1054.06 UNACCEPTABLE DISCHARGES DEFINED.
   Unacceptable discharges shall include those which have been determined by
the Superintendent of Utilities to:
   (A)   Violate the prohibited discharges specified in §
1054.04 of this chapter;
   (B)   Contain concentrations or amounts of regulated materials or substances
in excess of limits defined and established by this chapter and applicable
national categorical pretreatment standards;
   (C)   Cause the city to incur excessive expense in the handling or treatment
of such discharges;
   (D)   Be incompatible with or inhibit the performance of the POTW treatment
plant;
   (E)   Result in non-compliance by the POTW with requirements set by state
and federal regulatory agencies;
   (F)   Cause the POTW treatment plant effluent, or any other product of the
treatment process, such as residues and sludges, to be unsuitable for
reclamation and reuse; and
   (G)   Result in adverse impact on POTW treatment plant operations or design
capacity.
(Prior Code, § 1054.06) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
§ 1054.07 PROCEDURES FOR UNACCEPTABLE DISCHARGES.
   Upon determination that an existing or proposed wastewater discharge is
unacceptable, the Superintendent of Utilities may:
   (A)   Refuse wastewater treatment service to the user discharging or
proposing to discharge unacceptable waste. Further, the Superintendent may
order the removal of such discharges from the sewerage system, including the
physical removal of connection to the system, after 30 days of notification to
the user that such discharge is unacceptable; or
   (B)   Require provision of pretreatment of the wastewater by equipment and/
or procedures to assure that wastewater discharges to the sewerage system will,
at all times, be acceptable.
(Prior Code, § 1054.07) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
§ 1054.08 PRETREATMENT OF UNACCEPTABLE DISCHARGES.
   (A)   Upon notification by the Superintendent of Utilities that pretreatment
of an industrial user’s wastewater discharges is required, the user shall:
      (1)   Submit to the Superintendent, within 14 calendar days of
notification, a statement acknowledging the notification and indicating the
user’s intent to proceed to provide remedial pretreatment equipment and/or
procedures; and
      (2)   Submit to the Superintendent, as directed, a proposed compliance
schedule to carry out the necessary work leading to implementation of
operations/procedural changes, or installation of pretreatment facilities
within the shortest time possible. The compliance schedule shall indicate the
separate milestone steps to be taken, the dates for completion of each step and
a final date for achieving compliance.
   (B)   If the original compliance schedule is not acceptable to the
Superintendent, the user shall submit additional information, data or a revised
schedule within 30 days of notification of the unacceptable provisions
submitted. Failure to submit an acceptable compliance program shall be
considered unsatisfactory progress and may result in orders to remove the
unacceptable discharge from the sewerage system, or refusal to permit a
proposed new discharge.
   (C)   Upon acceptance by the Superintendent of the pretreatment compliance
program, the industrial user shall proceed to implement the program in
accordance with the compliance schedule as accepted. The user shall submit
periodic progress reports as required by the Superintendent, indicating whether
or not the scheduled milestone dates are being achieved and, if not, what steps
are being taken to return to the approved schedule for meeting the final
compliance date.
   (D)   Failure to meet the compliance schedule milestone dates, final
compliance date or reporting requirements shall be subject to enforcement
pursuant to the applicable provisions of this chapter, including notice of
violation, administrative fees, revocation of treatment service and penalty
action.
(Prior Code, § 1054.08) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
§ 1054.09 CONSTRUCTION OF PRETREATMENT FACILITIES; PLAN APPROVAL.
   Where installation of new or modified pretreatment facilities is required to
comply with pretreatment standards and limitations, all industrial users shall
submit applications for a permit to install to the Superintendent of Utilities
and the Ohio EPA for approval prior to construction or installation.
Applications shall include detailed plans, specifications and sufficient design
information to allow proper evaluation of the proposed pretreatment facilities.
Approval by the Superintendent does not, in any way, guarantee that the
facilities will function satisfactorily or that it will not be necessary to
enlarge or otherwise modify the facilities to make them capable of providing
satisfactory pretreatment. It remains the responsibility of the user to provide
a pretreatment system that will ensure consistent compliance with all discharge
limitations.
(Prior Code, § 1054.09) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
§ 1054.10 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.
   Wastewater pretreatment or control facilities, as required, shall be
maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation and shall be
subject to periodic inspection by the Control Authority. The industrial user
shall maintain all records of operation necessary to document performance of
the pretreatment system, and shall submit reports on the characteristics of
wastewater discharge as required by the Superintendent of Utilities or this
chapter to demonstrate compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements.
(Prior Code, § 1054.10) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
§ 1054.11 LIMITATIONS ON WASTEWATER POLLUTANTS.
   (A)   National categorical pretreatment standards for new and existing
indirect sources, as promulgated under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6 and 40 C.F.R. Ch. I,
Subch. N, are hereby incorporated as part of this chapter by reference.
Industrial users subject to the applicable categorical standards shall comply
with the more stringent of these standards or the local limitations established
and adopted by the city.
   (B)   The city shall develop limitations for pollutants of concern
contributed by industrial users in concentrations that may cause interference
or pass through of the POTW treatment works.
   (C)   Best management practices (BMPs) may be developed by the control
authority as a local limit and if so, shall be incorporated in the
administrative orders of wastewater acceptance.
   (D)   The city reserves the right to add to or revise local limitations on
discharges to the POTW, as deemed necessary to ensure continued compliance with
the POTW’s NPDES permit, or sludge use or disposal practices.
   (E)   Specific effluent limits shall not be developed and enforced without
individual notice to persons or groups who have requested such notice and an
opportunity to respond. Industrial users affected by the adoption of new or
revised pollutant limitations shall be given a reasonable period of time to
comply with such changes.
   (F)   No industrial user shall discharge wastewater concentrations and/or
mass-based loadings to the POTW exceeding the limitations for the regulated
pollutants specified in the user’s administrative orders of wastewater
acceptance issued by the city, or any discharge violating the prohibited
discharges listed in §
1054.04(A) and (B) of this chapter.
   (G)   (1)   No industrial user shall discharge or cause to be discharged
into the sewerage system any regulated substance or pollutant in concentrations
above the background concentrations as established by the city, unless the
pollutant is listed and limitations are provided in administrative orders of
wastewater acceptance issued by the city.
      (2)   Categorical users regulated by concentration-based may now have
those limits converted to equivalent mass-based limits according to 40 C.F.R. §
403.6(c)(5).
   (H)   Sampling and analysis of all pollutants regulated under this chapter
shall be performed according to approved test methods established and contained
in 40 C.F.R. part 136, and amendments thereto, or analytical methods directly
specified by 40 C.F.R. part 403. Where approved test methods or procedures for
a given pollutant are not included or are inappropriate, any alternative method
developed must be validated and approved by the Administrator of the U.S. EPA.
   (I)   The authority may impose mass-based limitations on industrial users
which are using dilution to meet the pretreatment standards or limitations of
this chapter, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is
deemed appropriate.
   (J)   When limits in categorical pretreatment standards are expressed only
in terms of mass of pollutants per unit of production, the authority may
convert the mass-based limits to equivalent mass-based limitations expressed
either as mass discharged per day or as effluent concentration limits. The
equivalent concentration- based limitations will be deemed pretreatment
standards which industrial users will be required to comply with in lieu of
promulgated standards per 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c)(6).
   (K)   The Authority may control, by administrative order, any industrial
user discharge of conventional pollutants (BOD, COD, TSS and the like), and
discharge flow rates, to limit excessive pollutant concentrations and loadings
or to prevent an adverse impact on the POTW treatment plant operations.
   (L)   Any violation of applicable federal, state or city industrial
pretreatment standards is a violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1054.11) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
§ 1054.12 DILUTION PROHIBITION.
   Except where expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard, no
industrial user shall increase the use of potable or process water, or in any
way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the discharge limitations.
(Prior Code, § 1054.12) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
§ 1054.13 MONITORING AND FLOW MEASUREMENT FACILITIES.
   (A)   At the discretion of the Superintendent of Utilities, any user
discharging to the sewerage system shall provide, operate and maintain, at the
discharger’s own expense, a monitoring facility to enable inspection, sampling,
and flow measurement of each waste water discharge to the POTW. The
Superintendent may require the user to install appropriate sampling and flow
monitoring equipment where needed to determine compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards or extra-strength surcharges.
   (B)   Each monitoring facility shall be located on the user’s premises,
except, where such a location would be impractical; the Superintendent may
concur with construction on the public sidewalk or berm. Facility locations
shall be free of obstruction by equipment, parked vehicles or landscaping, and
be free of moving vehicular traffic hazards. There shall be ample room in or
near such sampling facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of
samples for analysis. All monitoring instrumentation required shall be
periodically calibrated and maintenance procedures shall be performed to ensure
accuracy of measurements. Flow measuring devices shall be calibrated at a
minimum of once per year, and a written statement of calibration, giving the
date performed and the name of the qualified service agent, shall be submitted
to the Superintendent for each calibration performed.
   (C)   Plans for the monitoring facilities shall be submitted for approval to
the Superintendent within 60 days of notification of the need for a facility.
The installation shall be completed within 90 days of the plan approval by the
Superintendent.
   (D)   Access to the monitoring facility shall be made available immediately
to authorized representatives of the Superintendent for the purpose of
inspection, or conducting independent sampling and monitoring activities.
(Prior Code, § 1054.13) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
§ 1054.14 RIGHT OF ACCESS.
   (A)   Authorized representatives of the POTW, upon presentation of city
identification, shall be permitted to enter upon any industrial user’s premises
where a regulated facility or activity is located or conducted for the purpose
of:
      (1)   Inspecting any production, manufacturing, fabricating or storage
area where regulated pollutants could originate or be discharged to the POTW;
      (2)   Inspecting at reasonable times any pretreatment facilities,
monitoring and control equipment or operations required for compliance with
pretreatment standards and requirements;
      (3)   Inspecting and copying, at reasonable times, any records required
to be kept as a condition of the user’s control orders or this chapter; and
      (4)   Sampling or monitoring of wastewater discharges to determine
whether applicable pretreatment standards are being complied with. If a
violation is detected through sampling and analysis conducted by the POTW in
lieu of the industrial user, the POTW shall perform the repeat sampling and
analysis within 30 days of becoming aware of the violation unless it notifies
the user of the violation and requires the user to perform the repeat sampling
and analysis.
   (B)   Refusal to permit prompt entry of POTW representatives to perform the
above activities, without just cause, shall be a violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1054.14) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
§ 1054.15 REQUIREMENTS FOR NON-CATEGORICAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGERS.
   This section is applicable to all industrial users discharging wastewaters
that are not subject to national categorical pretreatment standards and
requirements.
   (A)   Disclosure forms. Any user so required by the Superintendent of
Utilities shall complete and file initial or updated disclosure reports.
Existing industrial users shall file the forms within the time specified by the
Superintendent, and new industrial users shall file the forms at least 90 days
prior to commencement of discharge to the POTW. The disclosures to be made by
the user shall be on forms provided by the Authority and shall include:
      (1)   The name, address and location of the industrial user’s facility,
the name of the facility’s operators or owners and the contact official;
      (2)   A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the
facility;
      (3)   A brief description of the nature of operations at the facility,
including the type of processes used or to be used, hours of operation, number
of employees and standard industrial classification (SIC) code of the
operations. If no products are made, a description of services provided by the
facility is to be made;
      (4)   A list of products to be made, estimated or actual rates of
production, a list of raw materials used and identification of any known toxic
priority pollutants;
      (5)   Sources of water supply, amounts of average and maximum daily flow
of wastewater to be discharged, sources generating the wastewater and
disclosure of any existing or planned wastewater pretreatment facilities;
      (6)   Facility site and floor plans showing the location of buildings,
process areas, wastewater sumps, sewer lines and connections, access manholes,
pretreatment facilities and points of connection to the city’s sewer;
      (7)   Results of sampling and analysis, as required by the
Superintendent, identifying the nature and concentration of pollutants
regulated by this chapter, together with a statement indicating whether or not
compliance with required limitations is being achieved on a consistent basis,
and if not, identification of pollutants requiring additional control measures
or pretreatment facilities; and
      (8)   A certification statement attesting that the information submitted
is true, accurate and complete, signed by an officer, owner or authorized
representative of the industrial user.
   (B)   Compliance schedules.
      (1)   When an existing or new industrial user’s wastewater discharges
require pretreatment control measures or installation of pretreatment
facilities to comply with this chapter, the Superintendent shall require the
user to submit a compliance schedule, providing the shortest time feasible by
which the user will implement or install such measures or facilities and
achieve final compliance.
      (2)   Design plans and drawings for installation of physical wastewater
pretreatment facilities shall be prepared and certified by a qualified
professional engineer, and shall be subject to plan approval requirements
specified in §
1054.09 of this chapter.
      (3)   The required contents and conditions for compliance schedules are
as specified in §
1054.18 of this chapter.
   (C)   Compliance date reports.
      (1)   Within 90 days after the final date for compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards required by the Superintendent, or 90 days following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW by a new
industrial user, any user subject to this chapter shall submit to the
Superintendent a report indicating the nature and concentration of the
pollutants in the user’s wastewater discharge, and the average and maximum
daily flow in gallons. The report shall state whether the applicable
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what
additional operating or maintenance controls, or pretreatment, is necessary to
bring the discharge into compliance.
      (2)   A certification statement attesting that the information submitted
is true, accurate and complete shall be signed by an officer, owner or
authorized representative of the user and, in the case of installed physical
pretreatment facilities, by a qualified professional engineer.
   (D)   Periodic compliance reports.
      (1)   Industrial users shall submit to the Superintendent periodic
reports on the continued compliance with pretreatment standards. The
appropriate wastewater characteristics to be monitored, and the frequency of
sampling and reporting, shall be determined by the Superintendent and specified
in the user’s administrative orders of wastewater acceptance.
      (2)   Significant non-categorical industrial users, as defined in §
1054.01 of this chapter, shall submit to the Superintendent at least once every
six months a report of the required pollutants to be monitored on dates
specified in the user’s acceptance orders. The reports shall be based on
sampling and analysis performed in the period covered by the report. This
sampling and analysis may be performed by the authority in lieu of the
significant non-categorical industrial user, whereupon the user will not be
required to submit the report.
   (E)   General control mechanisms. The control authority may choose to issue
a general permit to a group of similar industrial users, rather than permits to
each individually. The details of the general permitting scheme follow.
      (1)   A general permit may be issued for groups of users, including both
significant and non-significant industrial users that have the same or
substantially similar types of operations, discharge the same types of wastes,
require the same effluent limitations and require the same or similar
monitoring.
      (2)   General permits are not available to users subject to production-
based categorical pretreatment standards, categorical pretreatment standards
expressed as mass of pollutant discharged per day, or industrial users whose
limits are based on the combined waste stream formula or net/gross
calculations.
      (3)   To be covered by a general permit, the significant industrial user
is required to file a written request to the Superintendent for coverage that
identifies its contact information, production processes, the types of waste
generated, the location for monitoring all wastes to be covered by that control
mechanism, any requests for a monitoring waiver for any pollutant not present,
and any other information the authority deems appropriate.
      (4)   The control authority will retain a copy of the general permit,
documentation to support the authority’s determination that a specific
significant industrial user meets the general permitting criteria, and a copy
of the user’s request for coverage at least three years after its expiration.
(Prior Code, § 1054.15) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
§ 1054.16 REQUIREMENTS FOR CATEGORICAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGERS.
   This section is applicable to all industrial users discharging wastewaters
subject to the applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements
under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6 and 40 C.F.R. Ch. I, Subch. N, and shall be in addition
to any other applicable pretreatment standards set forth in this chapter.
   (A)   General requirements.
      (1)   Category determination request. Within 60 days after the effective
date of a pretreatment standard for a subcategory under which a user may be
included, the user may submit a request to the Ohio EPA to provide written
certification on whether the user falls within that particular subcategory. An
existing user who adds or changes a process or operation which may be included
in a subcategory must request this certification prior to commencing discharge
from the added or changed process. A new source must request certification
prior to commencing discharge. Submission of requests must be made in
accordance with procedures stated in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6.
         (a)   Significant industrial user. Except as provided in division (A)
(1)(a)5. below, the term SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER means:
            1.   All dischargers subject to categorical pretreatment standards
under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6 and 40 C.F.R. Ch. I, Subch. N, except as provided in
divisions (A)(1)(c)3. and 4. below;
            2.   All dischargers that discharge greater than or equal to an
average of 25,000 gallons per day of process wastewater (excluding sanitary,
non-contact cooling and boiler blow-down wastewater) to the POTW;
            3.   All dischargers that contributes a process wastestream which
makes up 5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic (BOD or
suspended solids) capacity of the POTW;
            4.   All dischargers that, in the opinion of the Superintendent of
Utilities, have a reasonable potential to adversely affect the POTW’s
operations, including pass through or interference or for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirement; or
            5.   Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in
divisions (A)(1)(a)2. through (A)(1)(a)4. above has no reasonable potential for
adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment
standard or requirement, the control authority may at any time, on its own
initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user or
POTW, determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user.
         (b)   Non-significant categorical industrial users. Categorical
industrial users can be reclassified by the control authority to non-
significant categorical industrial users if the Superintendent of Utilities
decides such reclassification is appropriate. The requirements for
qualification as a non-significant categorical industrial user follow.
            1.   The industrial user does not discharge more than 100 gallons
per day of total categorical wastewater. That does not include sanitary, non-
contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater unless it is specifically
included in the categorical pretreatment standard.
            2.   No untreated concentrated wastewater, which is regulated by
the categorical pretreatment standards, may be discharged at any time.
            3.   The following certification statement must be submitted
annually to the city:
 
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing
compliance with the categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR [specify
applicable national pretreatment standards part or parts], I certify that, to the
best of my knowledge and belief, during the period from [specify month, day and
year] to [specify month, day and year]:
(1)   “The facility described as [insert facility name] met the definition of a non-
significant categorical industrial user as described in paragraph (P) of rule 3745-
3-01 of the Ohio Administrative Code;
(2)   “The facility complied with all applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements during this reporting period; and
(3)   “The facility never discharged more than one hundred gallons of total
categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting period. This
compliance certification is based upon the following information:
 
            4.   Appropriate justification in support of this statement is
required to be submitted with this certification statement and may include
water billing records, production records and the like.
             5.   If the industrial user is located upstream of a combined or
sanitary sewer overflow the following additional requirements must be met for
the application of this classification:
               a.   The industrial user does not discharge wastewater that is
regulated by categorical pretreatment standards;
               b.   The industrial user must not have been in significant non-
compliance at any time in the past two years; and
               c.   Procedures for issues relating to combined or sanitary
sewer overflows must be addressed through either a long-term control plan, an
approved combined sewer system operation plan implementing the nine minimum
controls or the program modification request.
            6.   At least once a year, the authority will evaluate whether the
industrial user still meets the requirements for classification as a non-
significant categorical industrial user and document the evaluation.
         (c)   Mid-tier categorical industrial users. Categorical industrial
users can be reclassified by the city to mid-tier categorical industrial users
if the Superintendent of Utilities decides such reclassification is
appropriate. A mid-tier user may have its reporting frequency reduced to no
less than once a year unless required more often by the categorical
pretreatment standard or the Director of Ohio EPA. The requirements for
qualification as a mid-tier categorical industrial user follow. If the user no
longer meets these criteria, then the authority will immediately begin
inspecting and monitoring the user as a categorical industrial user.
            1.   The industrial user must not discharge total categorical
wastewater that exceeds:
               a.   0.01% of the design dry weather hydraulic capacity of the
receiving POTW;
               b.   Five thousand gallons per day of total categorical
wastewater;
               c.   0.01% of the design dry weather organic treatment capacity
of the receiving POTW; and
               d.   0.01% of the maximum allowable headworks loading for any
pollutant regulated by the applicable categorical pretreatment standards for
which a local limit has been developed.
            2.   The industrial user’s flow must be monitored by a continuous
effluent flow monitoring device unless the user discharges in batches.
            3.   The industrial user must not have been in significant non-
compliance in the past two years.
            4.   The daily flow rates, production levels or pollutant levels of
the industrial user cannot vary so significantly that decreasing the reporting
requirement would result in data that are not representative of conditions
occurring during the reporting period.
            5.   If the industrial user is located upstream of a combined or
sanitary sewer overflow, the issues relating to the overflows must be addressed
through either a long-term control plan, an approved combined sewer system
operation plan implementing the nine minimum controls or the program
modification request.
            6.   The industrial user will be inspected and the effluent
randomly sampled at least once every two years by the city.      
      (2)   Deadline for compliance with categorical standards. Compliance by
existing sources with categorical pretreatment standards shall be within three
years of the effective date of the standard, unless a shorter time is specified
by the applicable subpart. Existing sources which become subject to newly
promulgated categorical standards shall be considered existing industrial
users, except where such sources meet the definition of a new source. New
sources shall install, shall have in operating condition and shall start-up all
pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards
before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest feasible time (not to exceed
90 days), new sources must meet all applicable pretreatment standards.
      (3)   Concentration and mass limitations.
         (a)   Pollutant discharge limits in categorical standards will be
expressed either as concentration or mass limits and shall apply to the
effluent of the process regulated by the standard, or as otherwise specified by
the standard. When the limits in a categorical standard are expressed only in
terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the authority may convert
the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant
discharged per day, or effluent concentration, for purposes of calculating
effluent limitations applicable to the user in accordance with 40 C.F.R. §
403.6(c)(6). Calculation of equivalent limitations shall be based upon a
reasonable measure of the user’s actual long term daily production and flow
rates of the user’s regulated process during a representative year. For new
sources, actual production shall be estimated using projected production.
         (b)   Equivalent limitations shall be deemed pretreatment standards,
and industrial users will be required to comply with the equivalent limitations
in lieu of the promulgated standards from which they were derived.
         (c)   Where categorical standards specify one limit for calculating
maximum daily discharge limitations and a second limit for calculating maximum
monthly average or four-day average limitations, the same production or flow
figures shall be used in calculating both types of equivalent limitations.
         (d)   Any industrial user operating under a control order
incorporating equivalent limits calculated from a production based standard
shall notify the control authority within two business days after the user has
a reasonable basis to know that the production level will significantly change
within the next calendar month. If notification is not made, the user will be
required to meet the mass or concentration limits that were based on the
original estimate of the long term average production rate.
         (e)   Facilities regulated by the categorical pretreatment standards
for organic chemicals, plastics, and synthetic fibers (40 C.F.R. part 414),
petroleum refining (40 C.F.R. part 419) and pesticide chemicals (40 C.F.R. part
455) that have mass-based limits may now have those limits converted to
equivalent concentration- based limits in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c)
(6).
      (4)   Combined wastestream formula.
         (a)   Where process effluent is mixed prior to treatment with
wastewaters other than those generated by the regulated process, alternative
discharge limits may be derived by the control authority and the alternative
limits applied to the mixed effluent. The industrial user shall comply with the
alternative limits fixed by the authority until the limits are modified on the
basis of a material or significant change in the values originally used to
determine the alternative limits. The user must immediately report any such
change to the Authority to enable calculation of new limits. An alternative
pretreatment limit cannot be used if the alternative limit is below the
analytical detection limit for any of the regulated pollutants.
         (b)   Monitoring points designated for compliance monitoring of a
user’s regulated discharge may be changed only upon approval of the control
authority. The authority shall ensure that any change in a user’s monitoring
points will not allow the user to substitute dilution for adequate treatment to
achieve compliance with applicable standards.
   (B)   Reporting requirements.
      (1)   Baseline monitoring reports (BMRs). Within 180 days after the
effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the
final administrative decision made upon a category determination request,
whichever is later, existing users subject to the standards and currently
discharging to, or scheduled to discharge to, the POTW shall submit to the
Superintendent of Utilities a report which contains the information listed in
divisions (B)(1)(a) to (B)(1)(g) below. At least 90 days prior to commencement
of discharge, new sources shall submit to the Superintendent a report which
contains the information listed in divisions (B)(1)(a) to (B)(1)(e) below. New
sources shall also include in this report information on the method of
pretreatment intended to be used to meet applicable pretreatment standards. New
sources shall give estimates of the information required in divisions (B)(1)(d)
and (B)(1)(e) below.
         (a)   The name and address of the facility and the name of the
operator, owners and contact official;
         (b)   A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the
facility;
         (c)   A brief description of the nature, average rate of production
and standard industrial classification of the operations carried out by the
user. This description shall include a schematic process diagram which
indicates points of discharge to the POTW from any regulated process;
         (d)   1.   Information showing the measured average daily and maximum
daily flow in gallons per day to the POTW from each of the following:
               a.   Regulated process streams; and
               b.   Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula.
            2.   The Authority may authorize verifiable estimates of the flows
where justified by cost or feasibility considerations.
         (e)   1.   The user shall identify the pretreatment standards
applicable to each regulated process. In addition, the user shall submit the
results of sampling and analysis, identifying the nature and concentration (or
mass, if required) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated
process. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass) shall be
reported. The samples shall be representative of daily operations.
            2.   A minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, hexavalent
chromium, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile
organics. Multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period for
hexavalent chromium, cyanide, total phenols and sulfides may be composited in
the laboratory or in the field. Multiple grab samples collected during a 24-
hour period for volatile organics and oil and grease may be composited in the
laboratory. For all other pollutants, 24-hour composite samples must be
obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling where feasible. The
Control Authority may waive flow- proportional sampling where it is not
feasible. In such cases, samples may be obtained through time- proportional
composite sampling or through a minimum of four grab samples where this will
provide a representative sample of the effluent discharge.
            3.   The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample, or
more when deemed necessary by the authority, to compile that data necessary to
comply with the requirements of this division (B)(1)(e).
            4.   Samples shall be taken immediately downstream from
pretreatment facilities, if such exist, or immediately downstream from the
regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed
with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user shall measure the
flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream
formula in order to evaluate compliance with pretreatment standards. Where an
alternative concentration or mass limit has been calculated by the user in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e), this adjusted limit, along with
supporting data, shall be submitted to the control authority.
            5.   Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
the approved techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. part 136 and amendments
thereto. The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of
sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and
analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected discharges to the
POTW.
         (f)   A certification statement, indicating whether pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional
operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required for the
user to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements, shall be included.
The certification statement of division (C) below shall be signed by an
authorized signatory of the user, as required by division (D) below, and
certified to by a qualified professional engineer;
         (g)   Users with applicable standards that require compliance with a
BMP or pollution prevention alternative shall submit documentation to determine
compliance with the standard when submitting baseline or periodic compliance
reports; and
         (h)   If additional pretreatment measures and/or operation and
maintenance changes will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, a
compliance schedule shall be provided, indicating the shortest schedule by
which the user will provide such additional measures. The completion date in
the schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the
applicable pretreatment standard. The required contents and conditions for
compliance schedules are as specified in §
1054.18 of this chapter.
      (2)   Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard
deadlines.
         (a)   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or 90 days following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW by a new source,
any user subject to those standards shall submit to the Superintendent a report
containing the information described in divisions (B)(1)(d) to (B)(1)(f) above.
         (b)   For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration
limits established by the authority, the report shall contain a reasonable
measure of the user’s long-term production rate. For all other users subject to
categorical standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per
unit of production, the report shall include the user’s actual production
during the appropriate sampling period.
      (3)   Periodic reports on continued compliance.
         (a)   Any industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment
standard after the compliance date of such standard or, in the case of a new
source, after commencement of discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the
Superintendent in the months of June and December (or as otherwise agreed upon
with the Superintendent) a report indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants limited by such categorical standards.
         (b)   The report shall be based upon data obtained through appropriate
sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, which
data is representative of conditions occurring during the period. The frequency
of monitoring necessary to assess and assure compliance by the user shall be
determined by the control authority.
         (c)   The report shall include a record of measured or estimated
average and maximum daily flows of regulated discharges for the reporting
period, except the Superintendent may require more detailed reporting of flows.
Where the authority has imposed mass limitations on a user’s discharge, the
report shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment
standards in the discharge.
         (d)   For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration
limits established by the Authority, the report shall contain a reasonable
measure of the user’s long-term production rate. For all other users subject to
standards expressed only in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production, the report shall include the user’s actual average production rate
for the reporting period.
         (e)   If the user monitors any pollutant more frequently than required
by control authority, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the
report. All sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with U.S.
EPA approved techniques and methods contained in 40 C.F.R. part 136.
   (C)   Certification statement. The reports required by divisions (B)(1), (B)
(2) and (B)(3) above shall include the following certification statement:
 
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system,
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.
 
   (D)   Signatory requirements. The reports required by divisions (B)(1), (B)
(2) and (B)(3) above shall include the certification statement as set forth in
division (C) above, and shall be signed as follows:
      (1)   By a responsible corporate officer if the industrial user is a
corporation. A RESPONSIBLE CORPORATE OFFICER means:
         (a)   A president, secretary, treasurer or vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal function, or any other person who performs
similar policy/decision making functions for the corporation; or
         (b)   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or
operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual
sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 if authority to sign documents has
been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate
procedures.
      (2)   By a general partner or proprietor if the user is a partnership or
sole proprietorship respectively;
      (3)   By a duly authorized representative of the individual designated in
divisions (D)(1) or (D)(2) above if:
         (a)   The authorization is made in writing by the individual;
         (b)   The authorization specifies either an individual or a position
having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility in accordance
with corporate procedures, including having the explicit or implicit duty of
making major capital investment recommendations, and of initiating and
directing other comprehensive measures, to assure long-term environmental
compliance with environmental laws and regulations, such as the position of
plant manager or well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent
responsibility or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for
the company; and
         (c)   The written authorization is submitted to the control authority.
      (4)   If an authorization under division (D)(3) above is no longer
accurate because of a change in individual or position duly authorized, a new
authorization satisfying the requirements must be submitted to the control
authority prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized
representative.
   (E)   Monitoring waiver. At the discretion of the Superintendent of
Utilities and with the exception of centralized waste treatment facilities
regulated by and defined in 40 C.F.R. part 437, the control authority may allow
industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards to forgo
sampling of a regulated pollutant. The following conditions apply.
      (1)   Monitoring waivers do not apply to pollutants where there are
certification processes and requirements established by the control authority
or by categorical pretreatment standards (e.g., TOMP (toxic organic management
plan) and certification in lieu of total toxic organics monitoring) unless
allowed for by the applicable standard.
      (2)   If a waived pollutant is found to be present or is expected to be
present based on changes that occur in the industrial user’s operations, the
user is required to immediately notify the control authority in writing and
start monitoring that pollutant at the specified frequency.
      (3)   The monitoring waiver only applies to an industrial user’s self-
monitoring. The control authority will still sample a user as is necessary.
      (4)   In making a request for a pollutant monitoring exemption, the
industrial user must demonstrate through sampling and other technical factors
that the pollutant is neither present nor expected to be present in the
discharge, or is present only at background levels from intake water without
increase in the pollutant due to activities of the user. In making a
demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the user must provide data from
at least one sampling of the facility’s process wastewater prior to any
treatment present at the facility that is representative of wastewater from all
processes. Non-detectable sample results may only be used as a demonstration
that a pollutant is not present if the USEPA approved analytical method from 40
C.F.R. part 136 with the lowest method detection limit for that pollutant was
used.
      (5)   Waivers are valid only for the duration of the effective period of
the industrial user’s permit, but in no case longer than five years. The user
must submit a new request for the waiver before the waiver can be granted for
each subsequent control mechanism.
      (6)   The request for a monitoring waiver shall be signed by an
authorized representative of the industrial user in accordance with paragraph
(F) of rule 3745-3-06 of the Administrative Code, and it must include the
certification statement in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(2)(ii). This is the standard “I
certify under penalty of law” statement.
      (7)   If a monitoring waiver has been granted for a pollutant or
pollutants, the details of the waiver and its justification will be included in
the industrial user’s permit. The supporting reason(s) for the waiver and the
information submitted by the user in its request for the waiver will be
maintained in the city’s user file for at least three years after its
expiration.
      (8)   Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision of the
industrial user’s permit, the user shall certify on each self-monitoring report
with the following statement:
 
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing
compliance with pretreatment standards under 40 CFR [specify applicable
national pretreatment standard part or parts], I certify that, to the best of
my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the level of [list
pollutant or pollutants] in the wastewaters due to the activities at the
facility since submittal of the last periodic report under paragraph (E) of
rule 3745-3-06 of the Administrative Code.
 
(Prior Code, § 1054.16) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
§ 1054.17 REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL INDUSTRIAL USERS.
   (A)   All sampling and analysis of wastewater performed to fulfill the
requirements of this chapter shall be made in accordance with EPA approved
techniques and analytical methods contained in 40 C.F.R. part 136.
   (B)   If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the
user shall notify the control authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of
the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit
the results to the Superintendent of Utilities within 30 days after becoming
aware of the violation, unless:
      (1)   The authority performs sampling of the user’s wastewater discharge
at least once per month;
      (2)   The authority performs sampling of the discharge between the time
when the user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user receives
the results of this sampling;
      (3)   (a)   All industrial users shall notify the authority in advance of
any substantial changes in the wastewater volume or the character of pollutants
in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for
which the user has submitted initial notification under 40 C.F.R. § 403.12.
         (b)   Approval by the control authority must be obtained prior to the
introduction of the new wastewater source or pollutants into the sewerage
system, or when a change will affect the determination or application of
compliance requirements by the control authority.
         (c)   Notification shall not be required for changes required by
administrative compliance orders issued to enforce compliance with discharge
standards or control discharge flow rates.
      (4)   (a)   All industrial users are subject to notification requirements
for discharge of wastes to the POTW which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a
hazardous waste under 40 C.F.R. part 261 (RCRA hazardous waste regulations).
Notifications shall be made to the POTW, U.S. EPA Region and the Ohio EPA
Division of Solid and Hazardous Waste by industrial users commencing discharge
after 8-23-1990, no later than 180 days after the discharge starts, and, in the
case of RCRA regulations identifying additional wastes as hazardous, within 90
days of the effective date of such regulations. In the case of notifications
made under this division (B)(4), the industrial user shall certify that it has
a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes
generated to the degree it has been determined to be economically practical.
         (b)   Users are exempt from the notification requirements if they
discharge less than 15 kilograms of non-acute hazardous waste per calendar
month, or are already reporting those pollutants covered by categorical
pretreatment standards through self-monitoring requirements.
(Prior Code, § 1054.17) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 62-1993, passed 4-
26-1993; Ord. 149-2013, passed 9-9-2013)
§ 1054.18 COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   Where additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance
activities are required to comply with this chapter or national categorical
pretreatment standards, the discharger shall provide a declaration of the
shortest compliance schedule by which the discharger will provide such
additional pretreatment and/or implementation of additional operational and
maintenance activities.
   (B)   The compliance schedule shall contain milestone dates for the
commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of additional pretreatment required for the discharger to comply with
the requirements of this chapter and categorical pretreatment standards,
including, but not limited to, dates relating to hiring an engineer, hiring
other appropriate personnel, completing preliminary plans, completing final
plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing construction,
completing construction and all other actions necessary to achieve final
compliance.
   (C)   Under no circumstances shall the authority permit a time increment for
any single step directed toward compliance which exceeds nine months.
   (D)   No later than 14 days following each milestone date in the schedule
and the final date of compliance, the discharger shall submit a progress report
to the authority, including no less than a statement as to whether or not it
complied with the increment of progress represented by that milestone date and,
if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress,
the reason for the delay, and the steps being taken by the discharger to return
the construction to the approved schedule. In no event shall more than nine
months elapse between such progress reports to the authority. A violation of an
industrial user’s compliance schedule which has been approved by the authority
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1054.18) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
§ 1054.19 TRADE SECRETS AND CONFIDENTIALITY.
   (A)   All information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits, monitoring programs and from
inspections shall be available to the public or any other governmental agency
without restriction unless the user request confidentiality and is able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Utilities that the
release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods
which would be detrimental to the user’s competitive position. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential
information. (See C.F.R. § 403.14.)
   (B)   Information accepted by the Superintendent as confidential shall not
be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the
control authority until and unless prior and adequate notification is given to
the user. Confidential information shall be retained in locked files.
(Prior Code, § 1054.19) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
§ 1054.20 PROTECTION FROM ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.
   (A)   Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental or slug
discharges to the sewerage system of the prohibited or regulated wastes
identified in this chapter, as well as any other substance or material that
would cause interference or pass through of the POTW treatment plant.
Facilities to prevent accidental discharges may include walls or dikes,
separate storage, removal of drain lines from locations where significant
quantities of harmful materials can enter sewerage systems, or other
appropriate control procedures. The plan shall be reviewed once during the term
of the significant industrial user’s administrative orders to control the
user’s discharge to the sanitary sewer or within one year of being identified
as a significant industrial user.
   (B)   Where such protection facilities are determined to be inadequate to
control or eliminate accidental or slug discharges, the authority may require
submission of spill prevention and control plans, and the installation of
additional control facilities by the user. Plans shall be submitted to the
Superintendent of Utilities for approval prior to construction or
implementation. Review and approval of such plans or procedures shall not
relieve the user of responsibility for preventing the discharge of unacceptable
materials to the sewerage system.
   (C)   Any significant industrial user that wishes to make significant
changes to the user’s operations or pretreatment system which might alter the
nature, quality of volume of its wastewater must notify the Superintendent of
Utilities at least 30 days prior to the change.
(Prior Code, § 1054.20) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
§ 1054.21 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE NOTIFICATION AND REPORTING.
   (A)   All industrial users shall notify the POTW treatment plant immediately
upon the first awareness of all discharges that could cause problems to the
POTW, including any slug loadings or spills that may enter the sewerage system.
The notification shall include the name of the caller, location of the
discharge point, date and time of discharge, identification of pollutant,
including concentration and volume, and corrective actions taken. Notification
of accidental releases in compliance with this section does not relieve the
user of other reporting requirements under local, state or federal laws, or of
liability for any consequential expense, loss or damage to the POTW treatment
system, or for any fines and/or penalties imposed on the user which result from
violative discharges.
   (B)   Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall
submit to the Superintendent of Utilities a detailed written report specifying:
      (1)   Description and cause of the slug load or accidental discharge,
including identification of pollutant, concentration and volume of discharge;
      (2)   Duration of event, including dates and times, and if non-compliance
is continuing, the time by which compliance is reasonably expected to occur;
and
      (3)   All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and/or prevent
recurrence of the discharge or other conditions of non-compliance.
(Prior Code, § 1054.21) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
§ 1054.22 CHARGES FOR DAMAGE TO SYSTEM.
   When discharge of wastes by any industrial user causes an obstruction,
damage or any other impairment to any part of the sewerage system, a charge
shall be levied by the Superintendent of Utilities against such user for the
cost of the work required to clear and/or repair the part of the system
affected by such discharge. The Superintendent shall add such charge to the
user’s usual service charges, surcharges or fees.
(Prior Code, § 1054.22) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
§ 1054.23 TREATMENT SYSTEM BYPASSES.
   (A)   Notification of bypass.
      (1)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall
submit prior notice to the authority, if possible, at least ten days before the
date of the bypass.
      (2)   A user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that
exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the authority within 24 hours
after the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall
also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the
bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and
its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times; if the
bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue;
and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the
bypass. The authority may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if
the oral report has been received within 24 hours.
   (B)   Prohibited bypasses. The authority may take enforcement action against
an industrial user for a bypass, unless:
      (1)   The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury
or severe property damage;
      (2)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use
of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes or maintenance
during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if
adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of
reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during
normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and
      (3)   The user submitted notices as required under division (A)(2) above.
(Prior Code, § 1054.23) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
§ 1054.24 OPERATING UPSETS.
   (A)   Any categorical or non-categorical industrial user which experiences
an upset in pretreatment facility operations which places the user in a
temporary state of non-compliance with applicable pretreatment standards shall
inform the authority thereof within 24 hours of first awareness of the
commencement of the upset. Where such information is given orally, a written
follow-up report thereof shall be filed by the user with the Superintendent of
Utilities within five days. The report shall specify the following:
      (1)   A description of the upset, the cause thereof and the upsets impact
on the user’s compliance status;
      (2)   The duration of non-compliance, including exact dates and times of
non-compliance and, if the non-compliance continues, the time by which
compliance is reasonably expected to occur; and
      (3)   All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent
recurrence of such an upset or other conditions of non-compliance.
   (B)   A documented and verified bonafide operating upset shall be an
affirmative defense to any enforcement action brought by the Superintendent
against a user for any non-compliance with pretreatment standards which arises
out of violation alleged to have occurred during the period of the upset. A
user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense shall demonstrate through
properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or other relevant evidence,
that:
      (1)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
      (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
      (3)   The user had submitted to the control authority the information
required in division (A) above. In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial
user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of
proof.
   (C)   The industrial user shall control production on all discharges to the
extent necessary to maintain compliance with applicable pretreatment standards
upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility
is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies where, among other things, the preliminary source of power of the
treatment facility is reduced or fails.
(Prior Code, § 1054.24) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
§ 1054.25 PRETREATMENT PROGRAM FEES.
   To compensate the city for the cost of administration of the pretreatment
program, each industrial discharger shall pay the cost of analytical services
relative to such discharger rendered by outside independent laboratories
required for program compliance. Charges shall be at the invoiced cost to the
city.
(Prior Code, § 1054.25) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
§ 1054.26 SURCHARGES.
   (A)   Every person, firm or corporation whose premises are served by a
sanitary sewer connection and discharges wastes other than “normal sewage” into
the sewerage system of the city shall pay an “extra strength surcharge” in
addition to the sewage service charge for “normal sewage”. NORMAL SEWAGE is
defined as that which contains pollutants in concentrations no greater than
listed below:
 
Pollutants     Concentration (in mg/l)
BOD            250
COD            500
SS             250
Phosphorus     10
Oil and grease 100
 
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BOD or BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter, under standard laboratory procedure,
in five days at 20°C.
      COD or CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. A measure of the oxygen equivalent of the
organic matter that can be measured using a strong chemical oxidizing agent in
an acidic medium.
      OG or OILS AND GREASES. Those materials extractable from an acidified
sample by Freon and other acceptable solvents in accordance with approved
laboratory produces.
      P or PHOSPHORUS. Measured as phosphorus.
      TOC or TOTAL ORGANIC CARBON. A measure of the organic matter present in
wastewater determined by injecting a known quantity of sample into a high
temperature furnace, oxidizing to carbon dioxide in the presence of a catalyst
and measuring the quantity produced. TOC may be used to reflect BOD or COD.
      TOD or TOTAL OXYGEN DEMAND. A measure of the oxygen required by the
organic and some inorganic substances determined by heating a sample in a
platinum catalyzed combustion chamber and monitoring the oxygen content present
in the nitrogen carrier gas.
      TSS or TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of
or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable
by laboratory filtering.
   (C)   Industrial waste surcharges shall be determined according to the
following procedure:
      (1)   (a)   Whenever the wastes are ruled acceptable for wastewater
treatment and the wastewater contains BOD and/or COD, suspended solids,
phosphorus and/or oil and grease in excess of normal sewage, the excess shall
be subjected to a monthly surcharge for each constituent as follows:
 
Pollutants Surcharge
BOD        $0.160/lb BOD
COD        0.010/lb COD
TSS        0.21/lb SS
P          2.21/lb P
OG         0.30/lb Oil and greases
 
         (b)   Charges will be based either on extra strength COD or BOD, plus
other parameters listed. These rates will be effective immediately upon passage
of this section.
         (c)   In addition to the surcharge, the user will pay the regular
sewer service charge on the entire volume of sewage discharged to the sewerage
system.
      (2)   Each industry subject to the provisions of the extra strength
surcharge shall submit monthly, on a timely basis, the certified daily flow and
analysis of the extra strength discharge to the sewerage system.
      (3)   The Superintendent of Utilities shall determine which sampling test
(BOD, COD, TOC, TOD and the like) is representative of actual wastewater
loadings and specify the type and frequency of analysis necessary for
monitoring discharges and for billing purposes.
      (4)   The Superintendent will evaluate the waste strength, and these
determinations shall be binding as a basis for charges.
      (5)   The volume of flow used for computing industrial waste surcharges
shall be metered water consumption of the user as shown in the records of meter
readings maintained by the city’s Water Department or metered wastewater
discharged to the city’s sewer system.
         (a)   If the user discharging industrial wastewater into the POTW
procures any part, or all, of their water from sources other than the city’s
water system, all or part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the
user shall install and maintain, at his or her expense, water meters of a type
approved by the Superintendent for the purpose of determining the volume of
water obtained from those other sources.
         (b)   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be
required by the Superintendent if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined
from the metered water consumption records.
         (c)   Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, owned, and maintained by the user. Following approval and
installation, such meters may not be removed without the consent of the
Superintendent. The volume of flow used for computing industrial waste
surcharges shall be determined as provided in this division (C).
(Prior Code, § 1054.26) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 190-2002, passed
11-12-2002; Ord. 149-2013, passed 9-9-2013; Ord. 142-2016, passed 12-12-2016)
§ 1054.27 ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS TO CONTROL DISCHARGES.
   (A)   The Superintendent of Utilities may issue, at any time deemed
necessary, an administrative order to any user to control the user’s discharge
to the sewerage system and enforce compliance with any regulation established
by this chapter, including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The general and specific discharge prohibition;
      (2)   Compliance with specific local discharge limits;
      (3)   The applicable national categorical pretreatment standards;
      (4)   The requirements for preparing a slug control plan;
      (5)   Best management practices (BMP) as a local limit or other BMP
requirements;
      (6)   Compliance with applicable sampling and reporting requirements; and
      (7)   Compliance with limitations and requirements specified in
administrative orders of wastewater acceptance.
   (B)   An administrative order will be in the form of a written notice from
the Superintendent and may be served upon any user by a duly authorized
representative of the Superintendent or by certified mail with return receipt
requested.
(Prior Code, § 1054.27) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
§ 1054.28 REQUESTS FOR RECONSIDERATION OF SUPERINTENDENT’S DECISIONS.
   (A)   Any industrial user affected by any decision, action and
determination, made by the Superintendent of Utilities interpreting or
implementing the provisions of this chapter, may file with the Superintendent a
written request for reconsideration within ten days of notice of such decision,
action or determination, setting forth in detail the facts supporting the
user’s request for reconsideration.
   (B)   The Superintendent may amend his or her original decision, action or
determination. The request for reconsideration shall be referred immediately to
the City Council for review and recommendations in the event the Superintendent
does not amend his or her original decision, action or determination within ten
working days of delivery of the request for reconsideration.
   (C)   The City Council shall conduct such hearings and studies as it
considers necessary and shall deliver its recommendations to the Superintendent
as soon as possible, but no longer than 60 days of the request for
reconsideration. The Superintendent’s decision, action or determination shall
remain in effect during such period of consideration, unless specific exception
is granted by the Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 1054.28) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
§ 1054.29 NOTICES OF VIOLATIONS.
   Whenever the Superintendent of Utilities finds that an industrial user has
violated or is violating any limitation or requirement of this chapter, or
administrative order issued hereunder, the Superintendent may serve or cause to
be served a written notice of the violation by certified mail, return receipt
requested. The notice may serve to inform the user of a minor or infrequent
violation only, or require a written explanation of the violation and specific
actions to be taken to prevent recurrence. Required responses shall be
submitted to the Superintendent within 15 days of the receipt date of the
notice.
(Prior Code, § 1054.29) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
§ 1054.30 ASSESSMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE FEES; INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER REVIEW
BOARD.
   (A)   The Superintendent of Utilities may assess administrative fees upon
industrial users which are in violation of pretreatment standards and
requirements, including, but not limited to, unpermitted discharges, exceedance
of discharge limits, reporting requirements, sampling requirements and other
provisions of this chapter. Assessment of fees up to $500 per day for each day
of violation may be imposed. The amount of fees assessed shall be determined on
the basis of a written schedule adopted by the city reflecting the type,
frequency and seriousness of violations.
   (B)   Written notification to industrial users shall be made stating the
violations and amount of fees to be assessed. Notification shall include notice
that the industrial user may request a hearing before the Industrial Wastewater
Review Board to show cause why said fees should not be imposed. The user must
request the hearing within ten days of receipt of notification.
   (C)   The Industrial Wastewater Review Board shall be comprised of the
Barberton Public Service Director, Superintendent of Utilities and
Superintendent of Wastewater Treatment. Upon having information presented by
the user, the Board shall determine the appropriate action to be taken, and the
decision of the Board shall be final.
Administrative Fee Assessment Schedule
Non-Compliance Nature of Violation Range of Fees
Administrative Fee Assessment Schedule
                                                                              Nature of      Range
Non-Compliance                                                                Violation      of
                                                                                             Fees
Illegal Discharges
                                                                              Discharge of
                                                                              non-
                                                                              conventional
                                                                              pollutants
                                                                              excluded by
   1. Non-permitted discharge                                              discharge      $50-
                                                                              acceptance     100
                                                                              orders (no
                                                                              adverse
                                                                              environmental
                                                                              or POTW
                                                                              impact).
                                                                              Discharge of
                                                                              non-
                                                                              conventional
                                                                              pollutants
                                                                              excluded by
   2. Non-permitted discharge                                              discharge      $300-
                                                                              acceptance     500
                                                                              orders causing
                                                                              POTW
                                                                              inhibition, or
                                                                              NPDES permit
                                                                              violation.
                                                                              Discharge of
                                                                              unregulated
                                                                              pollutants
                                                                              resulting in   $50-
   3. Unpermitted discharge                                                POTW           300
                                                                              inhibition (no
                                                                              interference
                                                                              or pass
                                                                              through).
                                                                              Discharge of
                                                                              unregulated
                                                                              pollutants     $300-
   4. Unpermitted discharge                                                resulting in   500
                                                                              violation of
                                                                              POTW NPDES
                                                                              permit.
Discharge Standard Violation
                                                                              Third
   1. Exceedance of discharge limits or prohibited discharges.             violation or   $50-
                                                                              more within 6  500
                                                                              months.
                                                                              Any violation
                                                                              resulting in
   2. Exceedance of discharge limits or prohibited discharges.             inhibition (no $200-
                                                                              interference   300
                                                                              or pass
                                                                              through).
                                                                              Any violation
                                                                              resulting in
                                                                              POTW           $300-
   3. Exceedance of discharge limits or prohibited discharges.             interference   500
                                                                              or pass
                                                                              through
                                                                              violation.
                                                                              Any violation
                                                                              causing
                                                                              endangerment
   4. Exceedance of discharge limits or prohibited discharges.             to sewerage    $300-
                                                                              system, POTW   500
                                                                              personnel, or
                                                                              to the general
                                                                              public.
Pretreatment Facility Compliance Schedules
                                                                              Violation not
                                                                              for good or
                                                                              valid cause.
                                                                              Will affect    $200-
   1. Missed milestone date.                                               other          400
                                                                              milestone or
                                                                              final
                                                                              compliance
                                                                              date.
                                                                              No report
                                                                              submitted and  $100-
   2. Failure to meet compliance schedule reporting requirements.          did not        300
                                                                              complete
                                                                              milestone.
                                                                              30 days or
                                                                              more. Failure
   3. Missed final compliance date.                                        or refusal to  $250-
                                                                              comply without 500
                                                                              good or valid
                                                                              cause.
Spill Incidents and/or Slug Discharge Incidents
                                                                              Failure to
                                                                              upgrade or
                                                                              develop
   1. Repeat spill and/or slug discharge incidents                         required spill $100-
                                                                              prevention     300
                                                                              and/or slug
                                                                              control
                                                                              program(s)
Sampling and Reporting
   1. Late submission of reports (minor compliance and surcharge sampling  Frequent and   $50-
reports).                                                                     repeated       100
                                                                              offenses.
                                                                              Failure to
                                                                              provide
   2. Late submission of major reports (BMR, 90-day compliance, compliance required       $100-
schedule, and categorical self- monitoring reports).                          reports within 300
                                                                              30 days of due
                                                                              date.
                                                                              Failure to
                                                                              notify or
                                                                              report spill
                                                                              discharges,    $50-
   3. Non-reporting                                                        slug           100
                                                                              discharges and
                                                                              treatment
                                                                              facility
                                                                              bypass events.
                                                                              Failure to
                                                                              notify or
                                                                              report 30 days
                                                                              in advance any
                                                                              substantial
                                                                              change in      $100-
   4. Non-reporting                                                        volume or      300
                                                                              character of
                                                                              wastewater
                                                                              pollutants to
                                                                              be discharged
                                                                              or changes in
                                                                              treatment.
                                                                              Frequent and
                                                                              repeated
                                                                              omissions of   $50-
   5. Sampling violations                                                  required       100
                                                                              sampling and
                                                                              monitoring
                                                                              data.
Compliance Orders
                                                                              Failure to
                                                                              comply with
   1. Compliance violations                                                actions        $100-
                                                                              required by    300
                                                                              administrative
                                                                              orders.
 
(Prior Code, § 1054.30) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
§ 1054.31 EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF SERVICE.
   The city may, for good cause shown, suspend the wastewater treatment service
to a discharger when it appears to the Superintendent of Utilities that an
actual or threatened discharge presents or threatens an imminent or substantial
danger to the health or welfare of persons, substantial danger to the
environment, interference with the operation of the POTW, or violation of any
pretreatment limits specified by this chapter. Any discharger notified of the
suspension of wastewater treatment service shall, within a reasonable period of
time, as determined by the Superintendent, cease all discharges. In the event
of failure of the discharger to comply voluntarily with the suspension order
within the specified time, the city shall commence judicial proceedings
immediately thereafter to compel the discharger’s compliance with such order.
The city may reinstate the wastewater treatment service and terminate judicial
proceedings upon receipt of proof by the discharger of the elimination of the
non-complying discharge or conditions creating the threat of imminent or
substantial danger as set forth in this section.
(Prior Code, § 1054.31) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
§ 1054.32 TERMINATION OF TREATMENT SERVICES.
   The Superintendent of Utilities may terminate the wastewater treatment
services to any discharger who:
   (A)   Fails to factually report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge or significant changes in wastewater
constituents or characteristics;
   (B)   Refuses reasonable access to the discharger’s premises by
representatives of the Utilities Department for the purpose of inspection or
monitoring;
   (C)   Fails to pay required surcharges or administrative fees;
   (D)   Fails to meet compliance schedules; or
   (E)   Violates the conditions of this chapter or any final judicial order
related to this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1054.32) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
§ 1054.33 RETENTION OF RECORDS.
   All dischargers shall retain and preserve for no less than three years any
records, books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and any and all
summaries thereof, relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analyses made
by or in behalf of a discharger in connection with its discharge. All records
which pertain to matters which are the subject of administrative adjustment or
any other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the city shall be
retained and preserved by the discharger until all enforcement activities have
concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals
have expired. The city shall have the right to enter on the premises of the
discharger at all reasonable hours for the purpose of records examination.
(Prior Code, § 1054.33) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
§ 1054.34 FALSIFYING INFORMATION.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make any false statement, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed
or required to be maintained in accordance with this chapter or wastewater
acceptance order, or falsify, tamper with or render inaccurate any monitoring
device or method required under this chapter.
   (B)   The reports and other documents required to be submitted by this
chapter are subject to the provisions of 18 U.S.C. § 1001 relating to fraud and
false statements; the provisions of 33 U.S.C. § 1319 governing false
statements, representation or certification; and the provisions of 33 U.S.C. §
1319 regarding responsible corporate officers.
(Prior Code, § 1054.34) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
§ 1054.35 ANNUAL PUBLICATION OF SIGNIFICANT NON-COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   A list of all industrial users which, at any time during the previous
12 months, were in significant non- compliance with applicable pretreatment
requirements shall be published annually by the city in the largest daily
newspaper serving the city.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, an industrial user is in significant
non-compliance if its violations meet one or more of the following criteria:
(Note: divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) below apply only to significant industrial
users and are applicable to each of a significant industrial user’s monitoring
locations. Divisions (B)(3) through (B)(8) below apply to all industrial
users.)
      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month
period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit, the average limit or
the instantaneous limit for the same pollutant parameter for any significant
industrial user;
      (2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those
in which 33% or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter
taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily
maximum limit, the average limit or the instantaneous limit multiplied by the
applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats and oils and greases, and 1.2 for
all other pollutants, except pH) for any significant industrial user;
      (3)   Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (the
instantaneous limit, daily maximum or longer term average) that the
Superintendent determines has caused, alone or in combination with other
discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of
POTW personnel or the general public);
      (4)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
of human health or welfare or of the environment or has resulted in the POTW’s
exercise of emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
      (5)   Failure to meet, within ninety days after the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge control order
or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or
attaining final compliance;
      (6)   Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, required
reports, such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
      (7)   Failure to accurately report non-compliance; or
      (8)   Any other violation or group of violations, including violations of
best management practices (BMPs), which the Superintendent determines will or
has adversely affected the operation or implementation of the city’s
pretreatment program.
(Prior Code, § 1054.35) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
§ 1054.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any industrial user who willfully or negligently violates any
provision of this chapter, or any order of the Superintendent of Utilities made
pursuant to this chapter, shall, upon conviction, be fined an amount not
exceeding $1,000 per day. Each day or portion thereof during which such a
violation occurs shall be considered a separate offense.
   (B)   Any industrial user who has violated or continues to violate this
chapter, or any order or permit issued thereunder, shall be liable for a civil
penalty of not more than $1,000, plus actual damages incurred by the POTW per
violation per day for as long as the violation continues. In addition to the
above described penalty and damages, the authority may recover reasonable
attorney’s fees, court costs and other expenses associated with the enforcement
activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
   (C)   The authority shall petition the court to impose, assess, and recover
such sums as provided in this section. In determining the amount of liability,
the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but
not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and
duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the industrial
user’s violation, corrective actions by the industrial user, the compliance
history of the user and any other factor as justice requires.
(Prior Code, § 1054.99) (Ord. 59-1991, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 149-2013, passed
9-9-2013)
CHAPTER 1056: ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION PROGRAM
Section
1056.01   Purpose and intent.
1056.02   Definitions.
1056.03   Applicability.
1056.04   Responsibility for administration.
1056.05   Conflicts, severability, nuisances and responsibility.
1056.06   Discharge prohibitions.
1056.07   Suspension of MS4 access.
1056.08   Industrial or construction activity discharges.
1056.09   Monitoring of discharges.
1056.10   Requirement to prevent, control and reduce storm water pollutants by
the use of best management practices.
1056.11   Watercourse protection.
1056.12   Notification of spills.
1056.13   Enforcement.
1056.14   Appeal of notice of violation.
1056.15   Enforcement measures after appeal.
1056.16   Cost of abatement of the violation.
1056.17   Injunctive relief.
1056.18   Compensatory action.
1056.19   Violations deemed a public nuisance.
1056.20   Criminal prosecution.
1056.21   Remedies not exclusive.
§ 1056.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of Barberton Ohio, County of Summit, through
the regulation of non-storm water discharges to the storm drainage system, to
the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This
chapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into
the city’s separate storm water system in order to comply with requirements of
the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit process.
   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:
      (1)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the storm sewer
system by storm water discharges by any user;
      (2)   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system; and
      (3)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection,
surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1056.01) (Ord. 208-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 1056.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. The City of Barberton is the authorized
enforcement agency and shall enforce this chapter. The Barberton City
Departments of Building, Engineering, Fire, Utilities and Storm Water shall
assist in the implementation and enforcement of the chapter. The city may
request assistance from the County Health District.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices maintenance procedures and other management practices to
prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to storm
water conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.
   CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251
et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES construction permits
resulting in land disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include but
are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition.
The city’s Comprehensive Storm Water Management Ordinance (Ord. 172-2008)
requires storm water management for all construction activity with the
exception of residential lots less than one-quarter acre in size.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. A substance or material that the Secretary of
Transportation has determined is capable of posing an unreasonable risk to
health, safety and property when transported in commerce, and has designated as
hazardous under § 5103 of federal hazardous materials transportation law (49
U.S.C. § 5103). The term includes hazardous substances, hazardous wastes,
marine pollutants, elevated temperature materials, materials designated as
hazardous in the Hazardous Materials Table (see 49 C.F.R. § 172.101), and
materials that meet the defining criteria for hazard classes and divisions
herein. Any material, including any substance, waste or combination thereof,
which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or
infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a
substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property or
the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or
otherwise managed.
   ILLEGAL DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the
storm drainage system, except as exempted in §
1056.07 of this chapter.
   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. Either of the following:
      (1)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including,
but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-storm water discharge,
including sewage, process wastewater and wash water to enter the storm drain
system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and
sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously
allowed, permitted or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or
      (2)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps
or equivalent records and approved by the county.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits, as
defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14).
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). A conveyance or system of
conveyances that is owned by a state, city, town, village or other public
entity that discharges to waters of the United States; is designed or used to
collect or convey storm water (including storm drains, pipes, ditches and the
like); not a combined sewer; and not part of a publicly owned treatment works
(sewage treatment plant).
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER
DISCHARGE PERMITS (NPDES). A permit issued by EPA (or by a state under
authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)) that authorizes the
discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is
applicable on an individual, group or general area-wide basis.
   NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is
not composed entirely of storm water.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, company or
body politic, including any agency of the county and the United States
Government.
   POLLUTANT. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. POLLUTANTS may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects,
ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to
pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and
particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from
constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any
kind.
   PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
   STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM. Publicly owned facilities by which storm water is
collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm
drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural water
bodies and human- made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs and other
drainage structures.
   STORM WATER. Any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting entirely of
water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SW3P). A document which describes the
best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or
business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the
actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to storm water, storm water
conveyance systems and/or receiving to the maximum extent practicable.
   WASTEWATER. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm
water, discharged from a facility.
   WATERCOURSE. Any body of water, including, but not limited to, lakes, ponds,
rivers, streams and bodies of water delineated as waters of the state.
   WATERS OF THE STATE OF OHIO. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, irrigation systems, drainage systems
and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface and underground,
natural or artificial which are situated wholly within, partly within or border
upon this state or are within its jurisdiction, except those private waters
which do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface or underground
waters.
(Prior Code, § 1056.02) (Ord. 208-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 1056.03 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by
an authorized enforcement agency.
(Prior Code, § 1056.03) (Ord. 208-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 1056.04 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
   The city is designated as the authorized enforcement agency and shall
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1056.04) (Ord. 208-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 1056.05 CONFLICTS, SEVERABILITY, NUISANCES AND RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Where this regulation is in conflict with other provisions of law or
ordinance, the most restrictive provisions as determined by the city shall
prevail.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If
any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this chapter or the application
thereof to any person, establishment or circumstances shall be invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
chapter.
   (C)   This regulation shall not be construed as authorizing any person to
maintain a nuisance on their property and compliance with the provisions of
this regulation shall not be a defense in any action to abate such a nuisance.
   (D)   Failure of the authorized enforcement agency or other delegated agents
to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly conditions or to recommend
corrective measures shall not relieve the site owner from the responsibility
for the condition or damage resulting there from, and shall not result in the
authorized enforcement authority, its officers, employees or agents being
responsible for any condition or damage resulting therefrom.
(Prior Code, § 1056.05) (Ord. 208-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 1056.06 DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause
to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any
materials, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality
standards, other than storm water. The commencement, conduct or continuance of
any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited, except described
as follows:
      (1)   The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this chapter: water line flushing or other potable water
sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising
ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped
ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater
dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs,
non-commercial washing of vehicles, street wash water, natural riparian habitat
or wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than one
PPM chlorine), firefighting activities and any other water source not
containing pollutants;
      (2)   Discharges specified in writing by the city’s Storm Water
Management Utility as being necessary to protect public health and safety;
      (3)   Discharges from off-lot household sewage treatment systems
permitted by the County Health District for the purpose of discharging treated
sewage effluent in accordance with O.A.C. 3701-29-02 until such time as the
Ohio Environmental Protection Agency issues as a NPDES permitting mechanism for
residential one-, two- or three-family dwellings. These discharges are exempt
unless such discharges are deemed to be creating a public health nuisance by
the County of Health District. In compliance with the city’s storm water
management program, discharge from all off-lot household sewage must either be
eliminated or have coverage under an appropriate NPDES permit issued and
approved by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency. When such permit coverage
is available, discharge from off-lot household sewage treatment systems will no
longer be exempt from the requirement of this legislation;
      (4)   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the
test; and
      (5)   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental
Protection Agency; provided that, the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver or order and other applicable laws and
regulations; and, provided that, written approval has been granted for any
discharge to the storm drain system.
   (B)   Prohibition of illicit connections.
      (1)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of
illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
      (2)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
      (3)   A person is considered in violation of this chapter if the person
connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to
continue.
(Prior Code, § 1056.06) (Ord. 208-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 1056.07 SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS.
   (A)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The city
may, without prior notice, suspend discharge access to a person when such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which
presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or
to the health or welfare of persons, or to the storm drainage system or waters
of the state. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in
an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed
necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the storm drainage system or waters
of the state or to minimize danger to persons.
   (B)   Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the storm drainage system in violation of this chapter may have
their storm drainage system access terminated if such termination would abate
or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a
violator of the proposed termination of its storm drainage system access. The
violator may petition the city’s Board of Zoning Appeals for a reconsideration
and hearing. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates storm
drainage system access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without
the prior approval of the city.
(Prior Code, § 1056.07) (Ord. 208-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 1056.08 INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.
   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity storm water
pollution plan (SWP3) or erosion control permit (ECP) permit and/or NPDES storm
water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof
of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the
city’s Storm Water Management Utility prior to the allowing of discharges to
the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4).
(Prior Code, § 1056.08) (Ord. 208-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 1056.09 MONITORING OF DISCHARGES.
   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have storm
water discharges associated with industrial, residential, institutional or
commercial activity, including construction activity.
   (B)   Access to facilities.
      (1)   The authorized enforcement agency, shall be permitted to enter and
inspect facilities subject to regulation under this chapter as often as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. If a discharger has
security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary
arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement
agency.
      (2)   Facility operators shall allow the authorized enforcement agency
ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the
conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge storm water, and the performance of
any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
      (3)   The authorized enforcement agency shall have the right to set up on
any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the
authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
facility’s storm water discharge.
      (4)   The authorized enforcement agency has the right to require the
discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility’s
sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All
devices used to measure storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to
ensure their accuracy.
      (5)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the authorized enforcement agency
and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by
the operator.
      (6)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the authorized enforcement agency
access to a permitted facility is a violation of a storm water discharge permit
and of this chapter. A person who is the operator of a facility with a SWP3 or
ECP and/or a NPDES permit to discharge storm water associated with industrial
activity commits an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement
agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of
conducting any activity authorized or required by this chapter.
      (7)   If the authorized enforcement agency have been refused access to
any part of the premises from which storm water is discharged, and he or she is
able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of
this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this
chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may
seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 1056.09) (Ord. 208-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 1056.10 REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL AND REDUCE STORM WATER POLLUTANTS BY
THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.
   The city’s Comprehensive Storm Water Management Ordinance (Ord. 172-2008)
has adopted requirements identifying best management practices for activities,
operations, or facilities which may cause or contribute to pollution or
contamination of storm water, the storm drain system or waters of the state.
The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall
provide, at his, her or their own expense, reasonable protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal
storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-
structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premises,
which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to
implement, at said person’s expense, additional structural and non-structural
BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the storm water system.
Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid SWP3 or ECP permit and/or
NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of storm water associated with
industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed in compliance
with the provisions of this section. The BMPs shall be part of a storm water
pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements
of the NPDES permit.
(Prior Code, § 1056.10) (Ord. 208-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 1056.11 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.
   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so
that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or physical
integrity of the watercourse.
(Prior Code, § 1056.11) (Ord. 208-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 1056.12 NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.
   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible
for a facility or operation, or responsible person for emergency response for a
facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of
materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants
discharging into storm water, the storm drain system or waters of the state,
said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment
and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous
materials, said person shall immediately notify the City Fire Department, the
County Emergency Management Agency and the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency
of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of
non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the City Storm Water
Management Utility or the Barberton Service Department in person or by phone or
facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by
phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the City
Storm Water Management Utility within three business days of the phone notice.
If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or
industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall
also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to
prevent its recurrence. A copy of such records shall be forwarded to the City
Storm Water Management Utility and retained by the owner or operator of such
establishment for at least three years.
(Prior Code, § 1056.12) (Ord. 208-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 1056.13 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Whenever the authorized enforcement agency finds that a person has
violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the
authorized enforcement agency shall order compliance by written notice of
violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without
limitation:
      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
      (2)   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
      (3)   That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and
desist;
      (4)   The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
      (5)   The payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation
costs; and
      (6)   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
   (B)   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation
or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should
the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the
work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the
expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
(Prior Code, § 1056.13) (Ord. 208-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 1056.14 APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of
the authorized enforcement agency to the Board of Zoning Appeals. The notice of
appeal must be filled with the office of the authorized enforcement agency
within 20 days of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the
appropriate authority or his or her designee shall take place within 45 days
from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the municipal
authority or its designee shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 1056.14) (Ord. 208-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 1056.15 ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL.
   If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation or, in the event of an appeal within 20 days
of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the
authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the authorized
enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are
authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or
restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or
person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government or
designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth
above.
(Prior Code, § 1056.15) (Ord. 208-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 1056.16 COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION.
   Within 15 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property
will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The
property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the
assessment within 20 days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner
as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by the expiration
of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special
assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for
the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. The
liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal payments. Interest at a rate
determined by the City Finance Department shall be assessed on the balance
beginning on the first day following discovery of the violation.
(Prior Code, § 1056.16) (Ord. 208-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 1056.17 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail
to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of
this chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary
or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities, which would
create further violations, or compelling the person to perform abatement or
remediation of the violation.
(Prior Code, § 1056.17) (Ord. 208-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 1056.18 COMPENSATORY ACTION.
   In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties and remedies authorized by
this chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator
alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at
compliance workshops, creek cleanup and the like.
(Prior Code, § 1056.18) (Ord. 208-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 1056.19 VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter is a threat to public health, safety and welfare, as is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be a summarily abated or restored at the
violator’s expense, and/or civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel
the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
(Prior Code, § 1056.19) (Ord. 208-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 1056.20 CRIMINAL PROSECUTION.
   Any person that has violated or continues to violate this chapter shall be
liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be
subject to a criminal penalty of $500 per violation per day and/or imprisonment
for a period of time not to exceed 30 days. The authorized enforcement agency
may recover all attorneys’ fees court costs and other expenses associated with
enforcement of this chapter, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
(Prior Code, § 1056.20) (Ord. 208-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 1056.21 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the
discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies.
(Prior Code, § 1056.21) (Ord. 208-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
CHAPTER 1058: GENERAL LIGHTING UTILITY
Section
1058.01   Establishment.
1058.02   General lighting utility fee.
§ 1058.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   Council hereby establishes a General Lighting Utility for the entire city,
for the purpose of providing the inhabitants of the city with an essential
public service relating to supplying adequate street lighting and traffic
signals throughout the entire city.
(Prior Code, § 1058.01) (Ord. 138-2018, passed 12-17-2018)
§ 1058.02 GENERAL LIGHTING UTILITY FEE.
   The Council hereby authorizes the Mayor and the Director of Public Service
to collect a general lighting utility fee of $3 from each utility customer
within the city that pays a storm water utility fee in connection with their
real property. The general lighting utility fees shall be used by the city to
pay the cost of constructing, operating, maintaining and repairing all of the
existing and future street lights and traffic signals throughout the city. Such
fees may be changed from time to time by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 1058.02) (Ord. 138-2018, passed 12-17-2018)
TITLE SIX: OTHER PUBLIC SERVICES
CHAPTER 1060: REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
Section
1060.01   Definitions.
1060.02   Method of collection.
1060.03   Permit.
1060.04   Transporting.
1060.05   Prohibited disposal.
1060.06   Utility Billing Review Board.
1060.07   Exemption for City.
1060.08   Residential payment fees.
1060.99   Penalty.
Editor’s note:
   This chapter, previously a codification of Ord. 38-1992, passed 3-9-1992, as
amended by Ord. 84-1993, passed 6-28-1993, was re-enacted in its entirety by
Ord. 58-1996, passed 4-22-1996, and again by Ord. 191-2000, passed 10-9-2000,
and amended by Ord. 236-2006, passed 12-11-2006, Ord. 31-2009, passed 3-9-2009,
and Ord. 203-2009, passed 11-9-2009.
Cross-reference:
   Burning rubber, see GEN. OFF.
660.13
   Collection and disposal of garbage, see Ohio R.C. 715.43, 717.01
   Employment of scavengers, see Ohio R.C. 3707.39
   Garbage and refuse in Barberton Reservoir-Wolf Creek area, see S.U. & P.S.
1072.03 et seq.
   Noxious and filthy accumulations; improper drainage, see GEN. OFF.
660.04, 660.18
   Open burning, see GEN. OFF.
610.09(i), 660.20
   Responsibility for disposal in dwellings, see B. & H. 1488.03, 1488.04
   Sanitation in parks and recreation areas, see S.U. & P.S.
1068.03
   Scavenging prohibited, see GEN. OFF.
660.14
   Trash deposits; littering, see GEN. OFF.
660.03,
660.05
   Trash on sidewalks, see GEN. OFF.
668.04
   Waste and garbage disposal in trailer camps and tourist camps, see B.R. & T.
860.08
§ 1060.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE. The grouping together under a common roof of two,
three or four residential units.
   REFUSE. All waste or offal of fish, fowl, fruit and other animal and
vegetable matter resulting from the preparation of food for human consumption;
lawn, hedge and grass clippings and tree trimmings; and baskets; and discarded
rags, mattresses, furniture, shoes, leather, carpets, scrap metal, broken
dishes, glassware, tin cans and other discarded household materials of a
similar nature. REFUSE does not include such materials as tires, broken or
whole bricks or cement, wood, ashes, stone, gravel, cinders, asphalt, earth,
feces.
   RESIDENTIAL UNIT. The place of abode of a person or persons living
separately or together as an independent family.
(Prior Code, § 1060.01) (Ord. 58-1996, passed 4-22-1996; Ord. 191-2000, passed
10-9-2000; Ord. 200-2002, passed 11-25-2002; Ord. 236-2006, passed 12-11-2006;
Ord. 11-2008, passed 1-28-2008; Ord. 133-2012, passed 7-23-2012; Ord. 16-2013,
passed 2-11-2013; Ord. 10-2018, passed 2-12-2018)
§ 1060.02 METHOD OF COLLECTION.
   (A)   City-wide curbside pick-up. On Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday of each
week, a residential unit or multiple-family residence shall be entitled to the
pick-up of refuse by placing it at curbside no earlier than one hour before
sunset on the evening before the scheduled pickup and no later than 7:00 a.m.
on the morning of the scheduled pickup, under the following method: residential
units shall be entitled to the pickup of trash and garbage which is placed at
the curb in the 95-gallon cart assigned by Kimble Recycling and Disposal, Inc.
(“Kimble”). Additionally, residential units may place up to a maximum of two
cubic yards in volume in the form of bagged trash, private residential trash
containers and/or items listed under division (B) below for weekly pickup.
Kimble provided disposal carts must be fully utilized prior to the placement of
additional bags or private containers at the curb.
   (B)   Allowable weekly pickups.
      (1)   (a)   Allowable items for weekly pickups (maximum two cubic yards
volume per week outside of the provided 95-gallon refuse cart) or any special
citywide pickup programs may include:
            1.   Bags (20 or 30 gallons - securely tied);
            2.   Bathroom fixtures (residential);
            3.   Bookcases (no pieces larger than four feet by four feet by
four inches, must weigh less than 60 pounds);
            4.   Car seats;
            5.   Carpet (securely tied in rolls no longer than four feet, must
weigh less than 60 pounds);
            6.   Dog houses, dismantled (no pieces larger than four feet by
four feet by four inches, must weigh less than 60 pounds);
            7.   Fencing (rolled and tied, not over four feet in length, must
weigh less than 60 pounds);
            8.   Firewood storage boxes, dismantled (not over four feet long);
            9.   Furnaces (residential, cut into four-foot lengths, must weigh
less than 60 pounds);
            10.   Furniture (mattresses and upholstered furniture containing
bed bugs must be wrapped in plastic);
            11.   Grass (if bagged and securely tied);
            12.   House doors (residential, cut into four-foot lengths, must
weigh less than 60 pounds);
            13.   Household appliances: washers, dryers, stoves and the like
(no items with Freon and/or refrigeration compressors);
            14.   Mufflers (cut into four-foot lengths);
            15.   Pallets (no longer than four feet, dismantled and tied in
bundles, must weigh less than 60 pounds);
            16.   Picnic tables, dismantled (no pieces larger than four feet by
four feet by four inches, must weigh less than 60 pounds);
            17.   Private waste containers (33 gallons or less, must weigh less
than 60 pounds);
            18.   Remodeling debris (homeowner generated only - no pieces
larger than four feet by four feet by four inches - nails removed, must weigh
less than 60 pounds);
            19.   Spouting (cut into four-foot lengths, must weigh less than 60
pounds);
            20.   Storm doors (residential);
            21.   Storm windows (residential);
            22.   Swing sets, dismantled (no pieces larger than four feet by
four feet by four inches, must weigh less than 60 pounds);
            23.   Tail pipes;
            24.   Tree trimmings, brush or hedge trimmings (if tied in bundles
no longer than four feet);
            25.   TV antenna, dismantled;
            26.   Water heaters (residential);
            27.   Window boxes or planters (not over four feet long, must weigh
less than 60 pounds); and
            28.   Wood (no larger than four feet by four feet by four inches,
with no exposed nails, tied in bundles).
         (b)   Exceptions:
            1.   No appliances containing Freon;
            2.   No contractor generated construction/remodeling material;
            3.   No dirt, soil or feces;
            4.   No evictions or whole-house cleanouts;
            5.   No tires; and
            6.   No hazardous waste.
      (2)   Upon written notice to the Service Department, cancellation of this
program requires a 30-day written notice, the water must be turned off, may be
cancelled only in increments of 30 days and may not be cancelled more than
twice a year. The residential unit must continue to pay for the service for the
first 30 days of the cancellation period. When the residential unit intends to
resume its entitlement to citywide pickup service, such service shall be
reinstated upon proper notification to the Service Department.
      (3)   All Kimble provided trash and recycle containers, along with any
materials allowed for collection under division (B)(1) above must be available
for pickup at the curb unless the resident is physically disabled. In such
cases, special arrangements will be made. Special arrangements do not include
the service of bulk items. Such items must be placed at the curb.
      (4)   All recyclable items must be placed in assigned Kimble Recycling
and Disposal, Inc. recycling containers, except large cardboard boxes, which
may be placed outside of the container. Such boxes must be broken down and
secured at placement at curbside along with non-recyclable trash and garbage.
      (5)   All trash and recyclables must be generated in the city to be
eligible for the citywide trash services. Any trash and recyclables not
generated from the city is prohibited from being placed curbside for
residential citywide pickup.
      (6)   Carts and additional allowable trash placed for pick-up must be
placed at the curbside or designated collection point of the residence that
generated such trash and recyclables.
      (7)   Trash containers and receptacles shall be removed from the city
right-of-way and placed behind the front building line.
   (C)   Private haulers not permitted. No residential unit may hire a private
hauler licensed under §
1060.03 of this chapter.
   (D)   Pick-up of court-ordered evictions and whole-house cleanouts.
      (1)   After 24 hours, a property owner/landlord shall be responsible to
remove any items and/or trash left on the curb. If the property owner/landlord
fails to do so, the city has the authority to have the items removed and any
and all costs related to this removal shall be the responsibility of the
property owner/landlord.
      (2)   The Municipal Court may also charge said costs as part of a fine in
any criminal action. Any costs collected as a fine shall be remitted back to
the city and placed in the General Fund.
      (3)   If the city is not reimbursed for these removal costs, the city
reserves the right to assess these costs on the taxes of said property and
collect them as a lien on the property, as well as recovering these costs in
any other manner provided by law.
   (E)   Bylaws and regulations. Upon written notification to Council, the
Director of Public Service may make such bylaws and regulations as the Director
deems necessary for the safe, economical and efficient management of the
services provided under this section; provided that, such bylaws and
regulations do not expressly conflict with any provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1060.02) (Ord. 58-1996, passed 4-22-1996; Ord. 191-2000, passed
10-9-2000; Ord. 200-2002, passed 11-25-2002; Ord. 236-2006, passed 12-11-2006;
Ord. 11-2008, passed 1-28-2008; Ord. 133-2012, passed 7-23-2012; Ord. 16-2013,
passed 2-11-2013; Ord. 10-2018, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. 76-2025, passed 6-23-
2025)
§ 1060.03 PERMIT.
   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of collecting, hauling,
removing and/or disposing of recyclables, garbage, animal or vegetable refuse,
ashes, rubbish, trash or waste materials of any kind within the city and upon
its streets without first obtaining an annual permit from the Director of
Public Service and without complying with the requirements of this chapter. The
fee for such a permit shall be $300 per year for each motor vehicle to be
operated within the city.
   (B)   Whoever desires a permit to engage in any business described in
division (A) above shall make a written application therefor at the Municipal
Building. The written application must be made on the form provided, correctly
stating the following information:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
      (2)   The make, model, year and current registration license of any motor
vehicle used in the business;
      (3)   A brief description of the type of materials to be collected;
      (4)   The applicant’s business name, address and telephone number;
      (5)   The name, address and telephone number of each principal owner of
the applicant;
      (6)   The type of business (commercial or residential);
      (7)   The location of the site for disposing of solid waste and
recyclables; and
      (8)   A list of customers for whom the applicant has provided or is
currently providing solid waste or commercial/industrial recycling collection
services.
   (C)   Upon payment by the applicant of the permit fee as set forth in
division (A) above, the Director of Public Service shall issue to the applicant
a permit, valid from the date of issuance to March 1 of the following year,
together with a license identification to affix to each motor vehicle in an
unobscured, conspicuous place. The permit fee shall be collected for the
purpose of reimbursing the city for the cost of processing the permit
application.
   (D)   Each permit holder shall be required to post with the city a $500 cash
or surety bond to insure the faithful performance of duties and
responsibilities required of such permit holder by this chapter and by
ordinances regulating vehicular traffic in the city as well as trash and
recyclable collection and transportation.
   (E)   Each permit holder must carry proper liability insurance for each
vehicle in the following amounts: personal injury, $1,000,000 per person and
$1,000,000 per occurrence; property damage, $300,000 per occurrence.
   (F)   Each permit holder must provide the name of the facility to which the
municipal solid waste and recyclables are transported and disposed.
   (G)   Each permit holder, as well as any other trash collector or hauler,
shall not operate within the city limits between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:
00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 1060.03) (Ord. 58-1996, passed 4-22-1996; Ord. 191-2000, passed
10-9-2000; Ord. 200-2002, passed 11-25-2002; Ord. 236-2006, passed 12-11-2006;
Ord. 11-2008, passed 1-28-2008; Ord. 133-2012, passed 7-23-2012; Ord. 16-2013,
passed 2-11-2013)
§ 1060.04 TRANSPORTING.
   (A)   Industrial, commercial or individual producers of refuse may transport
such refuse through the streets of the city; provided that, such transportation
is made in trucks or vehicles so constructed as to prevent the leakage or
scattering of the contents thereof.
   (B)   All such vehicles shall be provided with a suitable tarpaulin which
shall at all times cover the contents thereof, except when being loaded or
unloaded.
   (C)   Further, the ultimate disposal of the garbage or refuse must be made
without violating any other provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1060.04) (Ord. 58-1996, passed 4-22-1996; Ord. 191-2000, passed
10-9-2000; Ord. 200-2002, passed 11-25-2002; Ord. 236-2006, passed 12-11-2006;
Ord. 11-2008, passed 1-28-2008; Ord. 133-2012, passed 7-23-2012; Ord. 16-2013,
passed 2-11-2013)
§ 1060.05 PROHIBITED DISPOSAL.
   No person within the limits of the city shall throw any refuse upon the
ground or bury the same upon any premises, public or private, or burn the same
in any place; provided, however, that, this section shall not prevent the use
of mechanical disposal devices.
(Prior Code, § 1060.05) (Ord. 58-1996, passed 4-22-1996; Ord. 191-2000, passed
10-9-2000; Ord. 200-2002, passed 11-25-2002; Ord. 236-2006, passed 12-11-2006;
Ord. 11-2008, passed 1-28-2008; Ord. 133-2012, passed 7-23-2012; Ord. 16-2013,
passed 2-11-2013)
§ 1060.06 UTILITY BILLING REVIEW BOARD.
   Any administrative decision made by any person charged with the enforcement
of this chapter may be appealed to the Utility Billing Review Board by any
person claiming to be adversely affected by such decision. Where there are
unnecessary hardships due to lack of adequate income, the Utility Billing
Review Board shall have the power, in a specific case, to authorize refuse and
recycle collection without charge or for a reduced charge and to interpret any
such provision in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter
so that the public health, safety and general welfare may be secured and so
that substantial justice and equity may be done.
(Prior Code, § 1060.06) (Ord. 58-1996, passed 4-22-1996; Ord. 191-2000, passed
10-9-2000; Ord. 200-2002, passed 11-25-2002; Ord. 236-2006, passed 12-11-2006;
Ord. 11-2008, passed 1-28-2008; Ord. 133-2012, passed 7-23-2012; Ord. 16-2013,
passed 2-11-2013)
§ 1060.07 EXEMPTION FOR CITY.
   The city is expressly exempted from the provisions of this chapter
pertaining to permits or any other section of this chapter which might be
construed as requiring the city to pay any fee or obtain any permit or license.
(Prior Code, § 1060.07) (Ord. 58-1996, passed 4-22-1996; Ord. 191-2000, passed
10-9-2000; Ord. 200-2002, passed 11-25-2002; Ord. 236-2006, passed 12-11-2006;
Ord. 11-2008, passed 1-28-2008; Ord. 133-2012, passed 7-23-2012; Ord. 16-2013,
passed 2-11-2013)
§ 1060.08 RESIDENTIAL PAYMENT FEES.
   (A)   Residents of the city will be charged as provided in the rate schedule
(A)(1). Residents participating in the "Barberton Residential Services Relief
Program" are eligible for a reduced fee per the rate schedule (A)(1). The fees
provided by the rate schedule (A)(1) shall be included in monthly utility bills
received by customers.
      (1)   Rate schedule.
 
                                March 1, 2023 March 1, 2024 March 1, 2025
Monthly rate                    $22.11        $23.10        $24.14
Residential relief program rate $17.69        $18.48        $19.31
 
   (B)   The fees laid out in division (A)(1) above are subject to future
changes based upon provisions made in the contract authorized by this chapter
and as authorized by future legislation passed by City Council should any
become necessary.
(Prior Code, § 1060.08) (Ord. 58-1996, passed 4-22-1996; Ord. 191-2000, passed
10-9-2000; Ord. 200-2002, passed 11-25-2002; Ord. 236-2006, passed 12-11-2006;
Ord. 11-2008, passed 1-28-2008; Ord. 133-2012, passed 7-23-2012; Ord. 16-2013,
passed 2-11-2013; Ord. 139-2018, passed 12-17-2018; Ord. 8-2023, passed 2-13-
2023)
§ 1060.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than
$500 or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both, for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues after the offender has been notified of the violation. The
Building Commissioner shall have the authority to enforce this section under
the provisions set out by the ICC International Property Maintenance Code.
   (B)   Violations of §
1060.02(B)(7) shall result in a citation and $50 fine per occurrence. Citations
issued under this section may be appealed to the City's Board of Zoning and
Building Appeals.
   (C)   Whoever receives a trash container violation and chooses to file an
appeal to the Board of Appeals, the required appeal filing fee of $25 shall be
refunded to the appellant if the Board of Appeals finds in the appellant's
favor.
(Prior Code, § 1060.99) (Ord. 58-1996, passed 4-22-1996; Ord. 191-2000, passed
10-9-2000; Ord. 200-2002, passed 11-25-2002; Ord. 236-2006, passed 12-11-2006;
Ord. 11-2008, passed 1-28-2008; Ord. 133-2012, passed 7-23-2012; Ord. 16-2013,
passed 2-11-2013; Ord. 10-2018, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. 76-2025, passed 6-23-
2025; Ord. 163-2025, passed 11-24-2025)
CHAPTER 1062: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
1062.01   Definitions.
1062.02   False alarms.
1062.03   Fees.
Cross-reference:
   Division of Police, see ADM. Ch.
238
   Division of Fire, see ADM. Ch.
240
   Theft alarms, see TRAF.
337.19
   False alarms, see GEN. OFF.
648.08,
648.09
§ 1062.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM SYSTEM. Any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged
to signal audibly, visibly or electronically, to a location outside the
structures protected by the system, or to a monitoring station which in turn
notifies the appropriate agency, the occurrence of an illegal entry or other
activity requiring urgent attention to which the Division of Police or the
Division of Fire is expected to respond. However, ALARM SYSTEM shall not
include alarms installed in motor vehicles.
   ALARM USER. Any owner of an alarm system installed in any business,
residential or industrial property within the confines of the city.
   AUTOMATIC DIALER. Any alarm system which is designed to emit its signal
directly to the Division of Fire or the Division of Police by means of dialing
a telephone number either to the Division of Fire or the Division of Police, or
both, and giving a tape recorded message or synthesized voice message intended
to elicit a response.
   FALSE ALARM. An alarm system signal or message eliciting an urgent response
by the Division of Fire or the Division of Police when a situation requiring
such response by the Police or Fire Division does not in fact exist. However,
FALSE ALARM does not include an alarm signal caused by unusually violent
conditions of nature, nor does it include other extraordinary circumstances not
reasonably subject to control by the alarm user.
(Prior Code, § 1062.01) (Ord. 138-1988, passed 9-26-1988)
§ 1062.02 FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   An alarm which has been activated as a result of testing or repair
shall not be considered as a false alarm if prior notification has been given
the day of such repairs or test to the agency which the alarm would signal.
   (B)   An alarm which has been activated shall not be considered as a false
alarm if the responding Public Safety Division receives a request to cancel.
Such request must be made to the same location as the request for service and
must be received prior to the arrival of the first responding unit.
(Prior Code, § 1062.02) (Ord. 138-1988, passed 9-26-1988)
§ 1062.03 FEES.
   (A)   No service fee shall be assessed for the first three false alarms per
calendar year for each alarm user.
   (B)   Each false alarm in a calendar year in excess of three false alarms
and up to and including five false alarms, transmitted by an alarm system shall
be assessed by the Director of Public Safety, or his or her designee, a service
fee of $50.
   (C)   Each false alarm in a calendar year in excess of five false alarms
transmitted by an alarm system shall be assessed by the Director of Public
Safety, or his or her designee, a service fee of $100.
   (D)   Any alarm user whose system results in an excess of ten false alarms
in any given calendar year shall discontinue the use of the system until the
same is adjusted, repaired or replaced. Approval from the Director of Public
Safety must be obtained before such service is reactivated.
(Prior Code, § 1062.03) (Ord. 138-1988, passed 9-26-1988)
CHAPTER 1064: METRO REGIONAL TRANSIT AUTHORITY
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 74-1972, passed 4-24-1972, authorized the creation of a regional
transit authority with the Cities of Akron and Cuyahoga Falls and provided for
its administration by a Board of Trustees.
    Ord. 74-1972 has been amended by the following ordinances: Ord. 8-1973,
passed 1-15-1973; Ord. 119-1990, passed 6-25-1990; and Ord. 4-1991, passed 1-
28-1991.
   There are no sections in Ch. 1064. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross-references and any future legislation.
Cross-reference:
   Creation of regional transit authority by counties, municipal corporations
or townships, see Ohio R.C. 306.31, 306.32
   Establishment, see CHTR. §
6.04(c)
   Financing by revenue bonds, see Ohio R.C. 306.37 et seq.
   Misconduct involving a public transportation system, see GEN. OFF.
642.33
   Powers and duties of authority, see Ohio R.C. 306.35
CHAPTER 1068: PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
Section
1068.01   Definitions.
1068.02   Park property.
1068.03   Pets at Lake Anna Park.
1068.04   Sanitation.
1068.05   Traffic.
1068.06   Recreational activities.
1068.07   Behavior.
1068.08   Merchandising, advertising and signs.
1068.09   Enforcement.
1068.99   Penalty.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 24-1999, passed 3-8-1999, adopted the Parks and Recreation Master Plan
2010. Copies of such ordinance and of the plan may be obtained, at cost, from
the Clerk of Council.
Cross-reference:
   Advertising on public property, see GEN. OFF.
642.26(b)
   Criminal mischief, see GEN. OFF.
642.11
   Disorderly conduct, see GEN. OFF.
648.04
   Injuring vines, bushes, trees or crops, see GEN. OFF.
642.06
   Land appropriation for parks, see Ohio R.C. 715.21, 719.01
   Loitering, see GEN. OFF.
648.10
   Nude swimming prohibited, see GEN. OFF.
666.17
   Open burning, see GEN. OFF.
660.20
   Parks and Recreation Commission, see CHTR. §
6.03; ADM. Ch.
264
   Peddlers and solicitors, see B.R. & T. Ch.
844
   Playgrounds, recreation centers, swimming pools, see Ohio R.C. 755.12 et
seq.
   Power to regulate vehicle speed in parks, see Ohio R.C. 4511.07
   Sale of fireworks, see GEN. OFF.
672.12
   Slingshot, bow and arrow and air rifle, see GEN. OFF.
672.14
   Unguarded swimming prohibited, see GEN. OFF.
660.19
   Vacation or sale of park property, see CHTR. §
5.15
§ 1068.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BICYCLE. A vehicle as defined in § 402.04 of the Traffic Code.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of Parks and Recreation appointed by the Parks and
Recreation Commission pursuant to § 6.03(b) of the City Charter.
   PARK. A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other
area in the city, owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive
recreation.
   VEHICLE. Any conveyance, whether motor-powered, animal-drawn or self-
propelled and includes any trailer in tow, of any size, and ski-equipped
snowmobile, but does not include baby carriages or vehicles in the service of
the Parks and Recreation Commission.
(Prior Code, § 1068.01)
§ 1068.02 PARK PROPERTY.
   Except by the authority of public officers having charge of a park, no
person shall:
   (A)   Disfiguration and removal. Purposely mark, deface, disfigure, injure,
tamper with, displace or remove any building, bridge, table, bench, fireplace
or railing; paving or paving material; water line or other public utility or
part or appurtenance thereof; sign, notice or placard, whether temporary or
permanent; monument, stake, post or other boundary marker; or any other
structure, equipment, facility or park property or appurtenance, either real or
personal;
   (B)   Restrooms and washrooms. Fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms
and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition;
   (C)   Removal of natural resources. Dig or remove any beach sand, whether
submerged or not, or any soil, rock, stone, tree, shrub, plant, downtimber or
other wood or material or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or
other means or agency;
   (D)   Erection of structures. Construct or erect any building or structure
of any kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any
public service utility into, upon or across any park land, unless a special
written permit has been issued therefor;
   (E)   Injury and removal of vegetation. Damage, cut, carve or otherwise
injure, transplant or remove any tree or plant or pick the flowers or seeds of
any tree or plant; attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or
plant; dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas; or in any other way injure or
impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any park area;
   (F)   Climbing trees and the like. Climb any tree or wall or stand or sit
upon any monument, fountain, railing, fence or other property not designated or
customarily used for such purposes;
   (G)   Hitching of animals. Tie or hitch a horse or other animal to any tree
or plant;
   (H)   Hunting. Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot
or throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird, or remove or have in his or
her possession the young of any wild animal or the egg, nest or young of any
reptile or bird;
   (I)   Feeding of animals. Give, offer or attempt to give or offer to any
animal or bird any tobacco, alcohol or other known noxious substance; or
   (J)   Use of metal detectors and similar devices. No person shall use a
metal detector or any similar device without obtaining a permit issued by the
Director of Parks and Recreation.
(Prior Code, § 1068.02) (Ord. 42-1971, passed 3-15-1971; Ord. 202-2001, passed
10-22-2001)
§ 1068.03 PETS AT LAKE ANNA PARK.
   (A)   No person being the owner of or having the custody or control of any
pet, as defined in division (B) below, shall cause or allow said pet to be
within Lake Anna Park or on the sidewalks and tree lawns surrounding said Park.
   (B)   As used herein, the term PET is defined as any domesticated animal
kept for pleasure rather than utility. The term PET shall include, but not be
limited to, dogs, cats, horses, goats, domesticated fowl, sheep, rabbits and
monkeys. The term PET, as used herein, shall not include guide dogs for the
blind.
(Prior Code, § 1068.025) (Ord. 129-1989, passed 7-10-1989)
§ 1068.04 SANITATION.
   Except by the authority of public officers having charge of a park:
   (A)   Pollution of waters. No person shall throw, discharge or otherwise
place or cause to be placed in the waters of any pond, lake, stream, bay or
other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary stream, storm
sewer or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid
or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of such waters;
   (B)   Refuse and trash. No person shall bring into a park or dump, deposit
or leave in a park any bottle, broken glass, ashes, paper, box, can, dirt,
rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse or trash. No such refuse or trash shall be left
anywhere on the grounds of any park, but shall be placed in the proper
receptacles where these are provided. Where receptacles are not provided, all
rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible
for its presence; and
   (C)   Dogs in swimming areas prohibited. No person, being the owner or
person in control of a dog, whether such dog is in leash or not, shall allow
such dog to come within 500 feet of any beach or wading pool located in any of
the city parks.
(Prior Code, § 1068.03) (Ord. 42-1971, passed 3-15-1971; Ord. 217-1982, passed
9-27-1982)
§ 1068.05 TRAFFIC.
   Except by the authority of public officers having charge of a park, no
person shall:
   (A)   Conformity with traffic laws. Fail to comply with all applicable
provisions of the State motor vehicle traffic laws with regard to equipment and
operation of vehicles and with such regulations as are contained in this
chapter and Part Four, the Traffic Code, of this code of ordinances;
   (B)   Enforcement of traffic regulations. Fail to obey all traffic officers
and employees of the Parks and Recreation Commission, such persons being hereby
authorized and instructed to direct traffic whenever and wherever needed in the
parks and on the public ways immediately adjacent thereto in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter;
   (C)   Traffic signs. Fail to observe carefully all traffic signs indicating
speed, direction, caution, stopping or parking, and all other signs posted for
proper control and to safeguard life and property;
   (D)   Speed of vehicles. Ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed
exceeding ten mph, except upon such ways as the Director may designate by
posted signs;
   (E)   Operation confined to roads. Drive any vehicle on any area, except
paved park roads or parking areas or other areas as may on occasion be
specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the Director;
   (F)   Parking.
      (1)   Designated areas. Park a vehicle in other than an established or
designated parking area in accordance with the posted directions in such
parking area and with the instructions of any employee who may be present;
      (2)   Full-parking. Full-park on a road or driveway at any time;
      (3)   Immovable vehicles. Leave any vehicle anywhere in a park with one
or more wheels chained or with the motor set in gear and the doors locked or in
any manner fixed or arranged so that such vehicle cannot readily be moved by
hand;
      (4)   Night parking. Leave a vehicle standing or parked at night without
lights clearly visible for at least 200 feet from both front and rear on any
driveway or road area;
      (5)   Emergency procedure. Fail to notify immediately the Director or a
law enforcement officer of any emergency such as a breakdown requiring the
assistance of a tow truck, mechanic or other person; and
      (6)   Double-parking. Double-park any vehicle on any road or parkway.
   (G)   Bicycles.
      (1)   Confined to roads. Ride a bicycle on other than a paved vehicular
road or path designated for that purpose; except that, a cyclist shall be
permitted to wheel or push a bicycle by hand over any grassy area or wooded
trail or on any paved area reserved for pedestrian use;
      (2)   Operation. Ride a bicycle other than on the right-hand side of the
road pavement as close as conditions permit or ride two or more abreast;
      (3)   Rider prohibited. Ride any other person on a bicycle;
      (4)   Designated racks. Leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle
rack when such is provided and there is a space available;
      (5)   Immobile. Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or pavement, set
against a tree or in any place or position where another person may trip over
or be injured by it; or
      (6)   Night operation. Ride a bicycle on any road after sunset or before
sunrise without an attached headlight plainly visible at least 200 feet in
front of such bicycle and without a red tail light or red reflector plainly
visible at least 200 feet from the rear of such bicycle.
(Prior Code, § 1068.04) (Ord. 42-1971, passed 3-15-1971)
§ 1068.06 RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES.
   Except by the authority of public officers having charge of a park, no
person shall:
   (A)   Bathing and swimming hours. Frequent or congregate at any waters or
places designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing, except between such
hours of the day as are designated by the Director for such purposes for each
individual area;
   (B)   Bathing costume. Wear a bathing suit so as to indecently expose his or
her person or call forth merited criticism or appear in a bathing costume at
any place in the parks, except within the limits of designated bathing places
or areas; all bathing costumes shall conform to commonly accepted standards;
   (C)   Bath house. Dress or undress on any beach or in any vehicle, toilet or
other place, except in such bath houses or structures as may be provided for
that purpose;
   (D)   Hunting. Hunt, trap or pursue wildlife at any time or use, carry or
possess air rifles, spring guns, bow and arrows, slings, any other form of
weapon potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human safety or any
kind of trapping device, nor shall any person shoot into park areas from beyond
park boundaries;
   (E)   Picnic areas regulated. Picnic or lunch in a place other than those
designated for that purpose or fail to comply with any direction given by park
employees who have the authority to regulate the activities in such areas, when
necessary to prevent congestion and to secure maximum use for the comfort and
convenience of all;
   (F)   Availability of picnic areas. Fail to comply with the regulation that
the use of individual fireplaces, together with tables and benches, follows
generally the rule of “first come, first served”, except in cases where park
facilities have been reserved with permission of the Director;
   (G)   Picnic areas non-exclusive. Use any portion of the picnic areas or of
any of the buildings or structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics
to the exclusion of other persons;
   (H)   Duties of picnicker. Leave a picnic area before a fire is completely
extinguished and before all trash in the nature of boxes, papers, cans,
bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed in the disposal receptacles, where
provided or, if no such receptacles are available, is carried away from the
park area;
   (I)   Camping. Set up tents, shacks or any other temporary shelter or leave
in a park after closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be
used or that could be used for such purpose, such as a house trailer, camping
trailer, camp-wagon or the like;
   (J)   Games. Take part in or abet the playing of any game involving thrown
or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins or model
airplanes, except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation, or play
rough or comparatively dangerous games such as football and baseball, except on
the fields, courts and areas provided therefor;
   (K)   Horseback riding. Ride a horse or other animal except on designated
bridle trails using only horses which are thoroughly broken, properly
restrained and ridden with due care and which are not allowed to graze or go
unattended or be hitched to any rock, tree or shrub;
   (L)   Boating. Operate a power boat, runabout, canoe or raft on any lake or
pond under the jurisdiction of the Parks and Recreation Commission;
   (M)   Fishing. Fish in any pond or lake under the control of the Parks and
Recreation Commission during the hours of darkness, fish anywhere, except from
shore or fail to comply with any state fishing regulations; or
   (N)   Activity hours. Frequent any park or recreation area, except during
the hours of daylight, except where lighted facilities are provided or special
group permission is granted by the Director. Lighted recreation facilities
shall be closed at 11:00 p.m. and participation past this time is prohibited.
All parks shall close at 8:30 p.m. Eastern Standard Time or 9:30 p.m. Daylight
Saving Time unless otherwise posted.
(Prior Code, § 1068.05) (Ord. 42-1971, passed 3-15-1971; Ord. 55-2018, passed
5-14-2018)
§ 1068.07 BEHAVIOR.
   No person in a park shall:
   (A)   Alcoholic beverages. Bring into or ingest in any way any alcoholic
beverage or drug of abuse or any combination of the same at any time in a park
or enter a park while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse or
any combination of the same;
   (B)   Fireworks and explosives. Bring into a park, have in his or her
possession, or set off or otherwise cause to explode, discharge or burn, any
firecracker, torpedo, rocket or other fireworks, explosives or flammable
material or discharge or throw the same into any such area from any land or
highway adjacent thereto; this prohibition includes any substance, compound,
mixture or article that in conjunction with any other substance or compound
would be dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints;
   (C)   Reservation of facilities. Occupy any seat or bench or enter into or
remain in any pavilion or other park structure or section thereof which may be
reserved and designated by the Parks and Recreation Commission for the use of
the opposite sex, except for children under four years of age;
   (D)   Press. Appear at any place in other than proper clothing, except in
the restricted bathing areas;
   (E)   Alms. Solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, public or
private;
   (F)   Fires. Build or attempt to build a fire, except in such areas and
under such regulations as may be designated by the Director, or drop, throw or
otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper
or other flammable material within any park area or on any public way abutting
or contiguous thereto;
   (G)   Closed areas. Enter an area posted as “closed to the public” or use or
abet the use of any area in violation of posted notices;
   (H)   Games of chance. Gamble or participate in or abet any game of chance;
   (I)   Going onto ice. Go onto the ice on any of the waters except such areas
as are designated by the Director as skating fields on or near which a safety
signal is displayed;
   (J)   Loitering and boisterousness. Use loud, boisterous, threatening,
abusive, insulting or indecent language or engage in any disorderly conduct or
behavior tending to a breach of the public peace; or
   (K)   Smoking. Smoking shall be prohibited within any park area or on any
public way abutting or contiguous thereto.
(Prior Code, § 1068.06) (Ord. 42-1971, passed 3-15-1971; Ord. 42-2018, passed
4-23-2018)
§ 1068.08 MERCHANDISING, ADVERTISING AND SIGNS.
   No person in a park shall:
   (A)   Vending and peddling. Expose or offer for sale any article or thing or
station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or
display of any such article or thing, unless such person is a regularly
licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority and regulation of the
Parks and Recreation Commission;
   (B)   Advertising. Announce or call the public attention in any way to any
article or service for sale or hire; or
   (C)   Signs. Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard,
advertisement or inscription or erect or cause to be erected any sign on any
public lands or public ways adjacent to a park.
(Prior Code, § 1068.07) (Ord. 42-1971, passed 3-15-1971)
§ 1068.09 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Officials. The Director of Parks and Recreation, employees of the
Parks and Recreation Commission and city law enforcement officers shall, in
connection with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions
of this chapter.
   (B)   Ejectment. The Director, any employee of the Parks and Recreation
Commission and any city law enforcement officer shall have authority to eject
from the park any person acting in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter.
   (C)   Seizure of property. The Director and any employee of the Parks and
Recreation Commission shall have the authority to seize and temporarily hold
any property, thing or device in the park used in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1068.08) (Ord. 42-1971, passed 3-15-1971; Ord. 172-1979, passed
7-23-1979)
§ 1068.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
more than $500. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 1068.99) (Ord. 42-1971, passed 3-15-1971)
CHAPTER 1072: BARBERTON RESERVOIR; WOLF CREEK
Section
1072.01   Fish stocking by state.
1072.02   Sewage and industrial wastes prohibited.
1072.03   Miscellaneous refuse deposits prohibited.
1072.04   Other nuisances; privy vaults.
1072.05   Inspections.
1072.06   Privy vault regulations.
1072.07   Fishing, trapping and bathing prohibited.
1072.08   Boats prohibited.
1072.09   Livestock prohibited.
1072.10   Regulations of Director of Public Service.
1072.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Authority of Director of Public Service, see CHTR. §
4.02
   Contamination of water supply, see S.U. & P.S.
1044.02
   Dumping of septic tank materials, see S.U. & P.S.
1040.09 
   Hunting, see GEN. OFF.
618.16
   Improper drainage, see GEN. OFF.
660.18 
   Noxious odors; filthy accumulations; polluting and diverting watercourses,
see GEN. OFF.
660.04 
   Open burning, see GEN. OFF.
660.20
   Resisting arrest, see GEN. OFF.
606.16 
   Unguarded swimming prohibited, see GEN. OFF.
660.19 
§ 1072.01 FISH STOCKING BY STATE.
   (A)   The State Department of Agriculture is hereby authorized to place in
the Barberton Reservoir fish suitable for propagation in its waters, such as
blue gills, large mouth bass, small mouth bass, yellow perch and catfish, but
no shad or hickory shad shall at any time be placed therein.
   (B)   Such Department is also authorized, from time to time, to remove such
fish from the waters at such times and seasons as it may desire or when
requested to do so by the Director of Public Service. The fish are to be
distributed within a radius of 20 miles in such public or private waters as may
be agreed upon between the Department of Agriculture and the Director.
(Prior Code, § 1072.01) (Ord. 11-1945, passed 3-5-1945)
§ 1072.02 SEWAGE AND INDUSTRIAL WASTES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall establish an outlet for the discharge of sewage or
industrial wastes directly or indirectly into the Barberton Reservoir, Wolf
Creek above the Reservoir or any watercourse, ravine, run, swale, drain,
sinkhole, stream or ditch within a distance of 20 miles from the city
corporation line, whereby such sewage or industrial wastes may reach the
Reservoir above the water supply intake of the city, until such person has
obtained the approval of the Director of Public Service of the proposed outlet
and of such treatment works as may be necessary to prevent the pollution of the
public water supply of the city.
(Prior Code, § 1072.02)
§ 1072.03 MISCELLANEOUS REFUSE DEPOSITS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall place, deposit or cause to be placed or deposited in the
Barberton Reservoir, Wolf Creek above the Reservoir or in any ravine, run,
swale, drain, sinkhole, stream, ditch or other watercourse tributary thereto,
or on or under the surface of the ground at any point from which contamination
may reach the Reservoir, within a radius of twenty miles from the corporation
line of the city and upstream from the water supply intake to the city, any
human or animal excreta, offal, dead animal, garbage or refuse or offensive,
putrid or polluting material of any kind.
(Prior Code, § 1072.03)
§ 1072.04 OTHER NUISANCES; PRIVY VAULTS.
   No person shall maintain within a radius of 20 miles from the nearest
corporation line of the city, and upstream along Wolf Creek from the water
supply intake of the city, any privy vault, catch basin or other receptacle for
sanitary or domestic sewage, barnyard, pigsty, hen coop, hog wallow, garbage
heap or rubbish heap, within 500 feet of the Barberton Reservoir or of Wolf
Creek above the Reservoir or within 150 feet of the high water mark in any
ravine, run, swale, drain, sinkhole, stream, ditch or other watercourse,
whereby water may flow directly or indirectly, permanently or at intervals,
into the Barberton Waterworks Reservoir. However, this section shall not apply
to the maintenance of any privy vault so constructed and maintained as to
prevent the material deposited therein from overflowing onto the surface of the
ground. The owner, tenant or lessee of property on which such a vault is
located shall have it cleaned at such frequent intervals as to avoid overflow
and shall cause the matter removed to be buried at a point not less than 500
feet from the Reservoir or any ravine, run, swale, drain, stream, ditch or
other watercourse tributary thereto. Further, this section shall not apply to
the maintenance of any barnyard, pigsty, hen coop, hog wallow, garbage heap or
rubbish heap so located or constructed that no filth or unsanitary matter can
drain or flow into the Reservoir, if the owner thereof has obtained from the
Director of Public Service a certificate of such facts.
(Prior Code, § 1072.04)
§ 1072.05 INSPECTIONS.
   No person having or using a privy vault or other receptacle for sanitary or
domestic sewage, barnyard, pigsty, hen coop, hog wallow, garbage heap or
rubbish heap, shall refuse to permit the same to be inspected by the Director
of Public Service, or by such person duly authorized by him or her to make such
inspection.
(Prior Code, § 1072.05)
§ 1072.06 PRIVY VAULT REGULATIONS.
   No person shall fail to remove the material from any privy vault before the
same fills up, nor shall any person bury such material within 500 feet of the
Barberton Reservoir or Wolf Creek above the same or within 150 feet of any
ravine, run, swale, drain, sinkhole, stream ditch or other watercourse from
which water may flow directly or indirectly into the Reservoir.
(Prior Code, § 1072.06) (Ord. 11-1945, passed 3-5-1945)
§ 1072.07 FISHING, TRAPPING AND BATHING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall, without authority from the Director of Public Service or
his or her authorized representative, fish, take, kill or trap any fur-bearing
animal or game bird, swim, bathe, wade or wash clothes in the waters of the
Barberton Reservoir, in Wolf Creek above the same or in any stream, ditch or
other watercourse tributary thereto within 20 miles of the nearest corporation
line of the city, pollute such waters by putting in a putrid or offensive
substance injurious to the public health, trespass upon the grounds or waters
of the Reservoir or destroy or deface property pertaining thereto. No person
who is properly authorized to be upon the lands of the Reservoir or to fish
therein shall refuse to depart therefrom or to cease such activity upon being
ordered to do so by any law enforcement officer.
(Prior Code, § 1072.07) (Ord. 3-1937, passed 2-15-1937; Ord. 112-1972, passed
6-5-1972)
§ 1072.08 BOATS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall maintain, have or use boats on the Barberton Reservoir or on
Wolf Creek above the Reservoir or on any stream or water tributary thereto and
above the Reservoir within 20 miles of the nearest corporation line of the
city, except that officers of the city having care of the Reservoir may
maintain and use boats for the purpose of removing driftwood and for such other
work as may be necessary for the purification of the city water supply and the
preservation of the city property.
(Prior Code, § 1072.08)
§ 1072.09 LIVESTOCK PROHIBITED.
   No person shall permit livestock belonging to or in his or her charge to
wade, swim or stand in the waters of the Barberton Reservoir or of Wolf Creek
above the Reservoir or of any stream or watercourse tributary thereto, or to
run at large upon the property of the city adjacent to the Reservoir within 20
miles of the nearest corporation line of the city.
(Prior Code, § 1072.09)
§ 1072.10 REGULATIONS OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SERVICE.
   The Director of Public Service shall enforce the provisions of this chapter
and is hereby authorized to establish and enforce suitable rules and
regulations, and to provide for such patrol of the area affected thereby, as he
or she deems necessary for such purpose.
(Prior Code, § 1072.10)
§ 1072.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter, or any rule or
regulation of the Director of Public Service adopted pursuant to §
1072.10 of this chapter, shall be fined not more than $500. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(Prior Code, § 1072.99) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
CHAPTER 1074: MANAGEMENT, ADMINISTRATION AND CONTROL OF THE USE OF THE CITY’S
PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Section
1074.01   Findings and purpose.
1074.02   Scope.
1074.03   Definitions.
1074.04   Rights-of-way administration.
1074.05   Certificate of registration applications.
1074.06   Reporting requirements.
1074.07   Compensation for certificate of registration
1074.08   Oversight and regulation.
1074.09   Registration term.
1074.10   Small cell facilities and wireless support structures.
1074.11   Indemnity.
1074.12   Civil forfeitures.
1074.13   Termination of certificate of registration.
1074.14   Unauthorized use of public rights-of-way.
1074.15   Rights of individuals.
1074.16   Assignment or transfer of ownership and renewal.
1074.17   Construction permits.
1074.18   Construction, relocation and restoration.
1074.19   Minor maintenance permit.
1074.20   Enforcement of permit obligation.
1074.21   Performance security.
1074.22   Indemnification and liability.
1074.23   General provisions.
1074.99   Penalty.
§ 1074.01 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The city is concerned with the use of all rights-of-way in the city as
such rights-of-way are valuable and limited resources.
   (B)   Changes in the public utilities and communications industries have
increased the demand and need for access to rights-of-way and placement of
facilities and structures therein.
   (C)   It is necessary to comprehensively plan and manage access to, and
structures and facilities in, the rights-of-way and provide innovative and
economic solutions to efficiently and economically utilize limited rights-of-
way capacity.
   (F)   The city has authority under the laws and Constitution of the state,
including, but not limited to, Art. 18, §§ 3, 4 and 7, to regulate the public
and private entities which use the right-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 1074.01) (Ord. 76-2018, passed 9-24-2018)
§ 1074.02 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all users of the rights-of-way
as provided herein.
(Prior Code, § 1074.02) (Ord. 76-2018, passed 9-24-2018)
§ 1074.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense include the future
tense, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the
singular number include the plural number. The words “shall” and “will” are
mandatory and “may” is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their
common and ordinary meaning.
   ABANDONED. The designation given to a facility, except for a small cell
facility or wireless support structure in the right-of-way, when its operations
or use are discontinued in a manner that is not in accordance with §
1074.04(G)(1) of this chapter; or for a period exceeding 90 consecutive days or
a total of 180 days in any 365-day period, without notice of the discontinued
operations or use given to the city by the provider and without the city’s
approval; and except for a period of discontinued operations or use that has
been caused by acts of God. Small cell facilities or wireless support
structures shall be deemed ABANDONED if the facilities or support structures
are unused for a period of 365 days without the operator otherwise notifying
the city and receiving the city’s approval.
   AFFILIATE. Each person who falls into one or more of the following
categories: each person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest
in a provider; each person in which a provider has, directly or indirectly a
controlling interest; each officer, director, general partner, limited partner
or shareholder holding an interest of 15% or more, joint venture or joint
venture partner, of a provider; and each person, directly or indirectly,
controlling, controlled by or under common control with the provider; provided
that, affiliate shall in no event mean any limited partner or shareholder
holding an interest of less than 15% of such provider, or any creditor of such
provider solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not
otherwise an affiliate by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being
owned by or being under common ownership, common management or common control
with, such provider.
   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives radio frequency
signals in the provision of wireless service.
   APPLICANT. Any person who seeks to obtain a certificate of registration and/
or a permit.
   APPLICATION. The process by which an applicant submits a request to obtain
certificate of registration and/or a permit.
   APPLICATION FEE. The fee paid to the city for application for a certificate
of registration pursuant to §
1074.07(A) of this chapter.
   BANKRUPTCY CODE. The United States Bankruptcy Code of 1978, as amended
including regulations promulgated by U.S.C. Title 11.
   BEST EFFORT(S). The best reasonable efforts under the circumstances, taking
into consideration, among other appropriate matters, all applicable laws,
regulations, safety, engineering and operational codes, available technology,
human resources and cost.
   CABLE FRANCHISE. The same meaning as “franchise” in the Cable Communications
Policy Act of 1984, 98 Stat. 2779, 47 U.S.C. § 522, which defines that term as
follows: “An initial authorization, or renewal thereof (including a renewal of
an authorization which has been granted subject to section 546 of [Title 47 of
the United States Code]), issued by a franchising authority, whether such
authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution,
contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the
construction or operation of a cable system.”
   CABLE OPERATOR. The same meaning as in the Cable Communications Policy Act
of 1984, 98 Stat. 2779, 47 U.S.C. § 522.
   CABLE SERVICE. The same meaning as in the Cable Communications Policy Act of
1984, 98 Stat. 2779, 47 U.S.C. § 522.
   CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION. The document issued to each provider and its
unique system to occupy the rights-of-way within the city that outlines the
terms of that occupancy of the rights-of-way.
   CITY. The City of Barberton, Ohio.
   CITY COUNCIL. The governing body of the City of Barberton, Ohio.
   CODE. The code of ordinances of the City of Barberton, Ohio.
   CO-LOCATION or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate or
replace wireless facilities on a wireless support structure.
   CONSTRUCT. Digging, boring, horizontal directional drilling (HDD),
tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing wires, installing
conduit, installing pipes, installing transmission lines, installing poles,
installing signs or installing facilities, other than landscaping, ornamental
plantings in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any part of the
rights-of-way. CONSTRUCT shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting
into the surface of any paved or improved surface, or unimproved surface, that
is any part of the right-of-way.
   CONSTRUCTION. The act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching,
directional, drilling, horizontal directional drilling, excavating,
obstructing, installing wires, installing conduit, installing pipes, installing
transmission lines, installing poles, installing signs or installing
facilities, other than landscaping, ornamental plantings in, on, above, within,
over, below, under or through any part of the rights-of-way. CONSTRUCTION shall
also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or
improved, or unimproved surface that is part of the right-of-way.
   CONSTRUCTION BOND. A bond posted to ensure proper and complete construction
and/or repair of a facility and the affected rights-of-way pursuant to a
permit.
   CONSTRUCTION AND MAJOR MAINTENANCE PLAN. A written plan including maps of
the expected location, design, other related equipment and facilities of a
provider that describes in part or in full the construction intended to be
accomplished by the provider in the rights-of-way over the next calendar year,
to the satisfaction of the city.
   CONSTRUCTION PERMIT. The permit specified in §
1074.17 of this chapter which must be obtained before a person may construct
in, locate in, occupy, maintain, move or remove facilities from, in or on a
rights- of-way.
   COUNTY. Summit County, Ohio. COUNTY specifically excludes any and all
contractors, agents or other persons acting on behalf of said county.
   DECORATIVE POLE. A pole, arch or structure other than a street light pole
placed in the public way specifically designed and placed for aesthetic
purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments have been placed, except
for the following:
      (1)   Electric lighting;
      (2)   Specifically designed informational or directional signage; or
      (3)   Temporary holiday or special event attachments.
   DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SERVICE. The Department of Public Service of the city.
   DESIGN GUIDELINES. Detailed guidelines and specifications promulgated by the
city in accordance with R.C. Ch. 4939 for the design and installation of small
cell facilities and wireless support structures in the right-of-way.
   EMERGENCY. A condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life or
health, safety or of a significant loss of property.
   FACILITY(IES). Any tangible thing located in any rights-of-way within the
city, and includes wireless facilities and wireless support structures; but
shall not include boulevard plantings, ornamental plantings or gardens planted
or maintained in the rights-of-way between a person’s property and the street
edge of pavement.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission, or any successor thereto.
   FERC. The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission as created and amended in
accordance with the Federal Power Act, 16 U.S.C. § 792, or its statutory
successor.
   FINANCE DIRECTOR. The duly appointed Finance Director for the city or his or
her designee.
   HEIGHT. The distance measured from the pre-existing grade level to the
highest point on the structure, including the small cell facility, even if said
highest point is an antenna or lightening protection device.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT. A building, property or site, or group of buildings,
properties or sites that are either of the following:
      (1)   Listed in the National Register for Historic Places or formally
determined eligible for listing by the keeper of the National Register, the
individual who has been delegated the authority by the federal agency to list
properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in
accordance with § VI.D.1.a.i-v of the nationwide programmatic agreement
codified at 47 C.F.R. part 1, App. C; and
      (2)   A registered historic district as defined in Ohio R.C. 149.311.
   INSPECTOR. Any person authorized by the Service Director to carry out
inspections related to the provisions of this chapter.
   LAW. Any local, state and/or federal legislative, judicial or administrative
order, certificate, decision, statute, constitution, ordinance, resolution,
regulation, rule, tariff or other requirement in effect either at the time of
execution of this chapter or at any time during the location of, and/or while a
provider’
   MAYOR. The duly elected mayor of the City of Barberton, Ohio, or his or her
designee.
   MICRO WIRELESS PERMIT. A permit, which must be obtained before a person can
construct, modify, collocate or replace a small cell facility or wireless
support structure, as set forth in §
1074.10 of this chapter, in or on the rights-of-way.
   MINOR MAINTENANCE PERMIT. A permit, which must be obtained before a person
can perform minor maintenance, as set forth in §
1074.19 of this chapter, in or on the rights-of-way.
   OHIO MANUAL OF UNIFORM TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES (OMUTCD). The uniform system
of traffic-control devices promulgated by the Ohio Department of Transportation
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4511.09.
   O.R.C. The Revised Code of the State of Ohio.
   OPEN VIDEO SERVICE. Any video programming services provided to any person
through the use of rights-of-way, which person is certified by the FCC to
operate an open video system pursuant to §§ 651 et seq. of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 (codified at 47 U.S.C. §§ 571 - 573), regardless
of the facilities used.
   OPERATOR. A wireless service provider, cable operator or a video service
provider that operates a small cell facility and provides wireless service. For
purposes of this chapter, OPERATOR includes a wireless service provider, cable
operator or a video service provider that provides information services as
defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996, 110 Stat. 59, 47 U.S.C. § 153
(38), and services that are fixed in nature or use unlicensed spectrum.
   PERMIT. A construction permit, micro wireless permit or a minor maintenance
permit as the context requires.
   PERMIT COST. All direct, incidental and indirect costs actually incurred or
realized by the city for permit issuance, permit oversight and pavement
degradation resulting from construction activity.
   PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city for a permit.
   PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a construction permit and/or micro wireless
permit and/or minor maintenance permit has been granted by the city and not
revoked.
   PERSON. Any natural person or corporate entity, business association or
other business entity including, but not limited to, a firm, a partnership, a
joint venture, a sole proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public or
private agency of any kind, a utility, a successor or assign of any of the
foregoing, or any other legal entity.
   PROVIDER. A person who owns or operates a system and has a valid certificate
of registration. The city, county, schools, information technology centers,
small cell facility operators, and cable operators operating pursuant to a
valid cable franchise, or video service provider operating pursuant to a valid
video service authorization shall also be considered providers.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. A wireless service provider as defined in division (A)(20)
of Ohio R.C. 4927.01 or any company described in Ohio R.C. 4905.03, except in
divisions (B) and (I) of that section, which company is also a “public utility”
as defined in Ohio R.C. 4905.02 and regulated by the PUCO; and includes any
electric supplier as defined in Ohio R.C. 4933.81.
   PUCO. The Public Utilities Commission of Ohio, as defined in Ohio R.C.
4901.02.
   REGISTRATION MAINTENANCE FEE. The money paid to the city to maintain a
certificate of registration and compensate the city for actual costs incurred
by the city in the management, administration and control of the rights-of-way
of the city, and which are not reasonably recoverable by the city through
construction permit fees or other approved recovery mechanisms.
   REMOVAL BOND. A bond posted to ensure the availability of sufficient funds
to remove a provider’s facilities upon abandonment or disuse, or discontinuance
of a provider’s use or occupation of the rights-of-way.
   RESTORATION. The process and the resultant effects by which a rights-of-way
is returned to a condition as good as or better than its condition immediately
prior to the construction. RESTORATION shall occur in accordance with the rules
or regulations as may be further enacted and amended by the city.
   RIGHT(S)-OF-WAY. The surface of, and the space within, through on, across,
above or below, the paved or unpaved portion of any public street, public road,
public highway, public freeway, public lane, public path, public alley, public
court, public sidewalk, public boulevard, public parkway, public drive, public
easement and any other land dedicated or otherwise designated for a compatible
public use, which, on or after 7-2-2002, is owned or controlled, by the city.
RIGHT-OF-WAY excludes a private easement.
   RIGHT(S)-OF-WAY COST. All direct, incidental and indirect costs borne by the
city for the management and administration of the rights-of-way and this
chapter.
   RULES AND REGULATIONS. Any rules or regulations adopted by the Director of
Public Service pursuant to §
1074.08 of this chapter.
   SERVICE(S). The offering of any service or utility for a fee directly to the
public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to
the public, or alternatively, the provision (for a fee or otherwise) of any
service or utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a
class of users other than the general public that, in the opinion of the Mayor,
constitutes a SERVICE.
   SERVICE DIRECTOR. The duly appointed Service Director for the city or his or
her designee.
   SMALL CELL FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets both of the following
requirements:
      (1)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of not more than six
cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements,
the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of
not more than six cubic feet in volume; and
      (2)   All other wireless equipment associated with the facility is
cumulatively not more than 28 cubic feet in volume. The calculation of
equipment volume shall not include electric meters, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation boxes, grounding equipment, power transfer
switches, cut-off switches and vertical cable runs for the connection of power
and other services.
   STATE. The State of Ohio.
   SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION. Any application made to construct on or in more
of the rights-of- way than previously allowed, to extend a permit that had
already been issued, or to otherwise modify or amend the specifics of a permit
application.
   SYSTEM. Any system of conduit, cables, ducts, pipes, wires, lines, towers,
antenna wave guides, fiber optics, microwave, laser beams and any associated
converters, equipment or facilities or utilities designed and constructed for
the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying, delivering or distributing
services within the city. A SYSTEM shall specifically include, but not
necessarily be limited to: electric distribution and/or transmission systems;
natural or artificial gas distribution and/or transmission systems; water
distribution and/or transmission systems; storm sewer systems; sanitary sewer
systems; cable television systems; video service networks; telecommunications
systems (whether voice, video, data or other); fiber optic systems; and
wireless communications systems.
   SYSTEM REPRESENTATIVE. The specifically identified agent/employee of a
provider who is authorized to direct field activities of that provider and
serve as official notice agent for system-related information. Any such SYSTEM
REPRESENTATIVE shall be required to be available at all times to receive notice
of and immediately direct response to system related emergencies or situations.
   TRENCHLESS TECHNOLOGY. The use of directional boring, horizontal directional
drilling, microtunneling and other techniques in the construction of
underground portions of facilities which result in the least amount of
disruption and damage to rights-of-way as possible.
   UNDERGROUND FACILITIES. All lines, cables, conduits, pipes, posts, tanks,
vaults and any other facilities which are located wholly or partially
underneath rights-of-way.
   UNUSED FACILITY(IES). Facilities located in the rights-of-way which have
remained unused for 365 days and for which the provider is unable to provide
the city with a credible plan detailing the procedure by which the provider
intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 365 days , or
that the provider has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will
be actively using the facilities within the next 365 days , or that the
availability of such facilities is required by the provider to adequately and
efficiently operate its system.
   UTILITY(IES). Any water, sewer, gas, storm sewer, sanitary sewer, sprinkler
or culvert pipe and any electric power, telecommunications, signal,
communications or cable television or video service provider conduit, fiber,
wire, cable or operator thereof.
   UTILITY CORRIDOR(S). Those specific areas of the rights-of-way designated as
such by the Service Director pursuant to this chapter.
   UTILITY POLE. A structure that is designed for, or used for the purpose of,
carrying lines, cables or wires for electric or telecommunications service.
   VIDEO SERVICE. The same as “video service” as defined in Ohio R.C. 1332.21
(J).
   VIDEO SERVICE AUTHORIZATION (VSA). A “video service authorization” as issued
to a video service provider by the Director of the Ohio Department of Commerce
in accordance with Ohio R.C. 1332.24(A)(1).
   VIDEO SERVICE NETWORK. The same as “video service network” in Ohio R.C.
1332.21(L).
   VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER (VSP). The same as “video service provider” in R.C. §
1332.21(M).
   WIRELESS FACILITY.
      (1)   Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications
between user equipment and a communications network, including all of the
following:
         (a)   Equipment associated with wireless communications; and
         (b)   Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable,
regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of
technological configuration.
      (2)   The term includes small cell facilities;
      (3)   The term does not include any of the following:
         (a)   The structure or improvements on, under or within which the
equipment is collocated;
         (b)   Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is between wireless support
structures or utility poles or that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with a particular antenna. An antenna, accessory equipment,
distributed antenna system, small cell facility, micro wireless facility or
other device or equipment used to provide wireless service, including such
devices and equipment as provided for in Ohio R.C. Ch. 4939.
   WIRELESS SERVICE. Any services using licensed or unlicensed wireless
spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using
wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A pole, such as a monopole, either guyed or
self-supporting, street light pole, traffic signal pole, a 15-foot or taller
sign pole or utility pole capable of supporting small cell facilities. As used
in this chapter, WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE excludes all of the following:
      (1)   A utility pole or other facility owned or operated by a municipal
electric utility; and
      (2)   A utility pole or other facility used to supply traction power to
public transit systems including railways, trams, streetcars and trolleybuses.
(Prior Code, § 1074.03) (Ord. 76-2018, passed 9-24-2018)
§ 1074.04 RIGHTS-OF-WAY ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Administration. The Mayor shall be the principal city official
responsible for the administration of this chapter, except as otherwise
provided herein. The Mayor may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder to
the Service Director or other designee.
   (B)   Rights-of-way occupancy. Each person who occupies, uses or seeks to
occupy or use the rights-of-way to operate a system located in the rights-of-
way, or who has, or seeks to have, a system located in any rights-of- way,
shall apply for and obtain a certificate of registration pursuant to this
chapter. Any person owning, operating or maintaining a system in the rights-of-
way without a certificate of registration, including persons operating under a
permit, license or franchise issued by the city prior to the effective date of
this chapter shall apply for and obtain a certificate of registration from the
city within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter, unless exempted by
division (D) below. The 90-day requirement will be extended if, due to an
inability on the city’s behalf, all persons obtaining or wishing to obtain a
certificate of registration are not accommodated within the 90-day period. The
application for a certificate of registration will consist of providing the
information set forth in §
1074.05(B) of this chapter and as reasonably required by the Mayor.
   (C)   No construction without a certificate of registration. Aside from the
minor maintenance provisions outlined in §
1074.20 of this chapter, following the effective date of this chapter, no
person shall construct or perform any work on or in any rights-of-way, nor
shall a provider use any system or any part thereof located on or in any
rights-of-way without first obtaining a certificate of registration. Whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree as
provided for in §
1074.99 of this chapter.
   (D)   Exceptions.
      (1)   The following entities are not obligated to obtain a certificate of
registration: the city and resellers of services that do not own any system or
facilities in the rights-of-way.
      (2)   The following entities are required to participate in the
certificate of registration process, but shall be exempt from the financial
obligations of the application fee required by §
1074.05(A) of this chapter and the registration maintenance fee required by §
1074.07(A) of this chapter: a county; cable operators for the purpose of
providing only cable service and operating pursuant to a valid cable franchise;
a video service provider for the purpose of providing only video service and
operating pursuant to a valid video service authorization issued in accordance
with Ohio R.C. 1332.24; a small cell facility operator for the purpose of
providing wireless service; and any entity which possesses an existing and
valid non-terminable, non- amendable or non-revocable written privilege or
authority previously granted by the city for the use or occupancy of the right-
of-way, whereby such exemption shall be limited to a specific term and limited
conditions or obligations as previously granted. In addition, cable operators
shall be exempt from any requirement of the certificate of registration process
that is in direct conflict with the requirements of, and/or specifically
exempted by, a valid current and valid cable franchise with the city.
   (E)   Systems in place without a certificate of registration. Any system or
part of a system found in rights- of-way for which a certificate of
registration has not been obtained or is not otherwise exempted under division
(D) above shall be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the
rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in
equity, including, but not limited to: abating the nuisance; taking possession
of the facilities; and/or non-complying portion of such system; and/or
prosecuting the violator.
   (F)   Future uses. Subject to applicable law, in allowing providers and
permittees to place facilities in the rights-of-way, the city shall not be
liable for any damages caused thereby to any provider’s facilities that are
already in place or that shall be placed in the rights-of-way unless those
damages arise out of the sole negligence, gross negligence, willful misconduct
or fraud of the city. No provider is entitled to rely on the provisions of this
chapter as creating a special duty to any provider.
   (G)   Discontinuance of operations, abandoned and unused facilities.
      (1)   A provider who has discontinued or is discontinuing its operations
of any system in the city shall:
         (a)   Provide information satisfactory to the city that the provider’s
obligations for its system in the rights-of-way under this section and any
other sections in the city code of ordinances have been lawfully assumed by
another applicant and/or provider;
         (b)   Submit a written proposal to re-use its facilities in a manner
that promotes the city’s goals of providing innovative and economic solutions
to efficiently and economically utilize limited rights-of-way capacity. Such
proposal must be approved or denied by the Service Director. A denial by the
Service Director shall be done in writing and describe the reasons for such a
denial. The denial may be appealed by the provider to the Mayor. The decision
of the Mayor shall be final;
         (c)   Submit a written proposal for abandonment of facilities
indicating why good engineering practice would support this type of solution.
The Service Director must approve or deny said proposal within 30 days. A
denial by the Service Director shall be done in writing and describe the
reasons for such a denial. The denial may be appealed by the provider to the
Mayor, who must make a determination on the appeal within 30 days. The decision
of the Mayor shall be final;
         (d)   Completely remove all specifically identified portion(s) of its
system in a manner acceptable to the city within a reasonable amount of time if
the city believes that there exists a reasonable justification for such
removal; and
         (e)   Submit to the city within a reasonable amount of time and in
accordance with Ohio R.C. 4905.20 and 4905.21, a proposal for transferring
ownership of its facilities to the city. If a provider proceeds under this
clause, the city may, at its option where lawful:
            1.   Purchase the facilities; or
            2.   Unless a valid removal bond has already been posted pursuant
to §
1074.21, require the provider to post a bond in an amount sufficient to
reimburse the city for reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred in removing
the facilities.
      (2)   Facilities of a provider who fail to comply with this section and
which remain unused facilities shall be deemed to be abandoned. Abandoned
facilities are deemed to be a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or
rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Abating the nuisance;
         (b)   Taking possession of the facilities and restoring them to a
useable condition subject to a finding of the PUCO pursuant to the requirements
of Ohio R.C. 4905.20 and 4905.21; or
         (c)   Requiring removal of the facilities by the provider or by the
provider’s surety.
      (3)   If the city requires a provider to remove unused facilities in any
rights-of-way, the city shall use reasonable efforts to ensure that this
removal occur in conjunction with other scheduled excavations of the rights-of-
way. If the city abates the nuisance it may take all action necessary to
recover its costs and to abate said nuisance, including, but not limited to,
those methods set forth in Ohio R.C. 715.261.
   (H)   Nature of issuance. A certificate of registration shall not convey
equitable or legal title in the rights- of-way. A certificate of registration
is only the non-exclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city,
for the limited purposes and for the limited period stated in the certificate
of registration and in accordance with this chapter. The rights to occupy the
right-of-way may not be subdivided or subleased; provided, however, that, two
or more providers may co-locate facilities in the same area of the rights-of-
way so long as each such provider complies with the provisions of this chapter.
Co-locating providers may file a joint application for a construction permit. A
certificate of registration does not excuse a provider from obtaining
appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before co-locating its
facilities on facilities of others, including the city’s facilities. A
certificate of registration does not prevent a provider from leasing space in
or on the provider’s system, so long as the sharing of facilities does not
cause a violation of law, including the provisions of this chapter. A
certificate of registration does not excuse a provider from complying with any
provisions of the code or other applicable law.
   (I)   Other approvals, permits and agreements. In addition to a certificate
of registration, providers shall obtain any and all regulatory approvals,
permits, authorizations or licenses necessary for the offering or provision of
such services from the appropriate federal, state and local authorities and
upon the city’s reasonable request, shall provide copies of such documents to
the city. Further, a certificate of registration issued pursuant to this
chapter shall not entitle a provider to use, alter, convert to or interfere
with, the facilities, small cell facilities, wireless facilities, wireless
support structures, easements, poles, conduits, lines, pipelines, wires, fiber,
cable or any other real or personal property of any kind whatsoever under the
management or control of the city.
(Prior Code, § 1074.04) (Ord. 76-2018, passed 9-24-2018)
§ 1074.05 CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Certificate of registration applications. To obtain a certificate of
registration to construct, own or maintain any system within the city, or to
obtain a renewal of a certificate of registration issued pursuant to this
chapter, an application must be filed with the city on the form adopted by the
Department of Public Service. For all applications, the city shall collect an
application fee, unless exempt under §
1074.04(D) of this chapter. The application fee shall be equal to all the
actual and direct costs incurred by the city that are associated with
receiving, reviewing, processing and granting (or denying) an application. At
the time of its decision to either grant or deny an application, the city shall
calculate and assess all actual and direct costs involved in receiving,
reviewing, processing and granting (or denying) the application and provide a
written invoice to the applicant for the appropriate amount. The city shall
require that the applicant remit all application fee amounts invoiced within 30
days of its decision to either grant or deny a certificate of registration. Any
applicant who fails to timely remit such invoiced application fee amounts shall
be subject to the penalties of this chapter, the imposition of any other legal
or equitable remedies available to the city and the immediate revocation of any
certificate of registration having been issued.
   (B)   Information required for application to obtain a certificate of
registration.
      (1)   The applicant or provider shall keep all of the information
required in this section current at all times; provided further that, applicant
or provider shall notify the city of any changes to the information required by
this section within thirty days following the date on which the applicant or
provider has knowledge of such change. The information provided to the city at
the time of application shall include, but not be limited to:
         (a)   Each applicant’s name, legal status (i.e., partnership,
corporation and the like), street address, e-mail address, telephone number and
facsimile number, if applicable;
         (b)   The name, address, e-mail address, telephone number and
facsimile number, if applicable, of a system representative. The system
representative shall be available to the city at all times. Current information
regarding how to contact the system representative in an emergency shall be
provided at the time of application and shall be updated as necessary to assure
accurate contact information is available to the city at all times; and
         (c)   A certificate of insurance where required to be provided to meet
the requirements of this section shall:
            1.   Verify that an insurance company licensed to do business in
the state has issued an insurance policy to the applicant;
            2.   Verify that the applicant is insured on an occurrence basis
against claims for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for
property damage arising out of the:
               a.   Use and occupancy of the rights-of-way by the applicant,
its officers, agents, employees and contractors; and
               b.   Placement and use of facilities in the rights-of-way by the
applicant, its officers, agents, employees and contractors, including, but not
limited to, protection against liability arising from any and all operations,
damage of underground facilities and collapse of property.
            3.   Name the city, its elected officials, officers, employees,
agents and volunteers as an additional insured as to whom the comprehensive
general liability and completed operation and products liability insurance
required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will be
provided as to all such coverages, as is required within this chapter;
            4.   Require that the city be notified 30 days in advance of
cancellation of, or coverage changes in, the policy. The liability insurance
policies required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
 
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be diminished in
value, canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated, until thirty (30)
days after receipt by the City, by registered mail, return receipt requested,
of a written notice addressed to the Mayor or her/his designee of such intent
to cancel, diminish or not to renew.
 
            5.   Within 30 days after receipt by the city of said notice, and
in no event later than five days prior to said cancellation, the provider (or
applicant) shall obtain and furnish to the Service Director a certificate of
insurance evidencing replacement insurance policies;
            6.   Satisfy the requirements for comprehensive liability coverage,
automobile liability coverage and umbrella coverage as follows:
               a.   Comprehensive general liability insurance: comprehensive
general liability insurance to cover liability, bodily injury, and property
damage must be maintained. Coverage must be written on an occurrence basis,
with the following minimum limits of liability and provisions, or their
equivalent:
                  i.   Bodily injury: each occurrence - $1,000,000; annual
aggregate: $3,000,000;
                  ii.   Property damage: each occurrence: $1,000,000; annual
aggregate: $3,000,000;
                  iii.   Personal injury: annual aggregate: $3,000,000;
                  iv.   Completed operations and products liability shall be
maintained for six months after the termination of a certificate of
registration; and
                  v.   Property damage liability insurance shall include
coverage for the following hazards:
                     (A)   E - Explosion;
                     (B)   C - Collapse; and
                     (C)   U - Underground.
               b.   Comprehensive auto liability insurance: comprehensive auto
liability insurance to cover owned, hired and non-owned vehicles must be
maintained. The applicant may maintain comprehensive auto liability insurance
as part of applicant’s comprehensive general liability insurance, however, said
insurance is subject to approval by the Mayor or her or his designee. Coverage
must be written on an occurrence basis, with the following limits of liability
and provisions, or their equivalent:
                  i.   Bodily injury: each occurrence: $1,000,000; annual
aggregate: $3,000,000; and
                  ii.   Property damage: each occurrence: $1,000,000; annual
aggregate: $3,000,000.
      (2)   Additional insurance: the city reserves the right to require any
other insurance coverage it deems necessary after review of any proposal
submitted by applicant.
      (3)   Self-insurance: those applicants maintaining a book value in excess
of $50,000,000 may submit a statement requesting to self-insure. If approval to
self-insure is granted, applicant shall assure the city that such self-
insurance shall provide the city with no less than would have been afforded to
the city by a third party insurer providing applicant with the types and
amounts of coverage detailed in this section. This statement shall include:
         (a)   Audited financial statements for the previous year;
         (b)   A description of the applicant’s self-insurance program;
         (c)   A listing of any and all actions against or claims made against
applicant for amounts over $1,000,000 or proof of available excess umbrella
liability coverage to satisfy all total current claim amounts above
$50,000,000; and
         (d)   The Service Director may modify or waive these requirements if
they are not necessary to determine the sufficiency of the self-insurance. The
Service Director may request applicable and pertinent additional information if
it is necessary to determine the sufficiency of the self-insurance.
      (4)   The city’s examination of, or failure to request or demand, any
evidence of insurance in accordance with this chapter shall not constitute a
waiver of any requirement of this section and the existence of any insurance
shall not limit applicant’s obligations under this chapter.
      (5)   Documentation that applicant or provider maintains standard
workers’ compensation coverage as required by law. Similarly, the provider
shall require any subcontractor to provide workers’ compensation coverage in
amounts required by law for all of the subcontractor’s employees.
      (6)   If the person is a corporation, upon specific request of the city,
a copy of the certificate of incorporation (or its legal equivalent) as
recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State (or legal equivalent) in
the state or country in which incorporated.
      (7)   A copy of the person’s certificate of authority from the PUCO and/
or the FCC and/or FERC, if the person is lawfully required to have or actually
does possess such certificate(s) from said commission(s) and any other
approvals, permits or agreements.
      (8)   Upon request of the city, a narrative (or if applicable, PUCO/FCC/
FERC application information) describing applicant’s proposed activities in the
city including credible information detailing applicant’s financial, managerial
and technical ability to fulfill applicant’s obligations under this chapter and
carry on applicant’s proposed activities.
   (C)   Criteria for issuance of a certificate of registration. In deciding
whether to issue a certificate of registration, the city shall consider:
      (1)   Whether the issuing of the certificate of registration will promote
the health, safety and welfare of the city and its citizens;
      (2)   Whether the issuing of the certificate of registration will be
consistent with this chapter and the city code;
      (3)   Whether applicant has submitted a complete application and has
secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law in order to
construct and operate a system in the manner proposed by the applicant;
      (4)   Whether the applicant is delinquent on any taxes or other
obligations owed to the city, county or state;
      (5)   Unless applicant is otherwise exempted from such consideration by
Ohio R.C. 4939.03(c)(5), whether the applicant has the requisite financial,
managerial and technical ability to fulfill all of its obligations under this
chapter and the issuance of a certificate of registration; and
      (6)   Any other applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation.
   (D)   Grant or denial of an application for a certificate of registration.
      (1)   The city, not later than 60 days after the date of filing by an
applicant of a completed application, shall grant or deny the application.
      (2)   If an application for a certificate of registration is denied, the
applicant may request from the city, within 30 days of the notice of denial,
the city shall provide in writing its reasons for denying the application.
   (E)   Obligations of a provider upon receipt of a certificate of
registration. In addition to the other requirements set forth herein and in the
rules and regulations of the city, each provider shall:
      (1)   Use its best efforts to cooperate with other providers and users of
the rights-of-way and the city for the most efficient, and least obtrusive use
of rights-of-way, consistent with safety and to minimize traffic and other
disruptions including street cuts;
      (2)   When possible, participate in joint planning, construction and
advance notification of rights-of- way work, as may be required by the city;
      (3)   Upon reasonable written notice, and at the direction of the Service
Director, promptly remove or rearrange facilities as necessary for public
safety;
      (4)   Perform all work, construction, maintenance or removal of
facilities within the rights-of-way in accordance with industry standard of
care, construction and arboricultural practice (if applicable), including any
appropriate state building codes, safety codes and law, and use best efforts to
repair and replace any street, curb or other portion of the rights-of-way, or
facilities located therein, to a condition to be determined by the Service
Director to be adequate under current standards and not less than substantially
equivalent to its condition prior to such work and to do so in a manner which
minimizes any inconvenience to the public, the city and other providers, all in
accordance with all applicable provisions of this chapter, the code and any
rules and regulations that the city may adopt;
      (5)   Construct, install, operate and maintain its facilities and system
in a manner consistent with all applicable laws, ordinances, construction
standards and governmental requirements including, but not limited to, the
city’s Zoning Ordinance, the National Electric Safety Code, National Electric
Code and applicable FCC, FERC or other federal, state and/or local rules and
regulations;
      (6)   Be on notice that removal of trees, or the use of vegetation
management programs within the rights-of-way of the city requires prior written
approval by the Service Director or his or her designee. Any such activities,
unless an emergency, shall only be performed following the prior written
approval of the Service Director or his or her designee and must be performed
in accordance with the then most current standard horticultural and arboreal
practices as promulgated by entities such as the National Arbor Day Foundation,
the International Society of Arboriculture and the tree care industry, all as
may be required by the city. Pruning shall at a minimum meet or exceed the
requirements of the most current version of the American National Standards
Institute ANSI A300 standard. Any additionally required horticultural and
arboreal practices and guidelines shall be described in the Rules and
Regulations adopted by the Service Director pursuant to §
1074.08(E) of this chapter. Emergency removal of trees or the use of vegetation
management programs within the rights-of-way of the city may be performed in
rights-of-way as described herein and in accordance with the rules and
regulations, but the Service Director shall be provided notice of such
emergency work being performed within two business days of the start of the
work. Any non-emergency tree removal or the use of vegetation management
programs within the rights-of-way that is performed without the Service
Director or designee’s written permission shall subject a person to the
penalties of §
1074.99 of this chapter and may further require that the tree or vegetation be
replaced, at the sole expense of the responsible person, with a healthy tree or
vegetation of like kind and quality;
      (7)   Warrant that all worker facilities, conditions and procedures that
are used during construction, installation, operation and maintenance of the
provider’s facilities within the rights-of-way shall comply with all applicable
standards of the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration;
      (8)   Use its best efforts to cooperate with the city in any emergencies
involving the rights-of-way;
      (9)   Provider shall, weather permitting, remove all graffiti within 30
calendar days of notice. The provider shall remove any and all graffiti on any
of the provider’s facilities located within the city rights-of- way. Should the
provider fail to do so, the city may take whatever action is necessary to
remove the graffiti and bill the provider for the cost thereof;
      (10)   Providers shall field identify their facilities in the rights-of-
way whenever providers are notified by the city that the city has determined
that such identification is reasonably necessary in order for the city to begin
planning for the construction, paving, maintenance, repairing, relocating or in
any way altering any street or area in the rights-of-way, as defined in this
chapter. The city shall notify the providers of the city’s date to begin the
process at least 30 days prior to the commencement of said activities. In field
identifying facilities:
         (a)   Providers shall identify all facilities that are within the
affected rights-of-way using customary industry standards and distinct
identification;
         (b)   Facilities will be so marked as to identify the provider
responsible for said facilities;
         (c)   Should any such marking interfere with the facilities’ function,
create a safety problem or violate any safety code, alternative methods of
marking the facilities may be approved by the Service Director; and
         (d)   All markings should be clearly readable from the ground and
include the provider’s name, logo and identification numbering or tracking
information. No advertising will be permitted.
      (11)   A provider that is replacing an existing utility pole shall be
responsible for coordinating with all other providers to ensure the orderly
transfer of all lines or cables to the replacement utility pole, the removal of
the existing utility pole and the restoration of the rights-of-way within 30
days, weather permitting, after the replacement utility pole is installed. Upon
request, the Service Director may grant the provider additional time for good
cause.
   (F)   Establishment of utility corridors.
      (1)   The Service Director may assign specific corridors within the
rights-of-way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each
type of facilities that are, or that the Service Director expects, may someday
be, located within the rights-of-way.
      (2)   Any provider whose facilities are in the rights-of-way and are in a
position at variance with utility corridors established by the Service Director
shall at the time of the next construction of the area, excluding normal
maintenance activities, move such facilities to their assigned position within
the rights-of-way. Existing underground facilities located within a designated
utility corridor shall not be required to relocate into adjacent or alternative
portions of the rights-of-way unless they are in conflict with an actual or
proposed public improvement project. The above requirements may be waived by
the Service Director for good cause shown including, but not limited to,
consideration of such factors as: the remaining economic life of the
facilities, public safety, customer service needs, law precluding such
underground facilities, and hardship to the provider. If a provider is denied a
requested waiver from the above requirements, the provider may appeal the
denial of the Service Director to the Mayor. The decision of the Mayor shall be
final.
      (3)   The Service Director shall make every good faith attempt to
accommodate all existing and potential users of the rights-of-way as set forth
in this chapter.
      (4)   Providers may enter into written agreements to use existing poles
and conduits with the owners of same.
      (5)   No facility placed in any rights-of-way shall be placed in such a
manner that interferes with normal travel on such rights-of-way.
      (6)   Unless otherwise stated in a certificate of registration or permit,
all facilities within the rights-of- way shall be constructed and located in
accordance with the city code of ordinances and with the following provisions.
         (a)   Whenever all existing facilities that have been traditionally
located overhead are located underground in a certain area within the city, a
provider who desires to place its facilities in the same area must also locate
its facilities underground, to the extent such placement is technically
feasible and will not prohibit, or have the effect of prohibiting, provision of
the provider’s service within the area.
         (b)   Whenever a provider is required to locate or re-locate
facilities underground within a certain area of the city, every provider with
facilities within the same area of the city shall concurrently re-locate their
facilities underground, to the extent possible.
         (c)   The above requirements may be waived by the Service Director for
good cause shown including, but not limited to, consideration of such factors
as: the remaining economic life of the facilities, public safety, customer
service needs, law precluding such undergrounding of facilities and hardship to
the provider. If a provider is denied a requested waiver from the above
requirements, the provider may appeal the denial of the Service Director to the
Mayor.
   (G)   Historic districts.
      (1)   Unless otherwise required by law, the city shall have the authority
to prohibit the use or occupation of the right-of-way by a provider if the
right-of-way for which the provider seeks use and occupancy lies within a
historic district.
      (2)   As a condition for approval for the co-location or installation of
small cell facilities or wireless support structures in an area of the city
designated as a historic district, the city may:
         (a)   Require reasonable, technically feasible and non-discriminatory
design or concealment measures for the small cell facilities and wireless
support structures; and
         (b)   Request that a provider comply with the design and aesthetic
standards of the historic district or a residential district, as provided in
the city’s design guidelines.
      (3)   This section may not be construed to limit the city’s authority to
enforce local codes, administrative rules, or rules and regulations adopted by
ordinance, which are applicable to a historic area designated by the state or
city and historic preservation zoning regulations consistent with the
preservation of local zoning authority under 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7), the
requirements for facility modifications under 47 U.S.C. § 1455(a) or the
National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (54 U.S.C. §§ 300101 et seq.), and
the regulations adopted to implement those laws.
(Prior Code, § 1074.05) (Ord. 76-2018, passed 9-24-2018)
§ 1074.06 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Construction and major maintenance plan. Each provider shall, at the
time of initial application and using its best efforts by January 1 of each
following year, file a construction and major maintenance plan with the
Department of Public Service. Such construction and major maintenance plan
shall be provided for all geographical areas requested by the Service Director,
up to and including the entire geographical area of the city. It shall be
submitted using a format(s) mutually agreeable to the provider and the city and
shall contain the information determined by the Service Director to be
necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the frequency of
construction in the rights-of-way. The construction and major maintenance plan
shall include, but not be limited to, all currently scheduled and/or
anticipated construction projects for the next calendar year. If none of such
construction projects are scheduled or anticipated for the next calendar year
then the construction and major maintenance plan shall so state. The provider
shall use its best efforts in supplying this information and shall update the
construction and major maintenance plan on file with the Service Director
whenever there is a material change in scheduled and/or anticipated
construction projects. In an effort to assist providers with the completion of
their annual construction and major maintenance plan, the Service Director, on
or before November 1 of each year, will send each provider’s system
representative a descriptive narrative (and any mapping information reasonably
available) for all the planned right-of-way improvements and/or scheduled
maintenance that the city then currently intends to undertake during the next
calendar year. The city may, in its sole discretion, update and/or modify the
descriptive narrative and mapping information provided.
   (B)   Mapping data. With the filing of its application for a certificate of
registration, a provider shall be required to accurately inform the city of the
number of miles of physical infrastructure (rounded up to the nearest mile) of
right-of-way the provider’s system then currently occupies and begin submitting
to the city all information that currently exists and which can be provided
regarding the location of its facilities in the right- of-way in hard copy or
in the most advanced format (including, but not limited to, electronic and/or
digital format) then currently being used by the provider that is then
currently capable of technologically being read (or readily converted to a
readable form) by the city. A provider shall have up to one year from the date
of the provider’s initial filing of an application for a certificate of
registration to completely submit all the mapping data for the system owned by
the provider or over which it has control that is located in any rights-of-way
of the city in the most advanced format (including, but not be limited to,
electronic and/or digital format) then currently being used by the provider
that is then currently capable of technologically being read (or readily
converted to a readable form) by the city. The mapping data is only required to
be at the “Atlas” level of detail necessary for the city to reasonably
determine the location of the provider’s facilities in the rights-of-way. The
provider shall supply the mapping data on paper if the Service Director
determines that the format currently being used by the provider is not capable
of being read by the city. Any time after the issuance of a certificate of
registration, and upon the reasonable request of the Service Director, a
provider shall be required to provide to the city any additional location
information for any facilities which it owns or over which it has control that
are located in any rights-of-way of the city required by the city. Unless
otherwise required by law, any and all actual direct, incidental and indirect
costs incurred by the city during the process of reviewing, inputting and/or
converting a provider’s mapping information to comport with the city’s then
current standard format (whether electronic or otherwise) shall be directly
billed to, and must be timely remitted by, the provider. Failure to pay such
mapping costs within 60 days of receipt of an invoice shall subject an
applicant or provider to revocation of its certificate of registration and the
penalties of §
1074.99 of this chapter. Further, each provider that has been issued a
certificate of registration shall accurately inform the city on or before each
subsequent January 1 of the number of miles (rounded up to the nearest mile) of
right-of-way the provider’s system then occupied as of the immediately previous
December 1. The Service Director may, in the future, adopt additional
specifications and further define or modify the mapping data requirements under
this section for reasons including, but not limited to, changes in technology
or the law regarding public disclosure of a provider’s mapping information.
When the city modifies and/or amends the mapping data requirements, the city
shall use best efforts to avoid unreasonably increasing the burden to the
providers that may be associated with satisfying the amended mapping
requirements. When the mapping requirements are amended, each provider shall be
served with a copy of the new specifications or modifications by regular U.S.
mail to the system representative identified in each certificate of
registration and in accordance with §
1074.99 of this chapter; provided, however, that, any failure of any provider
to actually receive such notice shall not in any way affect the validity or
enforceability of said specifications or modifications.
   (C)   Requests for information. In the event that the city receives a
request from a third party for the disclosure of information a provider has
clearly marked as “confidential/proprietary information”, then the city shall
respond in accordance with Ohio R.C. Ch. 149. However, the city shall endeavor
to use reasonable best efforts to timely place the provider’s system
representative on notice that such a request for public disclosure has been
made, at which point it will be the provider’s sole and exclusive
responsibility to take whatever steps it deems necessary to protect such
documents from disclosure.
(Prior Code, § 1074.06) (Ord. 76-2018, passed 9-24-2018)
§ 1074.07 COMPENSATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Compensation. As compensation for the city’s costs to administer and
implement this chapter, manage, administer and control the rights-of-way and
maintain each certificate of registration issued, every provider or any person
operating a system or otherwise using and occupying the rights-of-way shall pay
to the city a registration maintenance fee, unless exempt under §
1074.04(D) of this chapter. The registration maintenance fee shall be
determined and assessed to providers and other persons operating a system or
otherwise using and occupying the rights-of-way in accordance with the
following process and formula.
      (1)   The city, by February 28 of each year, shall calculate all actual
and incurred costs associated with rights-of-way management, administration and
control for the previous calendar year that the city was not able to reasonably
recover through construction permit fees or other recovery mechanisms provided
for in this chapter.
      (2)   Providers and applicants, as required in §
1074.06(B) of this chapter, shall accurately inform the city upon application
for a certificate of registration and on or before each subsequent January 1 of
the number of miles (rounded up to the nearest mile) of right-of-way the
provider’s system then occupied as of the immediately previous December 1.
      (3)   The city shall total the entire number of miles of right-of-way
reported as being used or occupied by all providers.
      (4)   The city shall divide the calculated costs referenced in division
(A)(1) above by the total number of miles of right-of-way reported as being
used or occupied by all providers as referenced in division (A)(3) above to
arrive at a per-mile cost number.
      (5)   The city shall then multiply each provider’s mileage calculation as
referenced in division (A)(2) above by the per-mile cost calculation referenced
in division (A)(4) above. The product shall be a provider’s then current annual
registration maintenance fee.
      (6)   The city shall perform its annual calculation of registration
maintenance fees following receipt of the provider’s required January 1 mileage
report. Registration maintenance fees shall be invoiced to providers within 60
days of receipt of the provider’s required January 1 mileage report and shall
be due within 30 days of the date of the invoice. All fees shall be invoiced to
providers by March 1 of each calendar year.
      (7)   Cable companies operating under non-exclusive cable franchises for
the purposes of providing cable service, video services provider operating
under a VSA for the purpose of providing video services, and providers of open
video system services, which compensate the city under other mechanisms in an
amount equal to or greater than the annual registration maintenance fee that
would normally be required for their right- of-way use in the city, shall have
the mileage of the right-of-way they use and/or occupy included in the
calculations described in this section, but shall not be required to contribute
to the recovery of rights-of-way costs as defined by this chapter with the
exception of permit costs.
      (8)   The city may by separate legislation enacted by City Council on or
about February 28 of each year, in accordance with the results of division (A)
(4) above, enact an initial and thereafter a new annual registration
maintenance fee (per mile) by appropriately increasing or decreasing the
previous year(s) registration maintenance fee (per mile). Revised registration
maintenance fees shall be effective upon passage.
   (B)   Timing. Registration maintenance fees shall be paid each calendar year
in accordance with division (A)(6) above. Registration maintenance fees shall
be paid in full for the first year of the registration as a condition of the
certificate of registration becoming effective. Fees may be prorated from the
effective date of the certificate of registration to the end of the calendar
year if less than one full year.
   (C)   Taxes and assessments. To the extent taxes or other assessments are
imposed by any taxing authority or community authority on the use of city
property as a result of a provider’s use or occupation of the rights-of-way,
the provider shall be responsible for payment of such taxes or assessments.
Such payments shall be in addition to any other fees payable pursuant to this
chapter and shall not be considered an offset to, or in lieu of, the fees and
charges listed in this chapter. The registration maintenance fee is not in lieu
of any tax, fee or other assessment except as specifically provided in this
chapter, or as required by applicable law.
   (D)   Interest on late payments. In the event that any registration
maintenance fee is not paid to the city by April 1, the provider shall pay a
monthly late charge of 1% of the unpaid balance for each month or any portion
thereof for which payment is not made. Late payments on registration
maintenance fees may result in the denial of future right-of-way permits.
   (E)   No accord and satisfaction. No acceptance by the city of any
registration maintenance fee shall be construed as an accord that the amount
paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of such
registration maintenance fee payment be construed as a release of any claim the
city may have for additional sums payable.
(Prior Code, § 1074.07) (Ord. 76-2018, passed 9-24-2018)
§ 1074.08 OVERSIGHT AND REGULATION.
   (A)   Reports. Upon the request of the city, a provider shall promptly
submit to the city any information or report, but not including confidential/
proprietary information as described in division (B) below, that is reasonably
related to a provider’s obligations under this chapter, or its business and
operations with respect to the system or its operation, in such form and
containing such information as the city shall specify. Such information or
report shall be accurate and complete and supplied within 30 days of the city’s
request.
   (B)   Confidential/proprietary information. All information submitted to the
city that is considered confidential information, trade secret and/or
proprietary information or information that upon public its disclosure would be
highly likely to place critical portions of the provider’s system in real
danger of vandalism, sabotage or an act of terrorism, must be clearly marked as
such when submitted. The city shall endeavor to exercise all reasonable legal
protections so as not to publicly disclose to any third party such information
unless required by law. The city shall, following receipt of a request for
public disclosure of clearly marked trade secret and/or proprietary information
submitted by a provider, use reasonable best efforts and endeavor to provide
five days’ notice to the provider’s system representative that such a request
for public disclosure has been made, at which point it will be the provider’s
sole and exclusive responsibility to take whatever steps it deems necessary to
protect such documents from disclosure.
   (C)   Provider’s expense. Unless otherwise required by law, all reports and
records required under this chapter shall be furnished at the sole expense of a
provider.
   (D)   Right of inspection and audit. The city’s designated representatives
shall have the right to inspect, examine or audit during normal business hours
and upon reasonable notice to a provider under the circumstances, documents,
records or other information which pertain to a provider’s operation of a
system within the city that are related to its obligations under this chapter.
All such documents shall be made available within the city or in such other
place that the city may agree upon in writing in order to facilitate said
inspection, examination or audit.
   (E)   Rules and regulations. The Service Director may propose and adopt (and
from time to time amend) the rules and regulations regarding this chapter,
Design guidelines, construction standards and occupancy requirements of the
right-of-way. Prior to the initial adoption of the rules and regulations, the
Service Director shall provide written notice and a copy of the proposed
language of such adoption, via regular U.S. mail, to each provider who holds a
then current certificate of registration. Each provider shall then have 30 days
following the date of the city’s mailing to provide written comment regarding
the proposed language to the Service Director. At least 45 days, but not more
than 60 days, following the date of the city’s mailing, the Service Director
shall schedule and hold a meeting, to make available a forum at which all then
current providers may address any questions, concerns and make reasonable
suggestions regarding the proposed new rules and regulations to the Service
Director. The Service Director shall, following said meeting and the review of
the providers’ comments and suggestions, adopt the rules and regulations in a
manner that best serves the city.
(Prior Code, § 1074.08) (Ord. 76-2018, passed 9-24-2018)
§ 1074.09 REGISTRATION TERM.
   The term of each certificate of registration granted under this chapter
shall be valid from the date of issuance until such time as it is revoked,
terminated, has lapsed or is properly amended.
(Prior Code, § 1074.09) (Ord. 76-2018, passed 9-24-2018)
§ 1074.10 SMALL CELL FACILITIES AND WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURES.
   (A)   In accordance with Ohio R.C. Ch. 4939, this section establishes terms
and conditions for the use of the right-of-way by an operator to collocate
small cell facilities and construct, maintain, modify, operate or replace
wireless support structures to provide wireless service in the city.
   (B)   The application procedures, permit fees and auditing procedures
outlined in this chapter shall be applicable to applications to establish
wireless facilities in the city unless such facilities do not meet the
definitions of small cell facilities or wireless support structures located in
the right-of-way, as such terms defined in §
1074.03 of this chapter. Wireless facilities that do not meet the definition of
small cell facilities or wireless support structures located in the right-of-
way, as such terms are defined in §
1074.03 of this chapter, are subject to § 1250.09 of the city’s Development
Code.
   (C)   In accordance with this chapter, and unless otherwise prohibited by
law, each person who occupies, uses or seeks to occupy or use the rights-of-way
to operate a small cell facility or wireless support structure in the right-of-
way, or who has, or seeks to have, a small cell facility or wireless support
structure located in any right-of-way, shall apply for and obtain a certificate
of registration for the system pursuant to this chapter.
   (D)   All applications for the construction or modification of a small cell
facility or wireless support structure shall comply with the construction
permit and minor maintenance permit requirements set forth in this chapter and
any other applicable law.
   (E)   In addition to the requirements in divisions (C) and (D) above, an
application for a micro wireless permit shall be submitted by any person that
seeks to construct, modify, collocate or replace a small cell facility or
wireless support structure in any right-of-way. The city’s consent shall not be
required for the replacement of a small cell facility and/or wireless support
structure with a small cell facility and/or wireless support structure,
respectively, that is consistent with the city’s design guidelines and is
substantially similar to the existing small cell facility and/or wireless
support structure, or the same size or smaller than the existing small cell
facility and/or wireless support structure and complies with the requirements
for construction permits as provided in this chapter.
      (1)   For processing a micro wireless permit, the city may charge a fee
for each small cell facility and/or wireless support structure in accordance
with law and as listed on the micro wireless permit forms.
      (2)   The city shall grant or deny a micro wireless permit in accordance
with any required timelines under law. If the city fails to approve or deny a
micro wireless permit within the required time period; provided that, the time
period is not otherwise tolled in accordance with the provisions of this
section, the micro wireless permit shall be deemed granted upon the requesting
entity notifying the city that the time period for granting or denying the
request of consent has lapsed.
      (3)   Requests that do not meet the requirements listed on the
application or stated herein or in the city’s design guidelines shall be deemed
incomplete or shall otherwise be denied by the city.
         (a)   If a micro wireless permit is deemed incomplete, the city shall
provide written notice to the applicant not later than 30 days after receiving
the request that clearly and specifically delineates all missing documents or
required information. The missing documents or information shall be reasonably
related to determining whether the request meets the requirements of applicable
federal and state law. Any notice of incompleteness requiring other information
or documentation does not toll the time period.
            1.   Once the applicant submits the documents or information in
response to the city’s notice of incompleteness, the time period shall resume
and the city shall grant, deny or deem the micro wireless permit to be
incomplete due to not providing the information identified in the original
notice of incompleteness.
            2.   If the supplemental submission is inadequate, the city shall
notify the applicant not later than ten days after receiving the supplemental
submission that the supplemental submission did not provide the information
identified in the original notice delineating missing documents or information.
            3.   The time period may be tolled in the case of second or
subsequent notices under the procedures identified in §
1074.05(C)(1)(a) and (C)(1)(b) of this chapter. Second or subsequent notices of
incompleteness may not specify missing documents or information that was not
delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.
            4.   For a micro wireless permit that is deemed incomplete for a
second or subsequent time, the city shall continue to follow the process in
division (E)(3)(a)1. above until such time that a complete application is
received from the applicant.
         (b)   If a micro wireless permit is denied, the city shall provide in
writing its reasons for denying the request, supported by substantial,
competent evidence and such information as the applicant may reasonably request
to obtain consent. Except in the case of a public utility subject to the
jurisdiction and recognized on the rolls of the public utilities commission or
a cable operator possessing a valid franchise awarded pursuant to the Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1984, 98 Stat. 2779, 47 U.S.C. § 541, the city,
for good cause shown, may withhold, deny or delay its consent to any person
based upon the person’s failure to possess the financial, technical and
managerial resources necessary to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
      (4)   The city shall permit a person seeking to construct, modify,
collocate or replace more than one small cell facility or more than one
wireless support structure within the right-of-way to file a consolidated
application for consent.
         (a)   No more than 30 small cell facilities or 30 wireless support
structures shall be proposed within a single application to receive a single
permit for the construction, modification, collocation or replacement of small
cell facilities or wireless support structures in the right-of-way.
         (b)   A single application may only address multiple small cell
facilities or wireless support structures if they each involve substantially
the same type of small cell facility and/or substantially the same type of
wireless support structure.
         (c)   If an applicant intends to submit five or more small cell
facilities or wireless support structures in a single application, a pre-
application meeting that includes the applicant and the Service Department may
be required by the city in order to help expedite the permitting process. This
pre-application meeting may also include a site visit if so requested by the
city.
         (d)   The Director of Public Service may separately address
applications for which incomplete information has been received or which are
denied.
      (5)   If the number of requests for consent is likely to result in
difficulty processing applications within the time limits set forth in law due
to the lack of resources of the city, then the city may toll the time limits as
follows.
         (a)   The time period for the city to grant or deny a micro wireless
permit may be tolled for up to 21 days for the first 30 requests for consent
for small cell facilities or wireless support structures received by the city
above 90 small cell facility or wireless support structure requests for consent
within any consecutive 30-day period.
         (b)   For every additional 30 requests for consent that the city
receives above the threshold provided in division (E)(5)(a) above, the city may
toll the time period to grant or deny its consent for up to 15 additional days.
         (c)   In no instance shall the city toll the time period for any small
cell facility or wireless support structure micro wireless permit by more than
90 consecutive days.
         (d)   Upon request by the applicant, the city shall provide written
notice of the time limit for a small cell facility or wireless support
structure micro wireless permit.
   (F)   The total annual charge to reimburse the city for collocation of a
small cell facility by an operator to a wireless support structure owned by the
city and located in the right-of-way shall be in accordance with law.
   (G)   The city’s approval term of a collocation to a wireless support
structure shall be for a period of not less than ten years, with a presumption
of renewal for successive five-year terms, unless otherwise terminated or not
renewed for cause or by mutual agreement between the operator and the city.
      (1)   An operator may remove its small cell facilities at any time
subject to applicable permit requirements and may stop paying annual charges or
fees established by law.
      (2)   In the event that use of a small cell facility or wireless support
structure is discontinued, the owner shall submit written notice to the city to
discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued. If the small
cell facility or wireless support structure is not removed within 365 days of
discontinued use, the small cell facility or wireless support structure shall
be considered abandoned in accordance with Ohio R.C. Ch. 4939 and the city may
remove the small cell facility or wireless support structure at the owner’s
expense.
   (H)   (1)   The Director of Public Service is authorized to establish,
implement and amend, from time to time, design guidelines regarding, among
other things:
         (a)   The location of any ground-mounted small cell facilities;
         (b)   The location of a small cell facility on a wireless support
structure;
         (c)   The appearance and concealment of small cell facilities,
including those relating to materials used for arranging, screening or
landscaping; and
         (d)   The design and appearance of a wireless support structure,
including any height requirements adopted by the city.
      (2)   The city, as opposed to the construction of a new wireless support
structure in the right-of-way, shall prefer locating small cell facilities on
existing wireless support structures without increasing the height of the
wireless support structure by more than five feet, including the antenna and
any associated shroud or concealment material.
      (3)   The city shall permit, consistent with law and for the purpose of
providing wireless service, collocation of a small cell facility by an operator
to a wireless support structure owned by the city and located in the right-of-
way; provided that, the operator comply with the design guidelines under this
division (H) and any reasonable terms and conditions for such collocation that
are adopted by the city and written consistent with the design guidelines and
this chapter.
         (a)   The city may condition approval of the collocation on
replacement or modification of the wireless support structure at the operator’s
cost if the city determines that replacement or modification is necessary for
compliance with its construction or safety standards.
         (b)   A replacement or modification of the wireless support structure
shall conform to the applicable design guidelines and the city’s applicable
specifications for the type of structure being replaced.
         (c)   The city may retain ownership of a replacement wireless support
structure.
         (d)   The city may require removal and relocation of a small cell
facility or wireless support structure, at the permittee’s sole expense, in
order to accommodate construction of a public improvement project by the city.
(Prior Code, § 1074.10) (Ord. 76-2018, passed 9-24-2018)
§ 1074.11 INDEMNITY.
   Each certificate of registration issued pursuant to this chapter shall
contain provisions whereby providers agree to protect, defend, indemnify and
hold the city and its agents, officers, elected officials, employees,
volunteers and subcontractors harmless from and against all damages, costs,
losses or expenses:
   (A)   For the repair, replacement or restoration of city property,
equipment, materials, structures and facilities which are damaged, destroyed or
found to be defective as a result of such provider’s acts or omissions;
   (B)   From and against any and all claims, demands, suits, causes of action
and judgments:
      (1)   For damage to or loss of the property of any person, and/or the
death, bodily injury, illness, disease, workers’ compensation, loss of services
or loss of income or wages to any person;
      (2)   Arising out of, incident to, concerning or resulting from the act
or omissions of such provider, its agents, employees and/or subcontractors, in
the performance of activities pursuant to such certificate of registration, no
matter how, or to whom, such loss may occur; and
      (3)   Any operator who owns or operates small cell facilities or wireless
support structures in the rights-of-way shall indemnify, protect, defend and
hold the city and its elected officials, officers, employees, agents and
volunteers harmless against any and all claims, lawsuits, judgments, costs,
liens, losses, expenses, fees to include reasonable attorney fees and costs of
defense, proceedings, actions, demands, causes of action, liability and suits
of any kind and nature, including personal or bodily injury or death, property
damage or other harm for which recovery of damages is sought, to the extent
that it is caused by the negligence of the operator who owns or operates small
cell facilities and/or wireless service in the public way, and any agent,
officer, director, representative, employee, affiliate or subcontractor of the
operator, or their respective officers, agents, employees, directors or
representatives while installing, repairing or maintaining facilities in the
right-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 1074.11) (Ord. 76-2018, passed 9-24-2018)
§ 1074.12 CIVIL FORFEITURES.
   (A)   In addition to any other penalties set forth in this chapter and the
remedy of specific performance, which may be enforced in a court of competent
jurisdiction, the city may assess an additional penalty of civil forfeiture for
failure to comply with any provision of this chapter. Such penalty shall be a
monetary sum, payable to the city, in the amount of $500 per 24-hour day of
violation and any subsequent portion of a day less than 24 hours in length.
Prior to assessing said penalty, the city will provide written notice to the
provider detailing the failure to comply with a specific provision of this
chapter. Such notice shall also indicate that said penalty shall be assessed in
15 calendar days subsequent to the date of receipt, or some other period as
deemed appropriate by the city, if compliance is not achieved. If a provider
desires to challenge such penalty, the provider must request a hearing before
the Mayor within ten days of service of the notice. Such hearing shall be held
within 30 days of the provider’s request. If the provider requests such hearing
before the Mayor, such penalty shall be temporarily suspended.
   (B)   However, if, after the hearing, the Mayor determines that provider
failed to comply with the specific provision(s) of this chapter referenced in
the notice, such penalty shall be assessed starting with conclusion of the
compliance period specified in the notice referenced in this section and
continuing each day thereafter until compliance is achieved. The determination
of the Mayor shall be final. The provider may file an administrative appeal
pursuant to Ohio R.C. Ch. 2506. The penalty shall continue to accrue during the
appeal unless the provider obtains a stay and posts a supersede as bond
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2505.09 or the provider comes into full compliance with
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1074.12) (Ord. 76-2018, passed 9-24-2018)
§ 1074.13 TERMINATION OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Default notice provided. The city through its Department of Public
Service shall give written notice of default to a provider if the city, in its
sole discretion, determines that a provider has:
      (1)   Violated any provision of this chapter or any law, ordinance, rule
or regulation of the city and failed to cure;
      (2)   Evaded or attempted to evade any provision of the issuance of a
certificate of registration or the acceptance of it, including failure to
comply with the indemnification requirements in §§
1074.11 and
1074.23 of this chapter;
      (3)   Practiced any fraud or deceit upon the city; or
      (4)   Made a misrepresentation of fact in the application for a
certificate of registration.
   (B)   Cure required. If a provider fails to cure a default within 30
calendar days after such notice is served by the city, then the city may
exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the
certificate of registration. If the Service Director decides there is cause or
reason to terminate the certificate of registration, the following procedure
shall be followed.
      (1)   The city shall serve a provider with a written notice of the reason
or cause for proposed termination of the certificate of registration and shall
allow a provider a minimum of ten calendar days to cure.
      (2)   If the provider fails to cure within ten calendar days, the Service
Director may declare the certificate of registration terminated.
      (3)   The provider shall have ten calendar days to appeal the termination
to the Mayor. All such appeals shall be in writing. If the Mayor determines
there was not cause or reason to terminate the certificate of registration,
then the Mayor shall overturn the decision of the Service Director. Otherwise,
the Mayor shall affirm the decision of the Service Director to terminate the
certificate of registration. The determination of the Mayor shall be final.
      (4)   If a certificate of registration is terminated and the termination
is affirmed by the Mayor if appealed, the city may, in its sole discretion,
restrict future certificates of registration from being issued to the provider.
(Prior Code, § 1074.13) (Ord. 76-2018, passed 9-24-2018)
§ 1074.14 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   No use without authorization. No person shall use the rights-of-way to
operate a system that has not been authorized by the city in accordance with
the terms of this chapter and been issued a certificate of registration.
   (B)   No use without certificate of registration. No person shall place or
have placed any facilities in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through
the rights-of-way, unless allowed under this chapter or having been issued a
certificate of registration.
   (C)   Unauthorized use a violation. Each and every unauthorized use shall be
deemed to be a violation and a distinct and separate offense. Each and every
day any violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a distinct and
separate offense.
   (D)   Distinct and separate offense. No person shall fail to comply with the
provisions of this chapter. Each and every failure to comply shall be deemed a
distinct and separate offense. Each and every day any violation of this chapter
continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.
   (E)   Penalty assessed. The violation of any provision of this chapter shall
be unlawful and a misdemeanor offense. The penalty for any violation of this
chapter shall be as provided in §
1074.99 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1074.14) (Ord. 76-2018, passed 9-24-2018)
§ 1074.15 RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS.
   (A)   No discrimination. A provider shall comply at all times with all
applicable laws relating to non- discrimination.
   (B)   Equal employment. A provider shall adhere to the applicable equal
employment opportunity requirements of law, as now written or as amended.
   (C)   Privacy. A provider shall adhere to subscriber privacy laws.
(Prior Code, § 1074.15) (Ord. 76-2018, passed 9-24-2018)
§ 1074.16 ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP AND RENEWAL.
   (A)   Assignment or transfer approval required. A certificate of
registration shall not be assigned or transferred, either in whole or in part,
other than to an affiliate, without the prior written consent of the city. This
includes an assignment or transfer by means of a fundamental corporate change
or fundamental partnership change.
   (B)   Procedure to request assignment or transfer approval. The parties to
the assignment or transfer of a certificate of registration shall make a
written request to the city for its consent in the form of the certificate of
registration application.
   (C)   Review by city. The city will review the qualifications (including,
but not limited to, legal, technical and financial where appropriate) of the
proposed assignee or transferee and terms of the existing certificate of
registration. Within 120 days of actual receipt of the request for assignment
or transfer, the city shall approve or deny such assignment or transfer request
in writing, setting forth any conditions for assignment or transfer.
   (D)   Fundamental corporate change. For purposes of this section,
FUNDAMENTAL CORPORATE CHANGE means the sale or transfer of a controlling
interest in the stock of a corporation or the sale or transfer of all or a
majority of a corporation’s assets, merger (including a parent and its
subsidiary corporation), consolidation or creation of a subsidiary corporation.
For the purposes of this section, FUNDAMENTAL PARTNERSHIP CHANGE means the sale
or transfer of all or a majority of a partnership’s assets, change of a general
partner in a limited partnership, change from a limited to a general
partnership, incorporation of a partnership or change in the control of a
partnership.
   (E)   Certificate of registration and assignee/transferee replacement
issuance required. In no event shall a transfer or assignment of ownership or
control be ultimately acceptable to the city without transferee or assignee
requesting and being issued a replacement certificate of registration within 90
days of transfer or assignment.
   (F)   Not a transfer. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, no such
consent or approval shall be required for a transfer or assignment to an
affiliate.
(Prior Code, § 1074.16) (Ord. 76-2018, passed 9-24-2018)
§ 1074.17 CONSTRUCTION PERMITS.
   (A)   Construction permit requirement. Except as otherwise provided in the
code, no person shall be permitted to construct in any rights-of-way without
first having obtained a construction permit as set forth below. This
requirement shall be in addition to any requirement set forth in the code.
      (1)   A construction permit allows the permittee to construct in that
part of the rights-of-way described in such construction permit and to obstruct
travel over the specified portion of the rights-of-way by placing facilities
described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified therein.
      (2)   A construction permit is valid only for the dates and the area of
rights-of-way specified in the construction permit and shall in no event be
valid for more than 180 days from the construction start date.
      (3)   No permittee may construct in the rights-of-way beyond the date or
dates specified in the construction permit unless such permittee:
         (a)   Submits a supplementary application for another construction
permit before the expiration of the initial construction permit; and
         (b)   Is granted a new construction permit or construction permit
extension.
      (4)   Original construction permits issued pursuant to this section
shall, when possible, be conspicuously displayed at all times at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by inspectors and authorized
city personnel. If the original construction permit involves work conducted
simultaneously at multiple locations, each location shall display a photocopy
of the original construction permit. If the original construction permit is not
conspicuously displayed at the indicated work site, then upon request, the
original construction permit must be produced within 12 hours or the first
earliest business hour, whichever is later. For purposes of this section,
BUSINESS HOUR shall mean the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. during a
business day.
   (B)   Construction permit applications.
      (1)   Application for a construction permit, unless an emergency, shall
be made to the Service Director no less than 14 business days prior to the
requested start of construction.
      (2)   All construction permit applications shall contain, and will be
considered complete only upon compliance with the requirements of the following
provisions:
         (a)   Credible evidence that the applicant (where required) has been
issued a certificate of registration or proof that the applicant has written
authority to apply for a construction permit on behalf of a party that has been
issued a certificate of registration;
         (b)   Submission of a completed construction permit application in the
form required by the Service Director, including, but not limited to, all
required attachments, and scaled, dated drawings showing the location and area
of the proposed project, number and location of street crossings, and the
location of all then known existing and proposed facilities of the applicant or
provider within the proposed project area. All drawings, plans and
specifications submitted with the application shall comply with applicable
technical codes, rules and regulations, design guidelines, and be certified as
to being in such compliance by trained technical personnel acceptable to the
Service Director. The mapping data is only required to be at the “Atlas” level
of detail necessary for the city to reasonably determine the location of the
provider’s facilities in the rights-of-way. The city reserves the right, in
circumstances that the Service Director considers unique, complex or unusual,
to request that certain submitted drawings, plans and specifications be
accompanied by the certification of a registered licensed professional
engineer;
         (c)   A city-approved traffic control plan demonstrating the
protective measures and devices that will be employed, consistent with the Ohio
Manual of Uniform Traffic-Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to
persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and
vehicular traffic;
         (d)   If the applicant wants to install new facilities, evidence that
the right-of-way is not full and evidence that the applicant has received an
appropriate permit and is adhering to the city’s laws and rules and
regulations;
         (e)   If applicant is proposing an above ground installation on
existing poles within the rights-of- way, the applicant shall provide credible
information satisfactory to the city to sufficiently detail and identify:
            1.   The size and height of the existing poles;
            2.   Based on the facilities currently on the existing poles, the
excess capacity currently available on such poles before installation of
applicant’s facilities; and
            3.   Based on the facilities currently on the existing poles, the
excess capacity for like or similar facilities that will exist on such poles
after installation of applicant’s facilities.
         (f)   Unless otherwise prohibited by law, if the applicant proposes to
install new poles within the rights-of-way, the applicant shall provide:
            1.   Credible evidence satisfactory to the city that there is no
excess capacity on existing poles or in existing underground systems;
            2.   Credible evidence to the city that it is not financially and/
or technically practicable for the applicant to make an underground
installation or locate its facilities on existing poles;
            3.   The location, size, height, color and material of the proposed
poles; and
            4.   Credible evidence satisfactory to the city that the applicant
will adhere to all the applicable laws concerning the installation of new
poles.
         (g)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation in
existing ducts or conduits within the rights-of-way, the applicant shall
provide credible information satisfactory to the city to sufficiently detail
and identify:
            1.   Based on the existing facilities, the excess capacity for like
or similar facilities currently available in such ducts or conduits before
installation of applicant’s facilities; and
            2.   Based on existing facilities, the excess capacity for like or
similar facilities that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation
of applicant’s facilities.
         (h)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new
ducts or conduits to be constructed within the rights-of-way, the applicant
must provide credible information satisfactory to the city to sufficiently
detail and identify:
            1.   The location, depth, size and quantity of proposed new ducts
or conduits; and
            2.   The excess capacity for like or similar equipment that will
exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant’s facilities.
         (i)   A preliminary construction schedule and completion date;
         (j)   Payment of all money due to the city for:
            1.   Permit fees;
            2.   Any loss, damage or expense suffered by the city as a result
of applicant’s prior construction in the rights-of-way or any emergency actions
taken by the city;
            3.   Any certificate of registration issued to the applicant/person
whose facilities are being constructed; and
            4.   Any other money due to the city from the applicant/person
whose facilities are being constructed.
         (k)   When a construction permit is requested for purposes of
installing additional systems or any part of a system, the posting of a
construction bond and removal bond, acceptable to the city and subject to this
chapter, for the additional systems or any part of a system is required; and
         (l)   Upon request, the Service Director may modify or waive the
information requirements if they are not necessary in evaluating the
construction permit application. The Service Director may request applicable
and pertinent additional information if it is necessary in evaluating the
construction permit application.
   (C)   Issuance of permit; conditions.
      (1)   If the city determines that the applicant has satisfied the
requirements of this chapter and the construction permit process, the Service
Director shall issue a construction permit subject to the provisions of
division (C)(2) below.
      (2)   The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the
construction permit and the performance of the permittee thereunder in order to
protect the city’s investment in the right-of-way, protect the public health,
safety and welfare, to ensure the structural integrity of the rights-of-way, to
protect the property and safety of other users of the rights-of-way or to
minimize the disruption and inconvenience to the traveling public.
   (D)   Construction permit fees.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided by law, the city shall collect a
construction permit fee equal to the actual and direct cost incurred by the
city that is associated with receiving, reviewing, processing and granting (or
denying) the construction permit and any oversight of the construction permit
or the construction work associated therewith. Following completion of the
construction work for which a construction permit has been granted (or at the
time of the denial of construction permit), the city shall calculate and assess
all actual and direct costs involved in receiving, reviewing, processing and
granting (or denying) the construction permit and any oversight of the
construction permit or construction work associated therewith. Quarterly, the
city will cause the Director of Finance to issue a written invoice to a
provider that lists and summarizes the costs for each construction permit
issued to and/or completed by the provider over the previous 90 days. The
provider shall remit payment to the city for the original quarterly invoice
within 30 days after the Director of Finance issues such invoice. Any applicant
who fails to timely remit such invoiced construction permit fee amounts shall
be subject to the penalties of this chapter, the imposition of any other legal
or equitable remedies available to the city and the immediate revocation of any
certificate of registration or construction permit having been issued.
      (2)   The city may in addition to these direct and actual costs listed in
division (D)(1) above may include in the construction permit fee the cost of
the value of degradation and reduction in the useful life of the rights-of-way
that will result from construction that has taken place therein. DEGRADATION
AND THE REDUCTION IN THE USEFUL LIFE, for the purpose of this section, means
the accelerated depreciation of the rights-of-way caused by construction in or
disturbance of the rights-of-way, resulting in the need to reconstruct or
repair such rights-of-way earlier than would be required if the construction
did not occur.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided herein, no future construction permits
shall be issued to an applicant without payment of all outstanding construction
permit fee invoices. The city shall be exempt from payment of construction
permit fees. Construction permit fees that were paid for a permit that the city
has revoked pursuant to this chapter are not refundable.
   (E)   Joint applications. Applicants are encouraged to submit joint
applications for construction permits to work in the rights-of-way at the same
place and time. Joint applicants shall have the ability to divide amongst
themselves, in proportions the parties find appropriate, any applicable
construction permit fees.
   (F)   Exceptions to permit requirements. The following shall be excluded
from the requirements of this section:
      (1)   The repairing or improvement of streets or other public places
under or by virtue of a contract with the city;
      (2)   The maintenance, planting or removal of trees and shrubs from
within the right-of-way; and
      (3)   The addition of an overhead customer service line for any utility,
which service line does not cross across the edge of pavement limits or extend
over pavement at a height of less than 15 feet above the pavement.
(Prior Code, § 1074.17) (Ord. 76-2018, passed 9-24-2018)
§ 1074.18 CONSTRUCTION, RELOCATION AND RESTORATION.
   (A)   Utility engineering study required.
      (1)   Prior to commencement of any initial construction, extension or
relocation of facilities in the rights-of-way, except for repair, maintenance
or replacement with like facilities or relocations requested or caused by a
third party (excluding the city) or another permittee, a permittee shall
conduct a utility engineering study on the proposed route of construction
expansion or relocation if requested by the Service Director. Where such
construction and/or relocation is requested or caused by a third party, every
permittee located within the rights-of-way at issue or involved with the work
shall use all best efforts to cooperate and assist any other permittee or
person who is directed by the city to perform the required utility engineering
study. A utility engineering study consists of, but is not limited to,
completion of the following tasks:
         (a)   Secure all available “as-built” plans, plats and other location
data indicating the existence and approximate location of all facilities along
the proposed construction route;
         (b)   Visibly survey and record the location and dimensions of any
facilities along the proposed construction route, including, but not limited
to, manholes, valve boxes, utility boxes, posts and visible street cut repairs;
         (c)   Determine and record the presence and precise location of all
underground facilities the applicant or person on whose behalf the permit was
applied for owns or controls in the rights-of-way along the proposed system
route. Upon request of the Service Director, a permittee shall also record and
identify the general location of all other facilities in the rights-of-way
along the proposed system route. For the purposes of this section, GENERAL
LOCATION shall mean the alignment of other facilities in the rights-of-way, but
shall not necessarily mean the depth of other facilities in the rights-of-way;
         (d)   Plot and incorporate the data obtained from completion of the
tasks described in divisions (A)(1)(a) through (A)(1)(c) above on the
construction permittee’s proposed system route maps, Construction plans, plan
sheets or computer aided drafting and design (CADD) files, or other data files
in a format compatible with that used by the city;
         (e)   Where the proposed location of facilities and the location of
existing underground facilities appear to conflict on the plans drafted in
accordance with division (A)(1)(d) above, the permittee has the option of
either utilizing non-destructive digging methods, such as vacuum excavation, at
the critical points identified to determine as precisely as possible, the
horizontal, vertical and spatial position, composition, size and other
specifications of the conflicting underground facilities, or re-designing the
construction plans to eliminate the apparent conflict. A permittee shall not
excavate more than a three feet by three feet square hole in the rights- of-way
to complete this task; and
         (f)   Based on all of the data collected upon completion of the tasks
described in this section, adjust the proposed system design to avoid the need
to relocate other underground facilities.
      (2)   The Service Director may modify the scope of the utility
engineering study as necessary depending on the proposed construction plans.
   (B)   Copy to city. Upon completion of the tasks described in division (A)
above, the construction permittee shall submit the proposed system route maps
and construction plans, with the results of the utility engineering study, in
the most advanced format (including, but not be limited to electronic and/or
digital format), then currently being used by the provider that is then
currently capable of technologically being read (or readily converted to a
readable form) by the city. The mapping data is required to be at the “Atlas”
level of detail necessary for the city to reasonably determine the location of
the provider’s facilities in the rights-of-way. The provider shall supply the
mapping data on paper if the Service Director determines that the format
currently being used by the provider is not capable of being read by the city.
   (C)   Qualified firm. All utility engineering studies conducted pursuant to
this section shall be performed by the permittee if, in the discretion of the
Service Director, the construction permittee is qualified to complete the
project itself; alternatively, utility engineering studies shall be performed
by a firm specializing in utility engineering that is approved by the city.
   (D)   Cost of study. The permittee shall bear the cost of compliance with
divisions (A) through (C) above.
   (E)   Construction schedule. Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter
or in the rules and regulations, or unless the Service Director waives any of
the requirements of this section due to unique or unusual circumstances, a
permittee shall be required to submit a written construction schedule to the
city 14 business days before commencing any work in or about the rights-of-way,
and shall further notify the city not less than two business days in advance of
any excavation in the rights-of-way. This section shall apply to all situations
with the exception of circumstances under §§
1074.19 and
1074.20(D) of this chapter.
   (F)   Location of facilities.
      (1)   The placement of new facilities and replacement of old facilities,
either above ground or underground, shall be completed in conformity with
applicable laws and the city’s rules and regulations.
      (2)   The city shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of
new or additional facilities within the rights-of-way if the right-of-way is
full, as determined in the sole discretion of the city. In making such
decisions, the city shall strive to the extent possible to accommodate all
existing and potential users of the rights-of-way, but shall be guided
primarily by considerations of the public health, safety and welfare, the
condition of the rights-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential
utilities, the protection of existing facilities in the rights-of-way, future
city and county plans for public improvements, development projects which have
been determined to be in the public interest and non-discriminatory and
competitively neutral treatment among providers.
   (G)   Least disruptive technology. All construction or maintenance of
facilities shall be accomplished in the manner resulting in the least amount of
damage and disruption of the rights-of-way. Specifically, every permittee when
performing underground construction, if technically and/or technologically
feasible and not economically unreasonable, shall utilize trenchless
technology, including, but not limited to, horizontal directional drilling,
directional boring and microtunneling. In addition, all cable, wire or fiber
optic cable installed in the subsurface rights-of-way pursuant to this chapter
may be required to be installed in conduit and, if so required, no cable, wire
or fiber optic cable may be installed pursuant to this chapter using “direct
bury” techniques.
   (H)   Special exceptions. The city may grant a special exception to the
requirements of §
1074.18(F) and (G) of this chapter if a permittee, upon application,
demonstrates with written evidence that:
      (1)   The exception will not create any threat to the city’s investment
or in the rights-of-way, the public health, safety or welfare;
      (2)   The permittee demonstrates that the increased economic burden and
the potential adverse impact on the permittee’s construction schedule resulting
from the strict enforcement of the requirement actually or effectively inhibits
the ability of the permittee to provide services in the city;
      (3)   The permittee demonstrates that the requirement unreasonably
discriminates against the permittee in favor of another person; and
      (4)   The requirements requested by the city herein create an
unreasonable economic burden for the permittee that outweighs any potential
benefit to the city.
   (I)   Relocation of facilities.
      (1)   A provider shall as promptly as reasonably possible and at its own
expense, permanently remove and relocate its facilities in the rights-of-way
whenever the city finds it necessary to request such removal and relocation. In
instances where the city requests removal and/or relocation, the city shall
waive all applicable construction permit fees. Upon removal and/or relocation,
the provider shall restore the rights-of-way to the same or better condition it
was in prior to said removal or relocation. If existing poles are required to
be removed and/or relocated, then the existing poles will be replaced with
poles of the same or substantially similar size, or smaller. In accordance with
law, the Service Director may request relocation and/or removal in order to
prevent unreasonable interference by the provider’s facilities with:
         (a)   A public improvement undertaken or approved by the city;
         (b)   The city’s investment in the right-of-way;
         (c)   When the public health, safety and welfare requires it, or when
necessary to prevent interference with the safety and convenience of ordinary
travel over the rights-of-way; and
         (d)   The sale, conveyance, vacation or narrowing of all or any part
of a right-of-way.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, a provider who has facilities in the
rights-of-way subject to a vacation or narrowing that is not required for the
purposes of the city, shall have a permanent easement in such vacated portion
or excess portion in conformity with Ohio R.C. 723.041.
      (3)   If, in the reasonable judgment of the city, a provider fails to
commence removal and/or relocation of its facilities, as designated by the
city, within 30 days after the city’s removal order, or if a provider fails to
substantially complete such removal, including all associated repair of the
rights-of-way of the city, within 12 months thereafter, then, to the extent
consistent with applicable law, the city shall have the right to:
         (a)   Declare that all rights, title and interest to the facilities
belong to the city with all rights of ownership, including, but not limited to,
the right to connect and use the facilities or to effect a transfer of all
right, title and interest in the facilities to another person for operation;
         (b)   Authorize removal of the facilities installed by the provider
in, on, over or under the rights- of-way of the city at provider’s cost and
expense, by another person; however, the city shall have no liability for any
damage caused by such action and the provider shall be liable to the City for
all reasonable costs incurred by the city in such action; and
         (c)   To the extent consistent with applicable law, any portion of the
provider’s facilities in, on, over or under the rights-of-way of the city
designated by the city for removal and not timely removed by the provider shall
belong to and become the property of the city without payment to the provider,
and the provider shall execute and deliver such documents, as the city shall
request, in form and substance acceptable to the city, to evidence such
ownership by the city.
   (J)   Pre-excavation facilities location.
      (1)   Before the start date of any rights-of-way excavation, each
provider who has facilities located in the area to be excavated shall, to the
best of its ability, be responsible to mark the horizontal and approximate
vertical placement of all its facilities.
      (2)   All providers shall notify and work closely with the excavation
contractor in an effort to establish the exact location of its facilities and
the best procedure for excavation.
   (K)   Rights-of-way restoration.
      (1)   The work to be done under the permit, and the restoration of the
rights-of-way as required herein, weather permitting, must be completed within
the dates specified in the permit. In addition to its own work, the permittee
must restore the general area of the work, and the surrounding areas, including
trench backfill, paving and its foundations in accordance with the code and
city rules and regulations. If a permittee is unable to timely complete the
restoration of rights-of-way due to unreasonable inclement weather conditions,
the permittee shall complete the restoration of the rights-of-way as soon as
weather conditions make it possible to do so and upon said completion notify
the city.
      (2)   In approving an application for a construction permit, the city may
have the permittee restore the rights-of-way, or alternatively the city may
restore the rights-of-way at the permittee’s cost if the permittee has in the
past not abided by requirements of this chapter.
      (3)   If the city chooses to allow permittee to restore the rights-of-
way, the permittee shall, at the time of application for a construction permit,
post a construction bond in an amount determined by the city to be sufficient
to cover the cost of restoring the rights-of-way to its approximate pre-
excavation condition. If, 12 months after completion of the restoration of the
rights-of-way, the city determines that the rights-of-way have been properly
restored, the surety on the construction bond shall be released.
      (4)   The permittee shall perform the right-of-way restoration work
according to the standards and with the materials specified by the city. The
city shall have the authority to prescribe the manner and extent of the
restoration, and may do so in written procedures of general application or on a
case-by-case basis. The city in exercising this authority shall be guided by
the following standards and considerations: the number, size, depth and
duration of the excavations, disruptions or damage to the rights-of-way; the
traffic volume carried by the rights-of-way; the character of the neighborhood
surrounding the rights-of-way; the pre-excavation condition of the rights-of-
way; the remaining life-expectancy of the rights-of-way affected by the
excavation; whether the relative cost of the method of restoration to the
permittee is in reasonable balance with the prevention of an accelerated
depreciation of the rights-of-way that would otherwise result from the
excavation, disturbance or damage to the rights-of-way; and the likelihood that
the particular method of restoration would be effective in slowing the
depreciation of the rights-of-way that would otherwise take place. Methods of
restoration may include, but are not limited to, patching the affected area,
replacement of the rights-of-way base at the affected area, and in the most
severe cases, milling, overlay and/or street reconstruction of the entire area
of the rights- of-way affected by the work.
      (5)   By restoring the rights-of-way itself, the permittee guarantees its
work and shall maintain it for twelve months following its completion. During
this 12-month period, it shall, upon notification from the Department of Public
Service, correct all restoration work to the extent necessary using the method
required by the Department of Public Service. Weather permitting, said work
shall be completed within five calendar days of the receipt of the notice from
the Department of Public Service, unless otherwise extended by the Department
of Public Service.
      (6)   If the permittee fails to restore the rights-of-way in the manner
and to the condition required by the city, or fails to satisfactorily and
timely complete all repairs required by the city, the city, at its option, may
do such work. In that event, the permittee shall pay to the city, within 30
days of invoicing, the restoration cost of restoring the rights-of-way and any
other costs incurred by the city. Upon failure to pay, the city may call upon
any bond or letter of credit posted by permittee and/or pursue any and all
legal and equitable remedies.
      (7)   If the work to be done under the permit is being done at the same
location and the same period of time as work by the city and/or another
permittee(s), then the Service Director may reasonably apportion the
restoration responsibility among the city, providers and/or other persons.
   (L)   Damage to other facilities.
      (1)   In the case of an emergency, and if possible after reasonable
efforts to contact the provider seeking a timely response, when the city
performs work in the rights-of-way and finds it necessary to maintain, support
or move a provider’s facilities to protect those facilities, the costs
associated therewith will be billed to that provider and shall be paid within
30 days from the date of billing. Upon failure to pay, the city may pursue all
legal and equitable remedies or the city may call upon any bond or letter of
credit posted by the permittee and pursue any and all legal or equitable
remedies. Each provider shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any
damage caused by its facilities to the facilities of another provider during
the city’s response to an emergency.
      (2)   Each provider shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any
city-owned facilities in the rights- of-way that the provider or its facilities
damage.
   (M)   Rights-of-way vacation. If the city sells or otherwise transfers a
right-of-way that contains the facilities of a provider, such sale or transfer
shall be subject to any existing easements of record and any easements required
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 723.041.
   (N)   Installation requirements. The excavation, backfilling, restoration
and all other work performed in the rights-of-way shall be performed in
conformance with all applicable laws, city rules and regulations, other
standards as may be promulgated by the Service Director.
   (O)   Inspection. When the construction under any permit hereunder is
completed, the permittee shall notify the Department of Public Service.
      (1)   The permittee shall make the construction site available to the
inspector and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all
reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction.
      (2)   At the time of inspection, the inspector may order the immediate
cessation of any work that poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety
or well-being of the public, violates any law or that violates the term and
conditions of the permit and/or this chapter. The city may inspect the work;
however, the failure of the city to inspect the work does not alleviate the
responsibility of the permittee to complete the work in accordance with the
approved permit and the requirements of this chapter.
      (3)   The Inspector may issue an order to the permittee for any work that
does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or
codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the violation will be
cause for revocation of the permit. The order may be served on the permittee as
provided in §
1074.23(e) of this chapter. An order may be appealed to the Service Director.
The decision of the Service Director may be appealed to the Mayor whose
decision shall be final. If not appealed, within ten days after issuance of the
order, the provider shall present proof to the Service Director that the
violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within the
required time, the Service Director may revoke the permit.
   (P)   Other obligations.
      (1)   Obtaining a construction permit does not relieve the permittee of
its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses and authority and to
pay all fees required by any other city, county, state or federal laws.
      (2)   The permittee shall comply with all requirements of all laws.
      (3)   The permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all
applicable laws and standards, and is responsible for all work done in the
rights-of-way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who performs the work.
      (4)   No rights-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when
seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except
in the case of an emergency as outlined in §
1074.20(D) of this chapter.
      (5)   The permittee shall not obstruct a right-of-way so as to interfere
with the natural free and clear passage of water through the gutters or other
waterways. The Service Director may waive this requirement if it is technically
or economically unreasonable in the circumstances.
      (6)   Private vehicles, other than necessary construction vehicles, may
not be parked within or adjacent to a permit area. The loading or unloading of
trucks adjacent to a permit area is prohibited unless specifically authorized
by the permit.
   (Q)   Undergrounding required. Any owner of property abutting a street or
alley where service facilities are now located underground and where the
service connection is at the property line, shall install or cause others to
install underground any service delivery infrastructure from the property line
to the buildings or other structures on such property to which such service is
supplied. Where not otherwise required to be placed underground by this
chapter, a provider shall locate facilities underground at the request of an
adjacent property owner; provided that, such placement of facilities
underground is consistent with the provider’s normal construction and operating
standards and that the additional costs of such undergrounding over the normal
aerial or above ground placement costs of identical facilities are borne
directly by the property owner making the request. A provider, under any
circumstance shall, upon the reasonable request of the city, always use best
efforts to place facilities underground. Where technically possible and not
economically unreasonable or unsafe (based upon the technology employed and
facilities installed), all facilities to be installed by a provider under the
right-of-way shall be installed in conduit.
(Prior Code, § 1074.18) (Ord. 76-2018, passed 9-24-2018)
§ 1074.19 MINOR MAINTENANCE PERMIT.
   (A)   Right-of-way minor maintenance permit requirement.
      (1)   No person shall perform minor maintenance of facilities in the
rights-of-way without first having obtained a right-of-way minor maintenance
permit as set forth in this chapter.
      (2)   MINOR MAINTENANCE means:
         (a)   The routine repair or replacement of facilities with like
facilities not involving construction and not requiring traffic control for
more than two hours at any one location;
         (b)   The routine repair or replacement of facilities with like
facilities not involving construction and taking place on thoroughfares and
arteries between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.;
         (c)   The routine repair or replacement of facilities with like
facilities not involving construction on all rights-of-ways, other than
thoroughfares and arterials, that does not impede traffic and is for a period
of less than eight contiguous hours; or
         (d)   Construction other than on thoroughfares and arterials that
takes less than eight contiguous hours to complete, does not impede traffic and
does not involve a pavement cut.
      (3)   The Service Director may adopt Rules and Regulations pursuant to §
1074.08(E) of this chapter that clarify the definition of minor maintenance
and/or provide a process for a provider to determine whether particular
activity constitutes minor maintenance.
         (a)   A right-of-way minor maintenance permit allows the permittee to
perform all minor maintenance in any part of the rights-of-way as required.
         (b)   A right-of-way minor maintenance permit is valid from the date
of issuance until revoked by the Service Director.
         (c)   A right-of-way minor maintenance permit must be displayed or
upon request produced within 12 business hours.
         (d)   A right-of-way minor maintenance permit by itself shall under no
circumstances provide a permittee with the ability to cut pavement without
seeking additional authority from the Service Director.
   (B)   Minor maintenance permit applications. Applications for a right-of-way
minor maintenance permit shall be made to the Service Director. In addition to
any information required by the Service Director, all right- of-way minor
maintenance permit applications shall contain, and will only be considered
complete upon compliance with the following provisions:
      (1)   Credible evidence that the applicant has obtained a certificate of
registration or proof that the applicant has written authority to apply for
right-of-way minor maintenance permit on behalf of a party that has been issued
a certificate of registration;
      (2)   Submission of a completed right-of-way minor maintenance permit
application in the form required by the Service Director; and
      (3)   A statement that the applicant will employ protective measures and
devices that, consistent with the Ohio Manual of Uniform Traffic-Control
Devices, will prevent injury or damage to persons or property and minimize
disruptions to the efficient movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (C)   Issuance of minor maintenance permits; conditions.
      (1)   If the Service Director determines that the applicant has satisfied
the requirements of this chapter and the right-of-way minor maintenance permit
process, the Service Director shall issue a minor maintenance permit subject to
the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   The city may impose reasonable conditions, in addition to rules and
regulations enacted by the Service Director, upon the issuance of the right-of-
way minor maintenance permit and the performance of the permittee thereunder in
order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, to ensure the
structural integrity of the rights-of-way, to protect the property and safety
of other users of the rights-of-way, and to minimize the disruption and
inconvenience to the traveling public.
   (D)   Minor maintenance permit fees. The Service Director shall not charge a
fee for the issuance of the right-of-way minor maintenance permit but may
revoke the right-of-way minor maintenance permit as any other permit may be
revoked under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1074.19) (Ord. 76-2018, passed 9-24-2018)
§ 1074.20 ENFORCEMENT OF PERMIT OBLIGATION.
   (A)   Mandatory denial of permit. Except in the case of an emergency, as
determined by the Service Director or his or her designee, no permit will be
granted:
      (1)   To any person who has not yet made an application or who is
occupying any right-of-way without a valid certificate of registration;
      (2)   To any person who has outstanding debt owed to the city unless
payment in full has been placed in an escrow account approved by the city’s
Director of Finance and the Law Director;
      (3)   To any person as to whom there exists grounds for the revocation of
a permit; or
      (4)   If, in the discretion of the Service Director, the issuance of a
permit for the particular date and/or time would cause a conflict or interfere
with an exhibition, celebration, festival or any other event. The Service
Director, in exercising this discretion, shall be guided by the safety and
convenience of ordinary travel of the public over the rights-of-way, and by
considerations relating to the public health, safety and welfare and/or the
city’s investment in the right-of-way.
   (B)   Permissive denial of permit. The Service Director may deny a permit in
order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and/or protect the
city’s investment in the right-of-way to prevent interference with the safety
and convenience of ordinary travel over the rights-of-way, or when necessary to
protect the rights-of- way and its users.
      (1)   The Service Director, in his or her discretion, may consider one or
more of the following factors:
         (a)   The extent to which rights-of-way space where the permit is
sought is available;
         (b)   The competing demands for the particular space in the rights-of-
way;
         (c)   The availability of other locations in the rights-of-way or in
other rights-of-way for the proposed facilities;
         (d)   The applicability of this chapter or other regulations of the
rights-of-way that affect location of facilities in the rights-of-way;
         (e)   The degree of compliance of the provider with the terms and
conditions of its certificate of registration, this chapter and other
applicable ordinances and regulations;
         (f)   The degree of disruption to surrounding communities and
businesses that will result from the use of that part of the rights-of-way;
         (g)   The condition and age of the rights-of-way, and whether and when
it is scheduled for total or partial re-construction;
         (h)   The balancing of the costs of disruption to the public and
damage to the rights-of-way, against the benefits to that part of the public
served by the expansion into additional parts of the rights-of-way; and/or
         (i)   Whether such applicant or its agent has failed within the past
three years to comply, or is presently not in full compliance with, the
requirements of this chapter or, if applicable, any other law.
      (2)   Under no circumstances will open cutting take place on any street,
except where:
         (a)   An emergency situation constitutes that an open cut is
necessary;
         (b)   Vital services to resident(s) or business(es) are needed or have
been cut off and there is no reasonable alternative (such as jacking or boring)
in supplying or restoring such services; and/or
         (c)   The Service Director determines it is in the best interests of
the city that such an open cut take place.
   (C)   Discretionary issuance of permit.
      (1)   Notwithstanding the provisions of divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2)
above, the Service Director may issue a permit in any case in which the permit
is necessary:
         (a)   To prevent substantial economic hardship to a customer of the
permit applicant, if established by credible evidence satisfactory to the city;
         (b)   To allow such customer to improve its service; or
         (c)   To allow a new economic development project to be granted a
permit under this section.
      (2)   To be granted a permit under this section, the permit applicant
must not have had knowledge of the hardship, the plans for improvement of
service or the development project when it was required to submit its list of
next year projects.
   (D)   Work done without a permit in emergency situations.
      (1)   Each provider shall, as soon as is practicable, immediately notify
the Service Director of any event regarding its facilities which it considers
to be an emergency. The provider may proceed to take whatever actions are
necessary in order to respond to the emergency. Within five business days,
unless otherwise extended by the Service Director, after the occurrence or
discovery of the emergency (whichever is later), the provider shall apply for
the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith or have those fees
attributed to its quarterly invoice balance in accordance with §
1074.17(D) of this chapter and fulfill the rest of the requirements necessary
to bring itself into compliance with this chapter for any and all actions taken
in response to the emergency. In the event that the city becomes aware of an
emergency regarding a provider’s facilities, the city may use best efforts to
contact the provider or the system representative of each provider affected, or
potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event, the city may take
whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, the
cost of which shall be borne by the provider whose facilities caused the
emergency.
      (2)   Except in the case of an emergency, any provider who constructs in,
on, above, within, over, below or through a rights-of-way without a valid
permit must subsequently obtain a permit, pay double the calculated fee for
said permit, pay double all the other fees required by the code, deposit with
the city the fees necessary to correct any damage to the rights-of-way and
comply with all of the requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   Revocation of permits.
      (1)   Permittees hold permits issued pursuant to this chapter as a
privilege and not as a right. The city reserves its right, as provided herein,
to revoke any permit, without refunding any fees, in the event of a failure of
the permittee to comply with the terms and conditions of any law, ordinance,
rule or regulation, design guidelines or any provision or condition of the
permit, including, but not limited to, the following:
         (a)   The violation of any provision or condition of the permit;
         (b)   An evasion or attempt to evade any provision or condition of the
permit or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon
the city or its citizens;
         (c)   Any misrepresentation of fact in the application for a permit;
         (d)   The failure to maintain the required construction or removal
bonds and/or insurance;
         (e)   The failure to obtain and/or maintain, when required, a
certificate of registration;
         (f)   The failure to complete the construction in a timely manner; or
         (g)   The failure to correct a condition of an order issued.
      (2)   If the Service Director determines that the permittee has not
complied with a term or condition of any law, ordinance, rule or regulation, or
any condition of the permit, the Service Director shall serve a written demand
upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The demand shall state that
continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. The Service
Director may also, in his or her discretion, place additional or revised
conditions on the permit.
      (3)   By the close of the next business day following receipt of
notification of the violation, the permittee shall contact the Service Director
with a plan, acceptable to the Service Director, for its correction. The
permittee’s failure to submit an acceptable plan, or the permittee’s failure to
reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be cause for immediate revocation
of the permit.
      (4)   If a permittee commits a second substantial default as outlined
above, permittee’s permit will automatically be revoked and the permittee will
not be allowed further permits for up to and including one full year from the
date that the permit was revoked, except for emergency repairs.
      (5)   If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall also reimburse the city
for the city’s reasonable costs, including restoration costs and the costs of
collection and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred in connection with such
revocation.
(Prior Code, § 1074.20) (Ord. 76-2018, passed 9-24-2018)
§ 1074.21 PERFORMANCE SECURITY.
   (A)   Required bond. Upon issuance of a certificate of registration, and
prior to the commencement of any construction, and continuously thereafter, a
provider shall deposit with the Service Director and maintain an irrevocable,
unconditional letter of credit or surety bond in an amount determined by the
Service Director to be appropriate based upon fair and reasonable criteria. The
full amount of the letter of credit or surety bond shall remain in full force
and effect throughout the terms and conditions of this chapter and/or until any
necessary site restoration is completed to restore the site to a condition
comparable or better to that which existed prior to the issuance of certificate
of registration. Unless a construction default, problem or deficiency involves
an emergency or endangers the safety of the general public, the Service
Director shall make all reasonable efforts to allow a provider a period of five
calendar days after sending notification in writing to correct or repair any
default, problem or deficiency prior to the Service Director’s attachment of
the letter of credit or surety bond. Upon attachment, written notice shall be
provided to the provider by the Service Director.
   (B)   Purposes. The letter of credit or surety bond required by this section
shall serve as security for:
      (1)   The faithful performance by the permittee or provider of all terms,
conditions and obligations of this chapter;
      (2)   Any expenditure, damage or loss incurred by the city occasioned by
the permittee or provider’s violation of this chapter or its failure to comply
with all rules, regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the city
issued pursuant to this chapter;
      (3)   The payment of all compensation due to the city, including permit
fees;
      (4)   The payment of premiums (if any) for the liability insurance
required pursuant to this chapter;
      (5)   The removal of facilities from the rights-of-way pursuant to this
chapter;
      (6)   The payment to the city of any amounts for which the permittee or
provider is liable that are not paid by its insurance or other surety; and
      (7)   The payment of any other amounts which become due to the city
pursuant to this chapter or law.
(Prior Code, § 1074.21) (Ord. 76-2018, passed 9-24-2018)
§ 1074.22 INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.
   (A)   City does not accept liability. By reason of the acceptance of an
application, the grant of a permit or the issuance of a certificate of
registration, the city does not assume any liability:
      (1)   For injuries to persons, damage to property or loss of service
claims; or
      (2)   For claims or penalties of any sort resulting from the
installation, presence, maintenance or operation of facilities.
   (B)   Indemnification.
      (1)   By applying for and being issued a certificate of registration with
the city a provider is required, or by accepting a permit a permittee is
required to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city’s agents, elected
officials, officers, employees, volunteers and subcontractors from all costs,
liabilities, claims and suits for damages of any kind arising out of the
construction, presence, installation, maintenance, repair or operation of its
facilities, or out of any activity undertaken in or near a right-of-way,
whether any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited
by a permit, unless the act or omission is due to the city’s negligence or
willful acts. A provider or permittee shall not bring, nor cause to be brought,
any action, suit or other proceeding claiming damages, or seeking any other
relief against the city’s agents, elected officials, officers, employees,
volunteers and subcontractors for any claim nor for any award arising out of
the presence, installation, maintenance or operation of its facilities, or any
activity undertaken in or near a right-of-way, whether the act or omission
complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by a permit. This section is
not, as to third parties, a waiver of any defense or immunity otherwise
available to the provider, the permittee or to the city; and the provider or
permittee, in defending any action on behalf of the city, shall be entitled to
assert in any action every defense or immunity that the city could assert in
its own behalf. Any and all exercise of the above shall be consistent with, but
not limited to, the following:
         (a)   To the fullest extent permitted by law, all providers and
permittees shall, at their sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend and
hold harmless the city, its elected officials, agents, officers, employees,
volunteers and subcontractors from and against any and all lawsuits, claims
(including, without limitation, workers’ compensation claims against the city
or others), causes of actions, actions, liability and judgments for injury or
damages (including, but not limited to, expenses for reasonable legal fees and
disbursements assumed by the city in connection therewith), unless the act or
omission is due to the city’s negligence or willful acts;
         (b)   Persons or property, in any way arising out of or through the
acts or omissions of the provider or permittee, its subcontractors, agents or
employees attributable to the occupation by the provider or permittee of the
rights-of-way, to which the provider’s or permittee’s negligence shall in any
way contribute, and regardless of whether the negligence of any other party
shall have contributed to such claim, cause of action, judgment, injury or
damage;
         (c)   Arising out of any claim for invasion of the right of privacy,
for defamation of person, firm or corporation, or the violation or infringement
of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent or any other
right of any person, firm and corporation by the provider, but excluding claims
arising out of or related to the city’s actions; and
         (d)   Arising out of the provider or permittee’s failure to comply
with the provisions of law applicable to provider or permittee in its business
hereunder.
      (2)   The foregoing indemnification is conditioned upon the city:
         (a)   Giving the provider or permittee prompt notice of any claim or
the commencement of any action, suit or proceeding for which indemnification is
sought;
         (b)   Affording the provider or permittee the opportunity to
participate in any compromise, settlement or other resolution or disposition of
any claim or proceeding subject to indemnification; and
         (c)   Cooperate in the defense of such claim and making available to
the provider or permittee all pertinent information under the city’s control.
      (3)   The city shall have the right to employ separate counsel in any
such action or proceeding and to participate in the investigation and defense
thereof, and the provider or permittee shall pay all reasonable fees and
expenses of such separate counsel if employed.
(Prior Code, § 1074.22) (Ord. 76-2018, passed 9-24-2018)
§ 1074.23 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Non-exclusive remedy. The remedies provided in this chapter are not
exclusive or in lieu of other rights and remedies that the city may have at law
or in equity. The city is hereby authorized at any time to seek legal and
equitable relief for actual or threatened injury to the rights-of-way,
including damages to the rights-of- way, whether caused by a violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter or other provisions of the city code of
ordinances.
   (B)   Severability. If any section, division, sentence, clause, phrase or
portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by
any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion
shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.
   (C)   Revocability. If a regulatory body or a court of competent
jurisdiction should determine by a final, non-appealable order that any permit,
right or any portions of this section are illegal or unenforceable, then any
such permit or right granted or deemed to exist hereunder shall be considered
as a revocable permit with a mutual right in either party to terminate without
cause upon giving 60 days’ written notice to the other. The requirements and
conditions of such a revocable permit shall be the same requirements and
conditions as set forth in the permit, right or registration, respectively,
except for conditions relating to the term of the permit and the right of
termination. If a permit or right shall be considered a revocable permit as
provided herein, the permittee must acknowledge the authority of the city to
issue such revocable permit and the power to revoke it.
   (D)   Reservation of regulatory and police powers. The city, by the granting
of a permit or by issuing a certificate of registration pursuant to this
chapter, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair or lessen the
lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter vested in the
city under the Constitution and laws of the United States, State of Ohio and
under the Charter of the city to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The
permittee by its acceptance of a permit, or provider by applying for and being
issued a certificate of registration, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful
powers and rights, regulatory power or police power, or otherwise as now are or
the same as may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall
be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at
any time. A permittee or provider is deemed to acknowledge that its rights are
subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce
general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is
deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances
enacted by the city pursuant to such powers.
   (E)   Method of service. Any notice or order of the Service Director or
Mayor shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is:
      (1)   Delivered personally;
      (2)   Successfully transmitted via facsimile transmission to the last
known fax number of the person to be served;
      (3)   Successfully transmitted via electronic mail to the last known e-
mail address of the person to be served;
      (4)   Left at the usual place of business of the person to whom it is to
be served upon and with someone who is 18 years of age or older;
      (5)   Sent by certified, pre-posted U.S. mail to the last known address;
      (6)   If the notice is attempted to be served by certified, pre-posted
U.S. mail and then returned showing that the letter was not delivered, or the
certified letter is not returned within 14 days after the date of mailing, then
notice may be sent by regular, pre-posted, first-class U.S. mail; and
      (7)   If the notice is attempted to be served by regular, first class
U.S. mail, postage prepaid, and the letter is then returned showing that the
letter was not delivered, or is not returned within 14 days after the date of
mailing, then notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the
structure, building, premises or property affected by such notice.
   (F)   Applies to all providers. This chapter shall apply to all providers
and all permittees unless expressly exempted.
   (G)   Police powers. All persons’ rights are subject to the police powers of
the city to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety and
welfare of the public. All persons shall comply with all applicable laws
enacted by the city pursuant to its police powers. As applicable pursuant to
law, all persons shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements
pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities.
   (H)   Compliance. No person shall be relieved of its obligation to comply
with any of the provisions of this chapter by reason of any failure of the city
to enforce prompt compliance.
   (I)   Foreclosure and receivership.
      (1)   Upon the filing of any voluntary or involuntary petition under the
Bankruptcy Code by or against any provider and/or permittee, or any action for
foreclosure or other judicial sale of the provider and/or permittee facilities
located within the rights-of-way, the provider and/or permittee shall so notify
the Service Director within 14 calendar days thereof and the provider and/or
permittee’s certificate of registration or permit (as applicable) shall be
deemed void and of no further force and effect.
      (2)   The city shall have the right to revoke any certificate of
registration or permit granted pursuant to this chapter, subject to any
applicable provisions of law, including the Bankruptcy Code, 120 days after the
appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of
the provider and/or permittee, whether in receivership, reorganization,
bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or
trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said 120 days or
unless:
         (a)   Within 120 days after election or appointment, such receiver or
trustee shall have fully complied with all the provisions of the relevant
certificate of registration, any outstanding permit, this chapter and remedied
all defaults thereunder; and
         (b)   Said receiver or trustee, within said 120 days, shall have
executed an agreement, duly approved by a court having jurisdiction over the
facilities, whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by
each and every provisions of the relevant certificate of registration, permit
and this chapter.
   (J)   Choice of law and forum. This chapter and the terms and conditions of
any certificate of registration or permit shall be construed and enforced in
accordance with the substantive laws of the city, the state and United States,
in that order. As a condition of the grant of any permit or issuance of any
certificate of registration, all disputes shall be resolved in a court of
competent jurisdiction in the county.
   (K)   Force majeure. In the event any person’s performance of any of the
terms, conditions or obligations required by this chapter is prevented by a
cause or event not within such person’s control, such inability to perform
shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a
result thereof. For the purpose of this section, causes or events not within
the control of a person shall include, without limitation, acts of God,
strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, failure or loss of, explosions,
acts of public enemies and natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes,
landslides and fires.
   (L)   No warranty. The city makes no representation or warranty regarding
its right to authorize the construction of facilities on any particular rights-
of-way. The burden and responsibility for making such determination shall be
upon the person installing facilities in the rights-of-way.
   (M)   Continuing obligation and holdover. In the event a provider or
permittee continues to operate all or any part of the facilities after the
termination, lapse or revocation of a certificate of registration, such
provider or permittee shall continue to comply with all applicable provisions
of this chapter and other laws throughout the period of such continued
operation; provided that, any such continued operation shall in no way be
construed as a renewal or other extension of the certificate of registration,
nor as a limitation on the remedies, if any, available to the city as a result
of such continued operation after the term, including, but not limited to,
damages and restitution. Any conflict between the issuance of a certificate of
registration or of a permit and any other present or future lawful exercise of
the city’s regulatory or police powers shall be resolved in favor of the
latter.
   (N)   Appeals. All appeals provided for by this chapter and any notification
to the city required by this chapter shall be in writing and sent via certified
U.S. mail to the Mayor or Service Director as specified in this chapter.
   (O)   City facilities. As part of city required standards, wherever rights-
of-way are under construction, if deemed advisable and practicable by the
Service Director, the city may install all such facilities deemed necessary to
accommodate future provider needs. Any such installed facilities shall be city
property and may be conveyed to any person under such terms and conditions as
are deemed advisable by the Mayor.
   (P)   Section headings. Section headings are for convenience only and shall
not be used to interpret any portion of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1074.23) (Ord. 76-2018, passed 9-24-2018)
§ 1074.99 PENALTY.
   In addition to any other penalties set forth in this chapter and the remedy
of specific performance which may be enforced in a court of competent
jurisdiction, the following penalties shall apply: any person who fails to pay
any forfeiture imposed pursuant to this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Each day such violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 1074.99) (Ord. 76-2018, passed 9-24-2018)
PART TWELVE: PLANNING AND ZONING CODE
Editor's note:
Ord. 148-1995, passed 12-11-1995, repealed Part Twelve, the Planning and Zoning
Code of the city, and adopted a new Development Code and Zoning District Map
for the city. Because the Development Code is separately published, it is not
codified herein. Copies of such code, as amended, may be obtained, at cost,
from the Council Clerk.
PART FOURTEEN: BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE
   Chapter
TITLE TWO: BUILDING STANDARDS
      
1402.   Residential Building Code of Ohio for One-, Two-and Three-Family
Dwellings
      
1404.   Ohio Building Code
      
1406.   National Electrical Code
TITLE FOUR: LICENSING OF TRADESMEN
      
1422.   Registration in General
      
1424.   Electrical Registration
      
1426.   Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning
      
1428.   Plumbing Registration
      
1430.   Sign Licensing
TITLE SIX: ADMINISTRATION; MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
      
1442.   Division of Building Inspection
      
1444.   Permits and Fees
      
1446.   Fire Districts
      
1448.   Insulation
      
1450.   Erosion and Sediment Control Regulation
      
1452.   Land Reutilization Program
      
1454.   Vacant Property Registration Program
TITLE EIGHT: HOUSING CODE
      
1462.   ICC International Property Maintenance Code
      
1464.   National Electrical Contractors Association, Tri-County, Minimum
Residential Rewire Electrical Code
TITLE TEN: COMMERCIAL MAINTENANCE CODE
      
1476.   Minimum Requirements
      
1478.   Rental Property Registration Program
      
1479.   Licensing Procedures and Regulations for Short-Term Rental Units
TITLE TWO: BUILDING STANDARDS
CHAPTER 1402: RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE OF OHIO FOR ONE-,
TWO- AND THREE-FAMILY DWELLINGS
Section
1402.01   Code application and enforcement.
1402.02   File and distribution copies.
1402.03   Conformity required.
1402.04   Exceptions and amendments.
1402.05   Conflict of laws.
1402.99   Penalty.
Editor’s note:
This chapter was originally titled “Akron Building Code”. It was re-enacted in
its entirety by Ord. 47-1990, passed 2-26-1990, which adopted the CABO One- and
Two-Family Dwelling Code. The OBOA One-, Two- and Three-Family Dwelling Code
was adopted in place of the CABO Code as part of the 1997 updating and revision
of this code of ordinances. The Residential Building Code of Ohio for One-,
Two- and Three-Family Dwellings was adopted in place of the OBOA Code as part
of the 2007 updating and revision of this code of ordinances.
Cross-reference:
   Adoption of technical codes by reference, see Ohio R.C. 731.231
   Ohio Building Code, see B. & H. Ch.
1406
   Removal of unsafe structures, see Ohio R.C. 715.26(B), 715.261
   Required submission of plans of public buildings, see Ohio R.C. 3791.04
§ 1402.01 CODE APPLICATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   The Residential Building Code of Ohio for One-, Two- and Three-Family
Dwellings, O.A.C. 4101:8-1-01, as promulgated by the Ohio Board of Building
Standards, shall apply and be enforced within the city.
(Prior Code, § 1402.01) (Ord. 221-2006, passed 11-27-2006)
§ 1402.02 FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.
   At least one copy of the Residential Building Code of Ohio for One-, Two-
and Three-Family Dwellings, as adopted in §
1402.01 of this chapter, is on file in the office of the Clerk of Council for
inspection by the public. At least one copy is also on file in the County Law
Library. In addition, the Clerk of Council has copies available for
distribution to the public, at cost.
(Prior Code, § 1402.02)
§ 1402.03 CONFORMITY REQUIRED.
   No building or structure shall be constructed, erected, altered, repaired or
moved, except in conformity with the Residential Code of Ohio for One-, Two-
and Three-Family Dwellings, as adopted in §
1402.01 of this chapter, and the standards set forth therein relating to
structural strength and stability, means of egress, adequate lighting and
ventilation and protection of life and property, shall govern construction
within the city.
(Prior Code, § 1402.03)
§ 1402.04 EXCEPTIONS AND AMENDMENTS.
   The Residential Code of Ohio for One-, Two- and Three-Family Dwellings, as
adopted in §
1402.01 of this chapter, shall not apply to residential structures exceeding
three families, to industrialized one-, two- and three-family dwelling
structures, or to commercial, institutional and industrial buildings and
structures, all of which shall be governed by the provisions of the Ohio
Building Code, as adopted in
Ch. 1404 of this code of ordinances. Permit fees shall be as provided in
Ch. 1444 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1402.04)
§ 1402.05 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   In the event of any conflict between any of the provisions of the
Residential Code of Ohio for One-, Two- and Three-Family Dwellings Code, as
adopted in §
1402.01 of this chapter, and any provision of this Building Code, any other
provision of this code of ordinances or any other local ordinance, the local
provision shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 1402.05)
§ 1402.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of the Residential Code of Ohio for
One-, Two- and Three-Family Dwellings is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree and shall be fined not more than $250 or imprisoned not more than 30
days, or both, for each offense. Unless otherwise provided, a separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or non-
compliance occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 1402.99)
CHAPTER 1404: OHIO BUILDING CODE
Section
1404.01   2017 edition adopted.
1404.02   Purpose.
1404.03   Application generally; Plumbing Code.
1404.04   Enforcement.
1404.05   File and distribution copies.
1404.06   Conflict of laws.
1404.99   Penalty.
Editor’s note:
   This chapter, formerly titled “Ohio Basic Building Code”, was re-titled
“Ohio Building Code” upon the adoption of Ord. 8-2002, passed 1-28-2002.
Cross-reference:
   Adoption of technical codes by reference, see Ohio R.C. 731.231
   Fees for plan approval, see Ohio R.C. 3791.07
   Ohio Building Code, see Ohio R.C. 3781.10
   Ohio State building standards, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3781
   Required submission of plans of public buildings, see Ohio R.C. 3791.04
§ 1404.01 2017 EDITION ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 731.231, there is hereby adopted, by and for the city,
the Ohio Building Code, Ohio Mechanical Code and Ohio Plumbing Code being
particularly the 2017 editions thereof, including all referenced standards, as
adopted by the Ohio Board of Building Standards, Department of Commerce, and as
published in Divisions 4101:1 through 4104:5, and all subsequent relevant
sections, of the Ohio Administrative Code, save and except such portions
thereof as may be hereinafter amended or deleted.
(Prior Code, § 1406.01) (Ord. 8-2002, passed 1-28-2002; Ord. 37-2002, passed 3-
11-2002; Ord. 187-2005, passed 11-28-2005; Ord. 141-2017, passed 11-13-2017)
§ 1404.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Ohio Building Code, as adopted in §
1404.01 of this chapter, is to:
   (A)   Provide uniform standards and requirements for the erection,
construction, repair, alteration and maintenance of buildings, including
construction of industrialized units. Such standards shall relate to the
conservation of energy, safety and sanitation of buildings for their intended
use and occupancy;
   (B)   Formulate such standards and requirements, so far as is practical, in
terms of performance objectives, so as to make adequate performance for the use
intended the test of acceptability;
   (C)   Permit, to the fullest extent feasible, the use of materials and
technical methods, devices and improvements, including the use of
industrialized units that tend to reduce the cost of construction and erection
without affecting minimum requirements for health, safety and security of the
occupants or users of buildings or industrialized units and without
preferential treatment of types or classes of materials or products or methods
of construction; and
   (D)   Encourage, so far as may be practical, the standardization of
construction practices, methods, equipment, material and techniques, including
methods employed to produce industrialized units.
(Prior Code, § 1406.02) (Ord. 8-2002, passed 1-28-2002)
§ 1404.03 APPLICATION GENERALLY; PLUMBING CODE.
   (A)   The Ohio Building Code applies to all buildings, except as follows:
      (1)   Single-family, two-family and three-family dwelling houses which
are not constructed of industrialized units, except for the energy conservation
provisions required in “Chapter 13, Energy Conservation” of the Ohio Building
Code; (See Ohio R.C. 3781.06, 3781.181 and 3781.182.)
      (2)   Buildings owned by and used for a function of the United States
government;
      (3)   Existing buildings where their location, parts, equipment and other
items do not constitute a serious hazard, unless otherwise regulated by the
provisions of Ch. 34, “Existing Structures” of the Ohio Building Code;
      (4)   Buildings constructed in accordance with plans which have been
approved prior to the effective date of the Ohio Building Code;
      (5)   Buildings or structures which are incident to the use for
agricultural purposes of the land on which said buildings or structures are
located; provided, such buildings or structures are not used in the business of
retail trade. For the purposes of this section, a building or structure is not
considered used in the business of retail trade if 50% or more of the gross
income received from sales of products in the building or structure by the
owner or operator is from sales of products produced or raised in a normal crop
year on farms owned or operated by the seller; (See Ohio R.C. 3781.06 and
3781.061.)
      (6)   Agricultural labor camps, as defined in Ohio R.C. 3733.41;
      (7)   Single-family, two-family and three-family detached dwelling houses
for which applications have been submitted to the Ohio Director of Human
Services pursuant to Ohio R.C. 5104.03 for the purposes of operating Type A
family day-care homes as defined in Ohio R.C. 5104.01; and
      (8)   Buildings or structures which are designed, constructed and
maintained in accordance with federal standards and regulations and are used
primarily for federal and state military purposes where the U.S. Secretary of
Defense, pursuant to 10 U.S.C. §§ 18231 et seq., has:
         (a)   Acquired, by purchase, lease or transfer, and constructs,
expands, rehabilitates or corrects and equips, such buildings or structures as
he or she determines to be necessary to carry out the purposes of 10 U.S.C. §§
18231 et seq.;
         (b)   Contributed to the state such amounts for the acquisition,
construction, expansion, rehabilitation and conversion by the state of such
additional buildings or structures as he or she determines to be required
because of the failure of existing facilities to meet the purposes of 10 U.S.C.
§§ 18231 et seq.; or
         (c)   Contributed to the State of Ohio such amounts for the
construction, alteration or rehabilitation of arms storage rooms as he or she
determines to be required to meet a change in U.S. Department of Defense
standards relating to the safekeeping of arms.
   (B)   The Ohio Plumbing Code, being Ch. 4101:3-1 et seq. of the Ohio
Building Code, as adopted in §
1404.01 of this chapter, is hereby expressly made applicable to all buildings
and structures in the city, including non-industrialized one-, two- and three-
family dwellings, but excluding those buildings and structures referred to in
divisions (A)(2) through (A)(8) above.
(Prior Code, § 1406.03) (Ord. 8-2002, passed 1-28-2002)
§ 1404.04 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Prior to enforcement of Ohio R.C. Ch. 3781 and 3791, or any rules
adopted pursuant thereto, including the Ohio Building Code, as adopted in §
1404.01 of this chapter, by any remedy, civil or criminal, the municipality
shall issue an adjudication order within the meaning of Ohio R.C. 119.06 to
119.13 or a stop work order as provided in O.A.C. 4101:2-1-36.
   (B)   Every adjudication order shall specify what appliances, site
preparations, additions or alterations to structures, plans, materials,
assemblages or procedures are necessary for the same to comply with Ohio R.C.
Ch. 3781 and 3791 and/or any rules adopted pursuant thereto, including the
provisions of the Ohio Building Code adopted in §
1404.01 of this chapter.
   (C)   Upon the issuance of any order provided for herein or in O.A.C. 4101:
2-1-36, the person receiving such order shall cease work upon the site
preparations or structure to be constructed, or, in the case of an
industrialized unit, the installation of the unit or shall cease using the
appliance, materials, assemblages or manufactured product identified in the
order until such time as the appeal provided for in accordance with the
provisions of Ohio R.C. 3781.19 and all appeals from such hearing, have been
completed, or the order herein has been released.
   (D)    Failure to cease work after receipt of a stop work order as provided
in O.A.C. 4101:2-1-36 is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 1406.04) (Ord. 8-2002, passed 1-28-2002)
§ 1404.05 FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.
   At least one copy of the Ohio Building Code adopted in §
1404.01 of this chapter is on file with the Clerk of Council for inspection by
the public. At least one copy of such code is also on file in the County Law
Library. In addition, the Clerk of Council shall keep copies of such code
available for distribution to the public at cost.
(Prior Code, § 1406.05) (Ord. 8-2002, passed 1-28-2002)
§ 1404.06 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   (A)   Whenever a provision of the Ohio Building Code, as adopted in §
1404.01 of this chapter, conflicts with a provision of the Ohio Fire Code or
any other order, standard or rule of the Ohio Department of Commerce, Division
of State Fire Marshal, the provision of the Ohio Building Code shall control;
except that, rules adopted and orders issued by the Fire Marshal pursuant to
Ohio R.C. Ch. 3743 prevail in the event of a conflict.
(ORC 3781.11(B))
   (B)   Whenever a provision of the Ohio Building Code, as adopted in §
1404.01 of this chapter, conflicts with a provision of any other standard
technical code adopted by the municipality, other than as provided in division
(A) above, or any ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of Council, the
stricter standard shall control.
   (C)   When a special provision is made in a use group classification of the
Ohio Building Code and is inconsistent with a general provision of the Ohio
Building Code relating to buildings generally, the special provision governs,
unless it appears that the provisions are cumulative.
(Prior Code, § 1406.06) (Ord. 8-2002, passed 1-28-2002)
§ 1404.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of the Ohio Building Code, as adopted
in §
1404.01 of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and
shall be fined not more than $250 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both,
for each offense. Unless otherwise provided, a separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation or non-compliance occurs or
continues.
(Prior Code, § 1406.99) (Ord. 50-1990, passed 2-26-1990; Ord. 8-2002, passed 1-
28-2002)
CHAPTER 1406: NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE
Section
1406.01   2005 edition adopted.
1406.02   Purpose.
1406.03   Conflict of laws.
1406.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Adoption of technical codes by reference, see Ohio R.C. 731.231
   Electricity generally, see S.U. & P.S. Ch.
1052
   Electrical registration, see B. & H. Ch.
1422,
Ch. 1424
   Electric sign licensing, see B. & H. Ch.
1430
   Electric wiring permit and inspection fees, see B. & H.
1444.02,
1444.16
§ 1406.01 2005 EDITION ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 731.231, there is hereby adopted, by and for the city,
the National Electrical Code, promulgated by the National Fire Protection
Association, being particularly the 2005 edition thereof, designated NFPA No.
70-2002, save and except Art. 80 of the Electric Code and, such portions
thereof as may be hereinafter amended or deleted.
(Prior Code, § 1408.01) (Ord. 9-2002, passed 1-28-2002; Ord. 187-2005, passed
11-28-2005)
§ 1406.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the National Electrical Code, as adopted in §
1406.01 of this chapter, is to establish rules and regulations governing
electrical materials and installations in dwelling units of one-, two- and
three-family dwellings, mobile homes and multi-family dwellings and commercial
and industrial occupancy in the city.
(Prior Code, § 1408.02)
§ 1406.03 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   In the event of a conflict between a provision of the National Electrical
Code, as adopted in §
1406.01 of this chapter, and a provision of any other technical code adopted by
the city, the stricter standard shall prevail. In the event of a conflict
between a provision of such code and state law, excluding the Ohio Building
Code, but including the Ohio Fire Code, the state law shall prevail. In the
event of a conflict between a provision of such code and a city ordinance,
resolution, rule or regulation, the city ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 1408.04) (Ord. 8-2002, passed 1-28-2002)
§ 1406.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of the National Electrical Code is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and shall be fined not more than
$250 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both, for each offense. Unless
otherwise provided, a separate offense shall be deemed committed each day
during or on which a violation or non-compliance occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 1408.99) (Ord. 49-1990, passed 2-26-1990)
TITLE FOUR: LICENSING OF TRADESMEN
CHAPTER 1422: REGISTRATION IN GENERAL
Section
1422.01   Definitions.
1422.02   Registration required.
1422.03   Home owner exemptions.
1422.04   Registration fees; insurance.
1422.05   Registration expiration and renewal.
1422.06   Registration issuance.
1422.07   Qualifications of applicant.
1422.08   Plant registration.
1422.09   Registration revocation and suspension.
1422.10   Appeals from decisions of Review Committee.
1422.11   Restrictions and exemptions.
1422.12   Responsibility of registrant.
1422.13   Termination of representation.
1422.14   Termination of employment.
1422.15   Continuation of registration.
1422.16   Enforcement.
1422.99   Penalty.
Editors’ note:
This chapter, formerly titled “Licensing in General”, was re-titled
“Registration in General” upon the adoption of Ord. 10-2002, passed 1-28-2002.
Cross-reference:
   Board of Zoning and Building Appeals, see CHTR. §
6.02
   Division of Building Inspection, see B. & H. Ch.
1442
   Electrical, Warm-Air Heating and Plumbing Boards, see CHTR. §
6.04(c)
   Establishment of boards by Council, see CHTR. §
6.05
   Power to license plumbers, electricians, sewer tappers and the like, see
Ohio R.C. 715.27
§ 1422.01 DEFINITIONS.
   All terms, words and phrases used in this Title Four, which are defined in
the Residential Building Code of Ohio as adopted in §
1402.01 of this code of ordinances, shall be so defined for the purposes of
this title, and the definitions used in such code are hereby enacted and made a
part of this title.
(Prior Code, § 1422.01) (Ord. 51-1990, passed 2-26-1990; Ord. 10-2002, passed
1-28-2002; Ord. 32-2011, passed 5-9-2011)
§ 1422.02 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in, advertise for or present himself or herself as
being in the general contracting, electrical, HVAC, plumbing or sewer laying
business or trade in the city without first obtaining a registration as
provided for in this Title Four, nor shall any firm or corporation engage in,
advertise for or otherwise present itself as being in the general contracting,
electrical, HVAC, plumbing or sewer laying business or trade in the city unless
such firm or corporation employs full time, in a supervisory capacity, a holder
of a registration as required in this Title Four.
(Prior Code, § 1422.02) (Ord. 51-1990, passed 2-26-1990; Ord. 10-2002, passed
1-28-2002; Ord. 32-2011, passed 5-9-2011)
§ 1422.03 HOME OWNER EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Nothing in this Title Four shall be interpreted to require a
registration from a bona fide owner who occupies a single-family dwelling and
who personally performs work upon the premises occupied by him or her as his or
her established residence. Such owner shall be issued a permit for such work if
he or she satisfactorily qualifies therefor through an oral test given by the
appropriate inspector of the Division of Building Inspection relating to such
work.
   (B)   A vacant dwelling or an occupied dwelling that is for sale or being
purchased on land contract is not considered an owner-occupied single-family
dwelling. For work upon such dwellings, a contractor registered by the city
shall be required to obtain a permit.
   (C)   All such work shall be done in conformity with the provisions of this
Building and Housing Code and the laws of the state, and no work shall be done
unless all permits required by this Building and Housing Code are obtained.
(Prior Code, § 1422.03) (Ord. 160-1992, passed 10-26-1992; Ord. 10-2002, passed
1-28-2002)
§ 1422.04 REGISTRATION FEES; INSURANCE.
   (A)   All fees for registration obtained under this Title Four shall be paid
to the Treasurer of the city at the municipal building.
   (B)   All fees shall be paid at the time of application for the
registration. Renewal fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of the renewal.
   (C)   The initial fee for a general contractor’s, an electrical
contractor’s, master plumber’s, HVAC contractor’s or limited work electrical
contractor’s registration shall be $150. The renewal fee for each registration
shall be $150 annually, except as provided in §
1422.05 of this chapter.
   (D)   The fee for a plant registration and a blanket permit for electrical,
plumbing or HVAC systems installed, altered or added to under the provisions of
such registration shall be $200 for each year, except as provided in §
1422.05 of this chapter, and except that additional permit fees shall be paid
as provided for in this Building Code for installations, alterations or
additions permitted in §
1422.11 of this chapter.
   (E)   The initial fee for a sewer layer’s registration shall be $150. The
renewal fee shall be $150, except as provided in §
1422.05 of this chapter.
   (F)   Within the corporate limits of the city, no person shall engage in a
general contracting, an electric, plumbing or HVAC contracting business until
such person has filed with the City Auditor a public liability policy,
indemnifying the city and its officials, in the sum of $300,000 for the injury
or death of any person and $100,000 for property damage.
   (G)   Late fees shall be $75 after March 31.
(Prior Code, § 1422.04) (Ord. 51-1990, passed 2-26-1990; Ord. 160-1992, passed
10-26-1992; Ord. 10-2002, passed 1-28-2002; Ord. 185-2005, passed 11-28-2005;
Ord. 32-2011, passed 5-9-2011; Ord. 147-2020, passed 12-21-2020)
§ 1422.05 REGISTRATION EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL.
   All registrations shall expire at 12:00 midnight on March 31 of each year
and no permit shall be granted until a registration has been secured for the
ensuing year. Renewals may be made for the ensuing year upon the surrender of
the previous year’s registration and payment of the prescribed fee to the city,
as provided in §
1422.04 of this chapter; except that, the fee for the renewal of the
registration shall be $150 if not renewed on or before April 30 of the year
following the expiration date; and, except that, the fee for the renewal of a
sewer layer’s license after such date shall be $150 and the fee for the renewal
of a plant license shall be $250. The renewal application for a plant
registration must show the name of the registration for the previous year and
the ensuing year. Should a registration not be renewed before April 30 of the
year following its expiration date, its holder shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter applying to persons who have not qualified for a
registration.
(Prior Code, § 1422.05) (Ord. 182-1994, passed 12-19-1994; Ord. 10-2002, passed
1-28-2002; Ord. 32-2011, passed 5-9-2011; Ord. 147-2020, passed 12-21-2020)
§ 1422.06 REGISTRATION ISSUANCE.
   Unless otherwise provided, no registration provided for in this Title Four
shall be issued except in accordance with the methods and standards provided
for in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1422.06) (Ord. 51-1990, passed 2-26-1990; Ord. 10-2002, passed
1-28-2002)
§ 1422.07 QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANT.
   The applicant for a registration under this Title Four shall have a current
state certificate for the trade in which he or she applies for registration,
except for an applicant for a general contracting or sewer layer’s registration
who needs only to complete the registration form and verify one year of
practical experience.
(Prior Code, § 1422.07) (Ord. 10-2002, passed 1-28-2002; Ord. 32-2011, passed
5-9-2011)
§ 1422.08 PLANT REGISTRATION.
   (A)   An applicant for a plant registration shall hold an engineering degree
from an accredited college or university in the business or trade in which he
or she applied to be registered or shall possess a state certificate.
   (B)   As used in this Title Four, PLANT means a commercial or industrial
building, buildings or premises or parts thereof, under single management,
where business or manufacturing is being conducted, where the managing agency
maintains constantly an Engineering Department, with a person with an
engineering degree from an accredited college or university, in the specific
branch of the trade for which a registration is desired, and in which one or
more persons are steadily employed for installing, altering, repairing,
replacing or adding to a plumbing, drainage, electrical or heating system for
which a registration is required by the Ohio Building Code.
(Prior Code, § 1422.09) (Ord. 51-1990, passed 2-26-1990; Ord. 182-1994, passed
12-19-1994; Ord 10-2002, passed 1-28-2002)
§ 1422.09 REGISTRATION REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION.
   (A)   The Building Commissioner shall create a review committee of
registered contractors consisting of two registered contractors from
electrical, HVAC and plumbing to hear any complaints arising against any
person, firm or corporation registered by the city in the electrical, HVAC,
plumbing or sewer laying business or trade and shall have the power, after
hearing, to revoke or suspend the registration for the following reasons:
      (1)   Violation of any of the provisions of this Building Code;
      (2)   Misrepresentation of material facts in obtaining a registration or
renewal thereof;
      (3)   Failure to secure the permits, inspections and approvals required
by this Building Code;
      (4)   Use of such registration to obtain a permit for another; or
      (5)   Failure or refusal to correct promptly an installation or part
thereof made in an incompetent or improper manner, after notice thereof by a
duly appointed Inspector of the Division of Building Inspection, or in
violation of any of the provisions of the Ohio Building Code.
   (B)   Notice of the hearing before the Registered Contractors Review
Committee stating the grounds of the complaint must be given to the registrant
in writing by registered mail at least ten days before the date of the hearing.
   (C)   The Review Committee shall have the power to adopt the necessary rules
and regulations for conducting matters.
   (D)   All complaints against any person, firm or corporation, and all
questions, papers, answer papers and other data forming the basis of the Review
Committee’s complaint dismissal, suspension or revocation of a registration
shall be kept on file in the Division of Building Inspection for at least one
year after receipt thereof in the Division.
   (E)   Violation of any of the provisions of the Ohio Building Code, which
code, for this purpose, shall be considered a part of this Title Four, shall be
sufficient grounds for the suspension or revocation of any registration issued
hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 1422.11) (Ord. 51-1990, passed 2-26-1990; Ord. 10-2002, passed
1-28-2002; Ord. 32-2011, passed 5-9-2011)
§ 1422.10 APPEALS FROM DECISIONS OF REVIEW COMMITTEE.
   A decision of the Review Committee denying, suspending or revoking a
registration or any decision adversely affecting a registrant or others may be
appealed to the Board of Zoning and Building Appeals in the same manner as the
decision of the Building Commissioner as provided in § R-107, Right of Appeal,
of The Residential Building Code of Ohio, as adopted in §
1402.01 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1422.13) (Ord. 51-1990, passed 2-26-1990; Ord. 10-2002, passed
1-28-2002; Ord. 32-2011, passed 5-9-2011)
§ 1422.11 RESTRICTIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.
   A plant engineer shall be solely employed by the registration holder. No
plant registration shall be sold, transferred or loaned to be used by other
than its holder. No plant registration shall entitle its holder or designee to
act as a contractor in the trade or business for which such plant registration
is issued. The plant registration shall entitle its holder to make
installations, alterations or additions in buildings which the registration
holder occupies as owner or lessee, provided such installation, alterations or
additions are performed under the supervision of the person designated in such
registration; except that, permit fees as set forth in the Ohio Building Code
shall be required for any major additions or major alterations in old buildings
and all initial installations, additions or alterations in new buildings. No
plant registration shall entitle its holder to make installations or additions
on premises or parts thereof not occupied by the registration holder or a
lessee thereof.
(Prior Code, § 1422.14) (Ord. 182-1994, passed 12-19-1994; Ord. 10-2002, passed
1-28-2002; Ord. 32-2011, passed 5-9-2011)
§ 1422.12 RESPONSIBILITY OF REGISTRANT.
   A holder of a plant registration, through its qualified representative,
shall be held responsible for all work done under its registration and is
subject to the penalties provided for in this Title Four. All work is subject
to suspension or revocation at any time in accordance with the provisions of §
1422.09 of this chapter upon failure to comply with any of the requirements of
the Ohio Building Code.
(Prior Code, § 1422.15) (Ord. 51-1990, passed 2-26-1990; Ord. 10-2002, passed
1-28-2002; Ord. 32-2011, passed 5-9-2011)
§ 1422.13 TERMINATION OF REPRESENTATION.
   If a representative should, at any time, terminate his or her relationship
with the plant he or she represents, then such plant shall file an application
for its plant registration through another qualified applicant. Such plant may
be granted permission to do its own work for a period of 60 days to allow the
registration of such applicant; provided that, a person whose qualifications
are acceptable to the appropriate inspector is designated by such plant to act
as its temporary representative and supervisor for such period. Should the
applicant become eligible as provided for in this chapter, the registration may
be retained by the plant without further fee until the date of expiration. A
representative who terminates his or her relationship with a plant may act as a
qualified representative of another plant upon notification in writing to the
Building Commissioner as long as the new plant is currently registered with the
Building Department. A registered contractor or plumber may act as a plant
representative.
(Prior Code, § 1422.16) (Ord. 51-1990, passed 2-26-1990; Ord. 10-2002, passed
1-28-2002; Ord. 32-2011, passed 5-9-2011)
§ 1422.14 TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT.
   Registrations are not transferable, but the registration of any member,
officer or supervisory employee of a firm or corporation shall be sufficient to
qualify the firm or corporation to engage in the business or trade for which
registration application has been made. Should the holder of the registration,
through which a firm or corporation engages in the business or trade, terminate
his or her relationship with such firm or corporation, such firm or corporation
may continue in the business or trade for which the registration was issued;
provided that, within 60 days from the date of the termination of employment,
some other member, officer or supervisory employee of the firm or corporation
obtains a registration to continue in the business. During the 60 days interim
period, such firm or corporation may continue in the business or trade for
which the registration was issued, provided it has in its employ, in a
supervisory capacity, a person whose qualifications are acceptable to the
appropriate Inspector in the Division of Building Inspection for that trade or
business.
(Prior Code, § 1422.17) (Ord. 51-1990, passed 2-26-1990; Ord. 10-2002, passed
1-28-2002)
§ 1422.15 CONTINUATION OF REGISTRATION.
   A person, firm or corporation holding a general contractor’s, an electrical,
HVAC, master plumber’s or sewer layer’s registration at the time of the
effective date of this section may continue to hold such registration until its
expiration date, and may renew it; provided, however, that, the registration of
a firm or corporation shall be renewed by and to the person through whom it was
formerly held by such firm or corporation, except as provided in §
1422.14 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1422.175) (Ord. 51-1990, passed 2-26-1990; Ord. 10-2002, passed
1-28-2002; Ord. 32-2011, passed 5-9-2011)
§ 1422.16 ENFORCEMENT.
   This Title Four shall be enforced by the Building Commissioner or any
employee of the Division of Building Inspection and by any other officer
designated by the ordinances of the city to enforce municipal laws and
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 1422.18)
§ 1422.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this Title Four is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree and shall be fined not more than $250 or
imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both, for each offense. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or non-
compliance occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 1422.99) (Ord. 51-1990, passed 2-26-1990)
CHAPTER 1424: ELECTRICAL REGISTRATION
Section
1424.01   “Electrical wiring” defined; exemptions.
1424.02   Classification of registrations.
1424.03   Public utilities and similar companies; requirements and exemptions.
Editor’s note:
   This chapter, formerly titled, “Electrical Licensing”, was re-titled
“Electrical Registration” upon the adoption of Ord. 10-2002, passed 1-28-2002.
Cross-reference:
   Electrical system inspections, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3783
   Public utility franchises, see CHTR. §
9.01
   Registration provisions, see B. & H. Ch.
1422
   Trailer and tourist camps, see B. R. & T.
860.11
§ 1424.01 “ELECTRICAL WIRING” DEFINED; EXEMPTIONS.
   As used in this chapter, ELECTRICAL WIRING means all electrical conductors,
wiring methods, fixture outlets, equipment, devices and gaseous tubes
installed, used or to be used or maintained in the city. The term does not,
however, include, and registration and permits, therefore, shall not be
required for: the replacement of fuses, lamps, wall switches, receptacles and
sockets; the attachment of portable appliances, motors and other devices when
the same are not attached to permanent wiring; the wiring which is an integral
part of machinery, appliances, apparatus and vehicles; and wiring otherwise
exempted in this Building Code.
(Prior Code, § 1424.01) (Ord. 51-1990, passed 2-26-1990; Ord. 10-2002, passed
1-28-2002)
§ 1424.02 CLASSIFICATION OF REGISTRATIONS.
   There shall be four types of electrical registrations as follows:
   (A)   An electrical contractor’s registration, which is a registration for
any person, other than those provided for in divisions (B), (C) and (D) below,
who proceeds with or employs others for the installation, alteration, repair of
or addition to any electrical wiring within the limits of the city. A firm or
corporation may engage in the business of electrical contracting; provided
that, such firm or corporation regularly and steadily employs in a supervisory
capacity the holder of an electrical contractor’s registration as provided
herein. No registration holder shall be in the employ of more than one such
firm or corporation at the same time;
   (B)   A plant electrical registration, as provided in by §
1422.08 of this code of ordinances;
   (C)   A limited premises electrical registration, as provided in §
1422.08 of this code of ordinances; and
   (D)   A limited work electrical registration, which is a registration
limited to specific electrical work to be done under special registration,
which work shall be definitely set out in the application and on the
registration issued. The application for such registration shall be the same as
for a plant registration or limited premises registration as provided in §
1422.08 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1424.02) (Ord. 51-1990, passed 2-26-1990; Ord. 10-2002, passed
1-28-2002)
§ 1424.03 PUBLIC UTILITIES AND SIMILAR COMPANIES; REQUIREMENTS AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Any public utility or company engaged in the manufacture, transmission
or distribution of electrical energy for commercial purposes, and any person,
firm or corporation primarily engaged in the business of transmission of
signals, communications or intelligence, are exempt from permit and
registration fees for installing, altering or adding to electrical wiring which
is for the exclusive use of the manufacture, transmission and distribution of
electrical energy. All such work shall be done in accordance with the currently
published rules and regulations of the National Electrical Code and the
National Safety Code as approved by the American Standards Association and
under the supervision of a qualified electrical engineer, registered by the
state. All work is subject to inspection and approval of the Electrical
Inspection Division at any time. For overhead and underground electric service
this exemption is limited to the service facilities on property owned or leased
or for which easement has been procured exclusively by the public electric
utility company.
   (B)   Permit fees shall be paid to the city as provided in Ch. 1444 of this
code of ordinances for the initial electric wiring installed in a building or
part thereof used or to be used solely for the manufacture of electrical
energy. A registration and permit fee shall be required for installing, adding
or altering electrical wiring in any building or part thereof not used or not
to be used solely for the manufacture or transmission of electrical energy for
use by others.
(Prior Code, § 1424.03) (Ord. 51-1990, passed 2-26-1990; Ord. 10-2002, passed
1-28-2002)
CHAPTER 1426: HEATING, VENTILATION AND AIR CONDITIONING
Section
1426.01   “HVAC” defined.
1426.02   Classification of registrations.
1426.03   Second opinion for defective equipment.
1426.99   Penalty.
Editor’s note:
This chapter, formerly titled “Warm-Air Heating Licensing”, was re-titled
“Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning (HVAC) Registration” upon the
adoption of Ord. 10-2002, passed 1-28-2002.
Cross-reference:
   Air pollution, see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 610
   Bureau of Fire Prevention, see F. P.
1604.05
   Registration provisions, see B. & H. Ch.
1422
   Venting of heaters and burners, see GEN. OFF.
660.01
§ 1426.01 “HVAC” DEFINED.
   As used in this chapter, HVAC means the installation, alteration, addition
to, repair or replacement of warm-air heating, ventilation and/or air
conditioning equipment, used or to be used in any building within the city,
unless exempted elsewhere in this Title Four or in this Building Code. The
construction, installation, alteration and repair of all solid and liquid fuel
burning equipment, or any equipment pertaining thereto, is further governed by
Ch. 610 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1426.01) (Ord. 51-1990, passed 2-26-1990; Ord. 10-2002, passed
1-28-2002)
§ 1426.02 CLASSIFICATION OF REGISTRATIONS.
   There shall be three types of HVAC registrations, as follows:
   (A)   An HVAC contractor shall be any person who proceeds with or has charge
of the installation of HVAC work in any building within the city. A firm or
corporation can act as an HVAC contractor; provided, such firm or corporation
regularly and steadily employs, in a supervisory capacity, the holder of an
HVAC contractor’s registration as provided herein. No registration holder shall
be in the same employ of more than one such firm or corporation at the same
time;
   (B)   A plant HVAC registration, as provided in §
1422.08 of this code of ordinances; and
   (C)   A limited premises HVAC registration, as provided in §
1422.08 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1426.02) (Ord. 51-1990, passed 2-26-1990; Ord. 10-2002, passed
1-28-2002)
§ 1426.03 SECOND OPINION FOR DEFECTIVE EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   If a registered HVAC contractor or his or her representative finds
that the heat exchanger of space heating equipment is leaking products of
combustion into the environmental air or that space heating equipment is
otherwise so defective as to require replacement, the contractor must advise
the property owner, or his or her agent, in writing, that the leaking or
defective condition may be verified upon request at no charge by the Building
Inspection Department or the Fire Department.
   (B)   Forms for the purpose of this notification shall be furnished by the
Building Department.
(Prior Code, § 1426.05) (Ord. 40-1977, passed 2-21-1977; Ord. 10-2002, passed
1-28-2002)
§ 1426.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates §
1426.03 of this chapter shall be fined not more than $100.
(Prior Code, § 1426.99) (Ord. 40-1977, passed 2-21-1977)
CHAPTER 1428: PLUMBING REGISTRATION
Section
1428.01   “Plumbing installation” defined.
1428.02   Classification of registrations.
Editor’s note:
This chapter, formerly titled “Plumbing Licensing”, was re-titled “Plumbing
Registration” upon the adoption of Ord. 10-2002, passed 1-28-2002.
Cross-reference:
   Municipal authority to license, see Ohio R.C. 715.27
   Ohio Plumbing Code, see O.A.C. 4101:3-1 et seq.
   Registration provisions, see B. & H. Ch.
1422
   Trailer and tourist camps, see B.R. & T.
860.11
§ 1428.01 “PLUMBING INSTALLATION” DEFINED.
   As used in this chapter, PLUMBING INSTALLATIONS means all pipes which are or
may be connected to a sewer or water system; all plumbing methods, fixtures,
equipment and devices; and the repair, replacement, alteration, construction or
addition to any drain, soil waste, water or vent pipe within the city, unless
exempted elsewhere in this Title Four or in this Building Code. The term does
not include a water supply system used for industrial purposes which is not
connected to a city water system.
(Prior Code, § 1428.01) (Ord. 51-1990, passed 2-26-1990)
§ 1428.02 CLASSIFICATION OF REGISTRATIONS.
   (a)   There shall be four types of plumbing registrations, as follows:
      (1)   A master plumber shall be any person who proceeds with or employs
others to make any mechanical connection to a sewer or water pipe or system or
to repair, alter, construct or add to any drain, soil waste, water or vent pipe
in or about any building, structure or premises of any kind or class, used or
to be used for any purpose whatsoever;
      (2)   A sewer layer shall be any person who proceeds with or employs
others to install or lay sewers from the main or property line to a point ten
feet from the front or side of a building or foundation wall;
      (3)   A plant plumbing registration, as provided in §
1422.08 of this code of ordinances; and
      (4)   A limited premises plumbing registration, as provided in §
1422.08 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent a registered
master plumber from engaging in the business of sewer laying.
   (C)   A firm or corporation can engage in the plumbing or in the sewer
laying trade or business provided that the firm or corporation regularly and
steadily employs, in a supervisory capacity, the holder of a master plumber’s
or a sewer layer’s registration as provided herein. No registration holder
shall be in the employ of more than one such firm or corporation at the same
time.
(Prior Code, § 1428.02) (Ord. 36-1976, passed 2-16-1976; Ord. 51-1990, passed
2-26-1990; Ord. 10-2002, passed 1-28-2002)
CHAPTER 1430: SIGN LICENSING
Section
1430.01   Definitions.
1430.02   Erection, repair or alteration by owner.
1430.03   Exceptions.
1430.04   Bond and insurance required.
1430.05   License required.
1430.06   License application.
1430.07   License fee.
1430.08   License expiration and renewal.
1430.09   License suspension and revocation.
1430.10   Lapsing of bond or insurance.
1430.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Advertising and billposting, see B.R. & T.
Ch. 804
   Advertising on private and public property, see GEN. OFF.
642.26
   Advertising on State and interstate highways, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 5516
   Authority of Municipality to regulate, see Ohio R.C. 715.27
   Political signs, see GEN. OFF.
642.27
   Power to regulate advertising, see Ohio R.C. 715.65
§ 1430.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL SIGN BUSINESS. The painting, constructing, erecting, repairing
and/or altering of one or more signs, but does not include any such work on
electric signs, ground bulletins, roof bulletins or wall bulletins.
   ELECTRIC SIGN BUSINESS. The painting, constructing, erecting, removing,
repairing and/or altering of one or more signs, but does not include any such
work on ground bulletins, roof bulletins or wall bulletins.
   OUTDOOR ADVERTISING BUSINESS. The painting, constructing, erecting,
removing, maintaining, repairing and/or altering of one or more signs, ground
bulletins, roof bulletins or wall bulletins.
(Prior Code, § 1430.01) (Ord. 43-1963, passed 5-20-1963)
§ 1430.02 ERECTION, REPAIR OR ALTERATION BY OWNER.
   (A)   Any owner who paints, constructs, erects, repair or alters one or more
signs at, or to be erected at, his or her residence or place of business shall
not be considered as being in the commercial or electric sign business or in
the outdoor advertising sign business; provided that, such signs are primarily
for the benefit of such owner or his or her place of business; and, provided
further that, the erecting, repairing or altering of such sign is done by the
owner or one or more employees who are regularly employed by such owner and are
not employed primarily for the erection of signs.
   (B)   An owner or his or her employee who constructs, erects, repairs and/or
alters a sign, as permitted in division (A) above, shall be subject to all of
the provisions of this chapter, including the bond and insurance requirements
of §
1430.04 of this chapter, except those provisions which apply to licensing.
(Prior Code, § 1430.02) (Ord. 43-1963, passed 5-20-1963)
§ 1430.03 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
   (A)   Federal, state or municipal signs pertaining to the city, house
numbers or legal notices;
   (B)   Railroad crossing signs, bona fide danger signs or such temporary
emergency non-advertising signs as may be approved by the Building
Commissioner; and
   (C)   Tablets designating such things as the name, the date of erection or
the use of a building, when such tablets are built into the wall of the
building and constructed of bronze, stone or similar incombustible materials.
(Prior Code, § 1430.03) (Ord. 43-1963, passed 5-20-1963)
§ 1430.04 BOND AND INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage, within the corporate limits of the city, in the
outdoor advertising business or the electric sign business until such person
has filed with the City Auditor a bond in the sum of $200,000 and no person
shall engage, within the corporate limits of the city, in the commercial sign
business, and no owner or his or her employee shall construct, erect, repair or
alter a sign which extends over public property, until such person, owner or
employee has filed with the City Auditor a bond in the sum of $100,000, the
condition of such bonds to be that such person so engaged in either the outdoor
advertising business, the electric sign business or the commercial sign
business, within the limits of the city, or such owner or employee who
constructs, erects, repairs or alters a sign which extends over public property
within the limits of the city, shall save and keep the city and its officials
harmless from all damages, liabilities, losses, costs or judgments that may be
claimed against the same by reason of the negligent erection, alteration,
removal or repair of any sign or outdoor advertising display which may be
constructed, erected, removed, repaired or altered in the course of their
respective businesses, or as an owner or employee as mentioned above. In lieu
of such bonds, a public liability policy in the sum of $100,000 covering the
injury or death of one person and in the sum of $200,000 covering the injury or
death of more than one person in any one accident, excluding, however,
employees of such person for those engaged in the outdoor advertising business
and/or the electric sign business, and a public liability policy in the sum of
$50,000 covering the injury or death of one person and in the sum of $100,000
covering the injury or death of more than one person in any one accident,
excluding, however, the employees of such person for those engaged in the
commercial sign business and for an owner or his or her employee who erects a
sign over public property, may be filed with the City Auditor. In addition, any
person engaged in the commercial sign business and any owner or his or her
employee who erects a sign over public property, who elects to file an
insurance policy, as aforesaid, in lieu of the bond, shall also file with the
City Auditor a property damage liability policy in the sum of $50,000 to cover
any injury to or destruction of property other than the property owned, leased,
occupied or used by, or in the care, custody or control of, such person, owner
or employee. Such policies of insurance shall cover jointly the legal liability
of such person or owner and the city and its officials, in connection with the
erection, repair or alteration of any sign or outdoor advertising display. In
the event such person owns or maintains signs or outdoor advertising displays
for outdoor advertising purposes, additional provisions shall be made for the
bond and policy of insurance filed with the City Auditor, covering the
operation, maintenance and existence of such signs or outdoor advertising
displays.
(Prior Code, § 1430.04)
§ 1430.05 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of outdoor advertising, the
electric sign business or the commercial sign business within the city until
such person has obtained a license, as provided in this chapter.
   (B)   The license to engage in the business of outdoor advertising, the
electric sign business or the commercial sign business shall be known as a sign
license and the work performed by a person who has been issued such sign
license shall be limited to the work included in the classification of
commercial sign business, electric sign business or outdoor advertising,
according to which of such classifications is specified on such license, which
classification shall be consistent with the fee paid for such license.
   (C)   The Building Commissioner may, subject to the provisions of §
1430.09 of this chapter, deny the renewal of a license to any person who has
habitually or willfully violated any of the provisions of this chapter which
apply to signs or outdoor advertising displays, or who has failed to comply,
within the time specified, with a reasonable and valid order, properly issued
and served by the Commissioner, to cause compliance with any of such
provisions.
(Prior Code, § 1430.05) (Ord. 43-1963, passed 5-20-1963)
§ 1430.06 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   Application for a sign license shall be made to the Building Commissioner.
The applicant shall be at least 21 years of age and he or she shall furnish the
Commissioner such information as such Commissioner may deem necessary for the
proper enforcement and application of the provisions of this chapter which are
applicable.
(Prior Code, § 1430.06) (Ord. 43-1963, passed 5-20-1963)
§ 1430.07 LICENSE FEE.
   The fee for a sign license shall be as follows.
   (A)   The fee to engage in the commercial sign business shall be $50 per
calendar year.
   (B)   The fee to engage in the electric sign business shall be $75 per
calendar year.
   (C)   The fee to engage in outdoor advertising shall be $100 per calendar
year.
(Prior Code, § 1430.07) (Ord. 51-1990, passed 2-26-1990; Ord. 184-2005, passed
11-28-2005)
§ 1430.08 LICENSE EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL.
   (A)   All sign licenses shall expire at 12:00 midnight, December 31, of the
current year.
   (B)   Sign licenses shall be obtained each year before any work is performed
for which a license is required; except that, a license to engage in outdoor
advertising shall be obtained on or before the expiration of an existing
license held by the applicant for a new license.
(Prior Code, § 1430.08) (Ord. 43-1963, passed 5-20-1963)
§ 1430.09 LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Building Commissioner may suspend the sign license of any person
for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Violation of any of the provisions of this Building Code;
      (2)   Misrepresentation of a material fact in obtaining or renewing such
license;
      (3)   Failure to secure the permits, inspections and approvals required
by this Building Code;
      (4)   Use of such license to obtain a permit for another;
      (5)   Failure or refusal to correct promptly an installation or part
thereof which has been made in an incompetent or improper manner, after notice
thereof has been given by a duly appointed inspector of the Division of
Building Inspection, or which is in violation of any of the provisions of this
Building Code;
      (6)   Conviction of a felony involving the moral character of the
licensee; provided that, such suspension or revocation is deemed necessary to
the public interest; and
      (7)   For any other valid reason adversely affecting the health, safety
and welfare of the residents of the city.
   (B)   Written notice of such suspension, signed by the Commissioner, shall
be mailed to the address of the licensee as given in the application for the
license. If the licensee lives outside the city or cannot, after reasonable
search, be located, such notice shall be mailed or handed to his agent or
employee. No person shall perform any work under such license, except such work
as may be authorized by the Commissioner to complete properly or make safe any
work which may have been authorized by a permit issued under such license.
   (C)   When a sign license is denied or suspended by the Commissioner, the
person affected may appeal to the Board of Zoning and Building Appeals. Notice
of intention to appeal shall be filed with the Commissioner within ten days
after a license has been denied or suspended. In addition to the authority of
such Board as set forth in the 1973 Akron Building Code, the Board may revoke
the sign license of the appellant or authorize the discontinuance to the
appellant of building permits for Class J structures and devices as classified
in the Building Code, for any of the reasons listed in division (A) above.
   (D)   Failure to file a notice of intention to appeal within the time herein
specified shall constitute a plea of guilty by the person affected to the
charges or reasons for the denial or suspension of such license and shall be
construed as an admission by such person that the denial or suspension of such
license is justifiable. In such case, such license shall become null and void.
   (E)   When a notice of intention to appeal is filed within the ten days
specified in this section, then the appeal shall be heard and disposed of as
provided for in the Charter.
   (F)   When a sign license is denied a person or when such license is
suspended and a notice of appeal is filed with the Commissioner and such notice
is not transmitted to the members of the Board of Zoning and Building Appeals
or the Board fails to render a decision in the time specified in this chapter,
then the license which has been denied shall be granted or the license which
has been suspended shall be restored when application is made for the same to
the Commissioner.
(Prior Code, § 1430.09)
§ 1430.10 LAPSING OF BOND OR INSURANCE.
   The sign license of any person shall be null and void if the bond or
insurance, required under the provisions of §
1430.04 of this chapter, is found to be faulty or unreliable or is not renewed
or replaced on or before the expiration thereof.
(Prior Code, § 1430.10) (Ord. 43-1963, passed 5-20-1963)
§ 1430.99 PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1422.99 of this code of ordinances for general title penalty if no specific
penalty is provided.
(Prior Code, § 1430.99)
TITLE SIX: ADMINISTRATION; MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1442: DIVISION OF BUILDING INSPECTION
Section
1442.01   Assistant Building Commissioner.
1442.02   Registered engineer or licensed architect.
1442.03   Professional services; plans; specifications and drawings.
1442.04   Reimbursement for cost of examination of plans.
Cross-reference:
   Enforcement of licensing provisions, see B. & H.
1422.16
   Ohio State building standards, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3781; B. & H. Ch.
1406
   Power to regulate building erection, see Ohio R.C. 715.26, 715.29, 737.37
   Required submission of plans of public buildings, see Ohio R.C. 3791.04
§ 1442.01 ASSISTANT BUILDING COMMISSIONER.
   There shall be an Assistant Building Commissioner in the Division of
Building Inspection who, under the direction of the Building Commissioner,
shall perform such duties as may be necessary under this Building Code and
related codes and ordinances of the city. He or she shall be selected by a
competitive civil service examination.
(Prior Code, § 1442.01) (Ord. 110-1954, passed 8-2-1954)
§ 1442.02 REGISTERED ENGINEER OR LICENSED ARCHITECT.
   There shall be a registered professional engineer or a licensed architect in
the Division of Building Inspection who, under the direction of the Building
Commissioner, shall approve design, loads, stresses, strength, stability and
other requirements involving technical analysis. The registered professional
engineer or the licensed architect shall be paid from funds appropriated to the
Division for that purpose.
(Prior Code, § 1442.02) (Ord. 88-1980, passed 4-21-1980)
§ 1442.03 PROFESSIONAL SERVICES; PLANS, SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS.
   Except in the case of one-, two- and three-family dwellings, minor buildings
under 800 square feet in area, minor additions and minor alterations, plans and
specifications should be prepared by the professional engineer or licensed
architect. The Building Commissioner shall require that the unit stress and
live and dead loads used in the design of the building be tabulated on the
structural drawings and that such drawings bear a statement by the designer
certifying that the unit stresses permitted by the Ohio Building Code have not
been exceeded. He or she shall require the structural plans and computations,
including electric wiring, heating and plumbing, to bear the signature of the
registered engineer or the licensed architect in charge of structural design.
(Prior Code, § 1442.03) (Ord. 88-1980, passed 4-21-1980)
§ 1442.04 REIMBURSEMENT FOR COST OF EXAMINATION OF PLANS.
   (A)   The applicant for a building permit who requests approval of plans for
a structure that is governed by the Ohio Building Code shall reimburse the city
for the total cost of the examination of the plans.
   (B)   There shall be a deposit of $30 paid when plans are presented for
examination and approval.
   (C)   If the fee charged for the examination exceeds the deposit fee for
examination, the applicant shall pay the additional amount at the time the
building permit is issued along with all lawful charges for such permit as
provided by ordinances. Unused deposit money may be applied to the cost of the
building permit or refunded to the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 1442.04) (Ord. 88-1980, passed 4-21-1980)
CHAPTER 1444: PERMITS AND FEES
Section
1444.01   Permits required prior to commencing work.
1444.02   Specific permits.
1444.03   Permit applications.
1444.04   Permit information.
1444.05   Submission of specifications and plans; reference to Code compliance;
waiver.
1444.06   Plot plan information.
1444.07   Additional data and plan supplements.
1444.08   Abandonment of applications.
1444.09   Application and plan examination and approval.
1444.10   Permit conditions and rights; commencement of work; site markers;
surface water drainage; lot revision.
1444.11   Permit contents.
1444.12   Refund of expired fees; application of fees to new permits.
1444.13   Plans at work site.
1444.14   Posting and display of permit card at work site.
1444.15   General permit fees.
1444.16   Electric wiring permit fees.
1444.17   Heating, air conditioning, refrigeration and ventilation permit fees.
1444.18   Plumbing permit fees.
1444.19   Permit required for roll-off containers in city right-of-way;
deposit/fee.
1444.99   Penalty.
Editor’s note:
   This chapter was re-enacted in its entirety by Ord. 54-1988, passed 3-28-
1988.
Cross-reference:
   Board of Zoning and Building Appeals, see § 6.02
   Division of Building Inspection, see B.& H. Ch.
1442
   Fees for plan approval, see Ohio R.C. 3791.07
   Registration fees, see B.& H.
1422.04
§ 1444.01 PERMITS REQUIRED PRIOR TO COMMENCING WORK.
   No person shall commence or proceed with any operation regulated by or
included under the provisions of this Building Code, for which a permit is
required, or cause such operation to commence or to proceed, until application
has been made to the Building Commissioner for a permit and the required permit
has been obtained and received; except that, for permits required to be issued
by others in the service of the city, application shall be made to and obtained
from the person required by this Building Code to issue such permit.
(Prior Code, § 1444.01) (Ord. 54-1988, passed 3-28-1988)
§ 1444.02 SPECIFIC PERMITS.
   A separate permit is required to commence or proceed with each operation
regulated by or included under the provisions of this Building Code as follows
(new or reconstruction):
   (A)   To construct or erect a building or structure;
   (B)   To construct or erect an addition to an existing building;
   (C)   To erect, re-erect, place, hang or in any manner display a sign or
outdoor advertising display, except when the same is on the inside of a
building;
   (D)   To make major alterations in or on a building or structure;
   (E)   To repair the structural parts of a building or structure;
   (F)   To erect a chimney, smokestack, flue, factory built fireplace or
masonry fireplace when not included in a permit for a building or structure;
   (G)   To install electrical wiring, electric devices, low voltage and
telecommunications wiring;
   (H)   To perform grading, paving, excavating or fill;
   (I)   To erect a fire escape or exterior stairs when not included in a
permit for a building or structure;
   (J)   To install heating, ventilation, air conditioning (HVAC) systems and/
or equipment;
   (K)   To construct a foundation in advance of a superstructure;
   (L)   To construct structural elements or building shell in the absence of
complete plans;
   (M)   To erect a marquee or canopy;
   (N)   To move a building;
   (O)   To install plumbing and plumbing devices;
   (P)   To raise or lower a building;
   (Q)   To raze or demolish a building or part of a building;
   (R)   To recover the exterior walls and soffits of a building or structure
with other than a liquid protective material;
   (S)   To install solar collectors or generating devices;
   (T)   To install energy conservation devices or materials (except storm
doors and windows);
   (U)   To construct a retaining wall, the top of which will be more than
three feet above the adjoining grade;
   (V)   To install sidewalk elevators or lifts;
   (W)   To install storm or sanitary sewers or laterals outside of public
rights-of-way;
   (X)   To erect a tent or air supported structure of more than 400 square
feet of area;
   (Y)   To construct a vault under a sidewalk;
   (Z)   To install ventilating and exhaust systems;
   (AA)   To occupy a portion of a roadway or a street;
   (BB)   To erect or replace a fence or wall over three feet high;
   (CC)   To erect, install, repair or alter any other structure, appliance or
device for which a permit fee is required by this Building Code (except repairs
to stairs leading to stoops less than 30 inches high);
   (DD)   Fire alarms, detection fire communications or suppression systems;
   (EE)   Installation of storage tanks and miscellaneous structures;
   (FF)   Removal of tanks; and
   (GG)   To tear off and replace all types of roofing materials.
(Prior Code, § 1444.02) (Ord. 54-1988, passed 3-28-1988; Ord. 79-2002, passed
6-10-2002)
§ 1444.03 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   An application to the Building Commissioner for a permit shall be
submitted in such form as the Building Commissioner may prescribe. (See minimum
plan information format and application form.)
   (B)   The application shall be made in writing by the owner or lessee, or
agent of either, or the architect, engineer or builder employed in connection
with the proposed work.
   (C)   The application shall contain the full name and address of the owner,
the contractor and the officer in charge if the owner is a corporate body.
   (D)   The application shall contain the estimated cost, including material
and labor, for which a permit is requested. If an applicant for a permit fails
to give a correct statement of the cost of the work for which a permit is
requested, the Building Commissioner may submit such work to the Board of
Zoning and Building Appeals for an estimate, which is to be determined by the
majority of its members. Such estimate as the Board may so determine shall be
used in the granting of the permit.
   (E)   The application shall describe briefly the proposed work and shall
give such additional information as may be required by the Building
Commissioner for an understanding of the proposed work.
(Prior Code, § 1444.03) (Ord. 54-1988, passed 3-28-1988)
§ 1444.04 PERMIT INFORMATION.
   When applying for a building permit, the applicant shall:
   (A)   Furnish the house number (obtained from the Engineering Division);
   (B)   Furnish the lot number and name of allotment;
   (C)   Furnish a scaled plot plan;
   (D)   Show how roof water is disposed of;
   (E)   Furnish a basement plan showing the thickness of walls, location of
furnace, center-post footings and other footings and size of chimney;
   (F)   Furnish a complete set of floor plans;
   (G)   Furnish at least two elevations on plans;
   (H)   Furnish a complete set of framing plans, showing the size and spacing
of joists, size of beams and the like;
   (I)   Know between what cross streets the building is to be;
   (J)   Furnish heating layout and heat loss;
   (K)   Furnish electric layout, including service placement;
   (L)   Provide north orientation on all applicable plans;
   (M)   Furnish plumbing layout;
   (N)   Furnish computations showing Ohio Energy Code compliance;
   (O)   Furnish the type of construction under this code;
   (P)   Furnish the type of occupancy or use under this code;
   (Q)   Furnish additional information as may be required by the Building
Commissioner;
   (R)   Furnish detailed drawings and specifications of fire suppression
systems; and
   (S)   Furnish detailed drawings and specifications of all fire alarm and
fire communications systems (separate permit required).
(Prior Code, § 1444.04) (Ord. 54-1988, passed 3-28-1988)
§ 1444.05 SUBMISSION OF SPECIFICATIONS AND PLANS; REFERENCE TO CODE COMPLIANCE;
WAIVER.
   Five copies of specifications and of plans and elevations, drawn to scale
with sufficient clarity and detail to show the use of all parts of the building
or structure, and in compliance with this Building Code and other pertinent
laws and ordinances, shall accompany every application; except that, the
Building Commissioner may, at his or her discretion, modify or waive this
requirement when it is evident that the work can, because of its character or
triviality, be sufficiently described in an application.
(Prior Code, § 1444.05) (Ord. 54-1988, passed 3-28-1988)
§ 1444.06 PLOT PLAN INFORMATION.
   A plot plan submitted for a permit to build shall contain the following
information:
   (A)   The elevation of the first floor of the dwelling, or attached garages,
unattached garages and other accessory buildings;
   (B)   The finish curb or crown elevation of the street at the point of
extension of the lot line;
   (C)   The finish grade elevation at each principal corner of the structure;
   (D)   The finish grade elevation at both sides of abrupt changes of grade,
such as retaining walls, slopes and the like;
   (E)   Other elevations that may be necessary to show grading and drainage;
   (F)   The sewer grade and elevation and the location of water mains and
services, which shall be shown and approved by the Engineering Division;
   (G)   The scale of the plot plan, which shall be not less than one inch
equals 20 feet;
   (H)   The lot, lot number and allotment;
   (I)   The dimensions of the plot and north point;
   (J)   The dimensions of front or building lines and rear and side yards;
   (K)   The location and dimensions of garages, carports and other accessory
buildings;
   (L)   The dimensions of all adjacent buildings not separated by a public
street or alley;
   (M)   The location of walls, driveways and approaches;
   (N)   The location of steps, terraces, porches, fences and retaining walls;
   (O)   The locations and dimensions of easements, if any;
   (P)   The location and width of streets and rights-of-way and the type of
street surfaces;
   (Q)   The proposed drainage and curb cuts, which shall be shown and approved
by the Engineering Division; and
   (R)   The location of water, gas and electrical lines under or over rights-
of-way or private property.
(Prior Code, § 1444.06) (Ord. 54-1988, passed 3-28-1988)
§ 1444.07 ADDITIONAL DATA AND PLAN SUPPLEMENTS.
   (A)   The Building Commissioner may require details, computations, stress
diagrams and other data necessary to describe the construction and basis of
calculations. He or she may also require plans showing the location of the
proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on
the site or lot, in accordance with a boundary line survey prepared by a
registered surveyor. For other than dwellings and minor buildings, he or she
shall require that the unit stresses and live loads used in the design of the
building be tabulated on the structural drawings, and that the drawings bear a
statement by the designer certifying that the unit stresses, permitted by this
Building Code, have not been exceeded. He or she shall require structural plans
and computations to bear the signature of the registered architect or
registered engineer in charge of the structural design.
   (B)   The Building Commissioner may require additional and/or supplemental
plans for continued work commenced under previously approved plans where, in
the Building Commissioner’s opinion, material, structural and/or site
alterations have rendered such previously approved plans inadequate or
inappropriate. All work performed pursuant to such additional and/or
supplemental plans shall conform to the requirements of this Building Code as
of the date such additional and/or supplemental plans are approved.
(Prior Code, § 1444.07) (Ord. 54-1988, passed 3-28-1988)
§ 1444.08 ABANDONMENT OF APPLICATIONS.
   An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have
been abandoned 90 days after the date of filing, unless a permit has been
issued before then. After an application has been abandoned, the Building
Commissioner may destroy and dispose of all records, plans and specifications
submitted in connection with the application.
(Prior Code, § 1444.08) (Ord. 54-1988, passed 3-28-1988; Ord. 79-2002, passed
6-10-2002)
§ 1444.09 APPLICATION AND PLAN EXAMINATION AND APPROVAL.
   The Building Commissioner shall examine, or cause to be examined, each
application for a permit, and the plans, specifications and computations which
may be submitted therewith, and it shall be determined by such examination
whether the matter mentioned in the application and indicated, described and
determined in the plans, specifications and computations, is in accordance with
the requirements of the Residential Building Code of Ohio for One-, Two- and
Three-Family Dwellings, for all residential construction and all other
pertinent laws and ordinances. All plans, specifications and computations
submitted to the Building Department, which fall under the jurisdiction of the
Ohio Building Code, shall be reviewed for compliance by a registered Class IV
Plans Examiner as specified in the Ohio Building Code and all other pertinent
laws and ordinances. If the Plans Examiner is satisfied that the plans and
other matters submitted therewith conform to the requirements of the Ohio
Building Code and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he or she shall endorse,
in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans “APPROVED”, and such approval shall
bear the signature of the Plans Examiner and the Building Official who checked
the plans and other matter submitted therewith.
(Prior Code, § 1444.09) (Ord. 54-1988, passed 3-28-1988; Ord. 79-2002, passed
6-10-2002)
§ 1444.10 PERMIT CONDITIONS AND RIGHTS; COMMENCEMENT OF WORK; SITE MARKERS;
SURFACE WATER DRAINAGE; LOT REVISION.
   (A)   All work performed under a permit issued by the Building Commissioner
shall conform to the approved application and plans, and approved amendments
thereof, except as provided in division (B) below.
   (B)   A permit shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work
described therein and shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel,
alter or set aside any of the provisions of the Building Codes, nor shall the
issuance of a permit prevent the Building Commissioner thereafter from
requiring a correction of errors in plans or in construction, or of violations
of the Building Codes. A building permit carries with it the right to install
any crane, derrick, material elevator, material or office shed in a safe manner
which may be required for temporary use during the erection of the building,
except it does not carry the right to use any portion of a street, roadway or
any other public property.
   (C)   Any issued permit becomes invalid unless the work authorized by it
shall be commenced within 90 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized
by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of three months or more
after the time the work is commenced. COMMENCED, as used herein, means any work
initiated for which a permit has been issued and plans therefor have been
approved. However, for good cause, an extension of time may be allowed, in
writing, by the Building Commissioner when applied for by the person to whom
the permit was issued. The request for extension of time shall be filed prior
to the expiration of the initial permit. Each extension shall not be for more
than 90 days and shall have written justification and shall not exceed a total
of 270 days.
   (D)   Before any work for which a permit is required is started on a new
building or on an addition to an existing building, all boundary line
intersections of the site where the building or addition is to be located shall
be marked with permanent markers; except that, if it is not possible to
maintain such markers during construction, accurately located offset markers
may be used. All markers shall be set so as to be readily located at any time
during the construction of the building or structure. Said markers shall be
installed by a licensed surveyor under the laws of the state.
   (E)   All buildings hereafter constructed shall be set at elevations which
will facilitate proper surface water drainage.
      (1)   The established sidewalk grade shall be shown on all applications
to build by the Engineering Division.
      (2)   The sewer grade and elevation shall be shown on all applications to
build by the Engineering Division.
   (F)   The location of all new construction or additions to existing
construction, as shown on the approved plot diagram or an approved amendment
thereof, shall be strictly adhered to.
(Prior Code, § 1444.10) (Ord. 54-1988, passed 3-28-1988; Ord. 79-2002, passed
6-10-2002)
§ 1444.11 PERMIT CONTENTS.
   (A)   The forms for a permit issued by the Building Commissioner shall
consist of the permit and permit card, and shall be such as may be prescribed
by the Building Commissioner.
   (B)   The permit shall contain the name of the owner and of the contractor
and shall describe briefly the work covered by the permit and shall give such
additional information as the Building Commissioner may require for office and
inspection purposes.
(Prior Code, § 1444.11) (Ord. 54-1988, passed 3-28-1988)
§ 1444.12 REFUND OF EXPIRED FEES; APPLICATION OF FEES TO NEW PERMITS.
   A permit under which no work is commenced within 90 days shall expire as
provided for in §
1444.10(C) of this chapter. The fee for a permit which has expired and under
which no work has been done or will be done shall not be refunded, but such fee
may be applied to a new permit for the same applicant if the new permit is
applied for and issued within three months after the issuance of the expired or
unused permit; provided that, the permit receipt and card for the expired or
unused permit is returned to the Division of Building Inspection.
(Prior Code, § 1444.12) (Ord. 54-1988, passed 3-28-1988)
§ 1444.13 PLANS AT WORK SITE.
   One set of approved plans shall be returned to the applicant when the permit
is issued for the work indicated on the plans. This set of plans shall be kept
at the site of the work and shall be available for examination by the Building
Commissioner or his or her assistants at all reasonable times.
(Prior Code, § 1444.13) (Ord. 54-1988, passed 3-28-1988)
§ 1444.14 POSTING AND DISPLAY OF PERMIT CARD AT WORK SITE.
   (A)   No operations requiring a permit shall be commenced until the permit
card therefor is posted in a conspicuous place, near the front of the premises
and in such a position as to permit the inspectors of the Division of Building
Inspection to make the required entries thereon regarding inspection of the
work. The card shall be preserved and remain posted until the completion of the
work for which it was issued.
   (B)   No person shall remove or cover such permit card until the work for
which the card was issued has been approved by the Building Commissioner.
(Prior Code, § 1444.14) (Ord. 54-1988, passed 3-28-1988)
§ 1444.15 GENERAL PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   No permit for which a fee is required by this Building Code shall be
issued until the applicant for the permit has paid to the Building
Commissioner, or to the person otherwise designated by this Building Code, the
fees hereinafter prescribed. Fees shall be calculated to the nearest $1.
   (B)   Each applicant for a permit shall make a sworn statement or
affirmation, in writing, setting forth, in accordance with a bona fide
estimate, the total value of the proposed building, structure, addition,
alteration, repair, or installation, including the cost of any and all
plumbing, electrical, heating and other mechanical equipment, devices,
appliances, materials and the like, which will be incorporated therein, and
also the value of all labor, regardless of who is to do the work or make the
installations.
   (C)   (1)   The fee for a permit for a new building, structure, appliance or
installation; the fee for a permit for an addition, alteration or repair to an
existing building, structure, appliance or installation; the fee for a permit
to move or raze a building or structure; the fee for a special inspection; and
penalties for non- compliance, shall be the amounts stated or determined as
follows:
ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS, REPAIRS AND FOUNDATIONS
ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS, REPAIRS AND FOUNDATIONS
   Certificate of occupancy                                                   $100
   Commercial, industrial and multi-family                                    $225 min. base or $0.08 per sq. ft.
                                                                                 $55
   Decks, front porches                                                       Front porches greater than 60 sq. ft. require a roof and fee shall be as
                                                                                 provided in the entry for “one-, two- and three-family residential”
   Fences, retaining walls over 3 feet high
      Solid                                                                $50
      Decorative                                                           $25
      Repair or replace (less than 50%)                                    $15
   Foundation or shell only
      Commercial                                                           $160, plus new structure fee
      Residential                                                          $30, plus new structure fee
   Meter re-attachment inspection fee                                         $15
   Minor alteration or repair (commercial) $1,000 or less                     $100
   Minor alteration or repair (residential), to include front stoops, $500 or $45
less
   One-, two- and three-family residential                                    $150 min. base or $0.05 per sq. ft.
   Re-siding, re-covering or re-roof (non-structural)                         $60
   Residential garages                                                        $115 (max. 770 sq. ft.)
   Storage shed or barns - residential less than 144 sq. ft.                  $50
   Swimming pools
      Residential                                                          $55
      Commercial                                                           $500
COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND MULTI-FAMILY
   New structure                                                              $500 min. base or $0.05 per sq. ft.
ONE-, TWO- AND THREE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCIES
   New dwellings                                                              $300 - 2,000 sq. ft. or less
                                                                                 $335 over 2,000 sq. ft.
PERMIT RENEWAL FEE                                                                
   Residential                                                                $50
   Non-residential                                                            $100
RESIDENTIAL PROCESSING FEE                                                        
   New homes and additions                                                    $50
   Accessories structures                                                     $25
   Structural alterations                                                     $25
 
      (2)   Any structures, additions, unclassified buildings or unspecified
construction shall have fees provided in the table’s entry for “one-, two- and
three-family residential” for residential and the entry for “commercial,
industrial and multi-family” for commercial.
      (3)   The fee for a permit to erect, re-erect, alter, repair, place,
replace, hang, rehang, locate, relocate or in any manner display or redisplay a
sign or outdoor advertising display shall be based on the total superficial
area (including moldings and cappings) as follows:
 
All signs requiring a permit per the Development $2.50 per sq. ft.
Code
Awnings, canopies and marquees (except           $100, plus any signage
residential)
Billboards and advertising displays              $350 annual fee per billboard
 
      (4)   The fees for examination of plans for the use groups applicable to
the Ohio Building Code shall be as follows: (All plan review fees shall be paid
at the time of permit application.)
Type of Construction Documents Processing Fee Plan Examination Fee
Type of Construction Documents Processing Fee Plan Examination Fee
Automatic sprinkler and other  $250           $4.50/100 sq. ft. gross area of
fire suppression systems                      each floor level
Electrical                     $250           $4.50/100 sq. ft. gross area of
                                              each floor level
Fire alarm systems             $250           $4.50 per device
Industrialized unit            $200           $1.30/100 sq. ft. gross area of
                                              each floor level
Mechanical                     $250           $4.50/100 sq. ft. gross area of
                                              each floor level
Plumbing                       $250           $4.50/100 sq. ft. gross area of
                                              each floor level
Structural                     $250           $7.50/100 sq. ft. gross area of
                                              each floor level
NOTES TO TABLE:
Fees for all residential plan reviews are included in the cost of the
permits. Zoning plan review for residential and commercial are included in
the cost of the permits. Zoning site plan reviews for commercial projects:
$150
 
      (5)   The fee for a reinspection shall be $35 per additional trip and
must be paid in advance.
      (6)   In addition to all of the above fees, an inspection shall be made
at other than normal hours (8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday) when
requested by an owner or contractor during normal hours and when deemed
necessary by the Commissioner for efficient and effective construction of such
project, provided that a minimum fee of $30 is paid in advance for each
inspection requested.
      (7)   Owner, tenant or agent requested inspections not resulting from any
construction: fees for this inspection must accompany the request and are as
follows:
 
Building or structure inspection                                $30
Code and use inspection                                         $30
Electrical inspection/re-energize                               $50
Heating inspection (does not include smoke testing of furnaces) $30
Plumbing inspection                                             $30
NOTES TO TABLE:
Exception: An owner-occupied or tenant-occupied single-family or single unit
inspection may be requested without a fee.
 
      (8)   All fees for permits to be charged by virtue of any section of this
Building Code, either in its present or amended form, shall be subject to an
increase of 200% if the work for which the permit is required is commenced
before the permit is issued or the written consent of the Building Commissioner
is procured, which increase shall be collected by the Commissioner before the
issuance of such permit.
      (9)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to repeal or modify any
other section of this Building Code providing for penalties, and the penalty
provided herein shall be in addition to any other penalties.
      (10)   (a)   Moving buildings on or over public streets or alleys;
prohibitions and penalty. To move a building from one location to another on or
across a public street or public alley, a fee shall be paid to the Director of
Public Service as follows:
 
Any residential detached garage                                           $500
Any residential dwelling (less than 2 stories)                            $500
Any structure over 2 stories (plus special approval from Safety Director) $500
If temporary utility location required                                    $250
Miscellaneous oversized load (special approval and coordination from      $100
Safety Director)
Residential (for 3 or more days)                                          $50
Waste receptable/yard dumpster in public way (special approval and        $100
coordination from Safety Director) non-residential use
 
         (b)   For all buildings over two stories, the fee shall be fixed by
resolution of Council in each case. In addition to the fee mentioned above for
moving a building on or over a public street or public alley, there shall be a
charge of $500 for each day over two days that the building remains an
obstruction on any public street or public alley, which amount shall be paid to
the Director. There shall also be filed with the Director a bond in the amount
of $100,000 before the moving of such building by the permittee. The conditions
of such bond shall be that the owner of the building and the person, firm or
corporation actually carrying out the work of moving the building shall comply
with all the general laws of the state and with the city ordinances in the
moving of the building; and, further that, they will indemnify and keep the
city harmless from all damages, liabilities, claims, losses, costs or judgments
made or rendered against or suffered by the city because of such moving
operations. However, in lieu of the bond, a public liability and property
damage insurance policy, issued by a solvent insurance company, in the amount
of $1,000,000 may be deposited with the Director; provided that, the city shall
b indemnified by reason of any losses sustained by reason of the liability
imposed by law upon the city on account of such moving operations, and that the
moving contractor shall also be responsible and pay for all damage caused to
the streets, overhead wires, trees and other objects which may be lawfully
placed or which lawfully exist near the streets.
         (c)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made, either
directly or indirectly or through any agency whatsoever, any false or
fraudulent statement, or knowingly fail to disclose information to the city or
any of its officers, agents, employees or departments, with the intent that
such statement or omission shall be relied upon to cause the issuance of a
building or moving permit for the construction, alteration or relocation of any
building or structure adjacent to the right-of-way limits of any limited or
controlled-access highway project, grade separation project or other highway
project. Whoever violates or assists in the violation of any provision of this
division (C)(10) shall be fined not less than $100, nor more than $500, or
imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both. In addition to the above mentioned
fee for moving a building on or across a public street or public alley, a
permit fee shall be paid to the Division of Building Inspection as follows: for
a foundation with no basement at the new location for buildings moved over a
public street or alley, the fee shall be as provided herein. When a basement is
to be provided at the new location, the fee for the new basement, including the
foundation, shall be at the same rate as is provided herein.
      (11)   The fee to raze a building shall be $25 for a residential garage,
$80 per 2,000 square feet for one- and two-family dwellings, and $50 for each
2,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, of the total floor area of all other
buildings. The floor area of every story, except the basement, using outside
dimensions, shall be additive. A separate permit shall be required for each
separate building.
      (12)   The fee for a permit to erect or re-erect a tent shall be based on
the ground area covered by the tent and shall be as follows: $50.
 
Residential over 400 square feet $50
Commercial                       $100
 
(Prior Code, § 1444.15) (Ord. 54-1988, passed 3-28-1988; Ord. 79-2002, passed
6-10-2002; Ord. 186-2005, passed 11-28-2005; Ord. 214-2009, passed 12-14-2009;
Ord. 34-2012, passed 4-9- 2012; Ord. 146-2016, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 147-
2020, passed 12-21-2020; Ord. 123-2021, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 1444.16 ELECTRIC WIRING PERMIT FEES.
   The fees for the installation, alteration or remodeling of electrical
wiring, rewiring, apparatus, and equipment, including installation of electric
furnaces, electric heating strips, electric heating cable and electric heat
pumps, air conditioning equipment, sanitary equipment, safety devices,
controls, motor generators, services, rectifiers, supports and accessories,
including, but not limited to, motion picture machines, vending machines and
all other electrical devices, apparatus, equipment and the like shall be as
follows:
COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND MULTI-FAMILY
   Additions                                                                 $170
                                                                                $215 min.
   New structures (includes temp. service) or additions                      base, plus
                                                                                $0.02 per
                                                                                sq. ft.
ONE-, TWO- AND THREE-FAMILY DWELLINGS
   Additions                                                                 $85
   New dwellings (includes temp. service)                                    $150
ONE-, TWO- AND THREE-FAMILY DWELLINGS; COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL EXISTING STRUCTURES AND
MULTI-FAMILY
                                                                                $35 per
                                                                                circuit
                                                                                (up to 9)
                                                                                (On dual
                                                                                use
                                                                                circuits,
                                                                                there
                                                                                shall be
   Electric ranges, electric ovens, electric dryers, electric water heaters, no
air conditioners, electric heating and commercial miscellaneous outlets         additional
                                                                                charge if
                                                                                the AC
                                                                                receptacle
                                                                                is part of
                                                                                the
                                                                                electric
                                                                                heating
                                                                                circuit.)
   Empty raceways (to be used later)                                         $100
   Exterior pole lighting                                                    $50 (per
                                                                                pole)
   New service, feeders or busways
      100 - 400 amp                                                       $80
      Over 400 amp                                                        $150
      Misc. residential wiring (no service)                               $55
      Misc. commercial wiring (no service)                                $150
      Major structural alteration wiring shall be charged as outlined in   
“Commercial, industrial and multi- family” entry
   Siding, entrance cable, meter relocation, siding detach                   $35
   Signs: outline or marquee branch circuit. the fee for signs, outline or   $50
marquee branch circuit
   Swimming pools
      Commercial                                                          $250
      Residential                                                         $50
                                                                                $60 (not
                                                                                to exceed
                                                                                90 days)
                                                                                (Upon
   Temporary installations - separate permit                                 written
                                                                                request,
                                                                                one 90-day
                                                                                extension
                                                                                may be
                                                                                granted.)
 
(Prior Code, § 1444.16) (Ord. 54-1988, passed 3-28-1988; Ord. 79-2002, passed
6-10-2002; Ord. 186-2005, passed 11-28-2005; Ord. 214-2009, passed 12-14-2009;
Ord. 34-2012, passed 4-9-2012; Ord. 146-2016, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 1444.17 HEATING, AIR CONDITIONING, REFRIGERATION AND VENTILATION PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Fees for new and replacement furnaces, space heaters, boilers, heat
pumps, solar collectors, refrigeration, air conditioning and any unclassified
heating devices, regardless of fuel, shall be as provided in the following
table:
 
BTU input – 0 – 500,000$85
500,001 and over           $125
(Note: 12,000 BTU = 1 ton)
 
   (B)   Miscellaneous residential duct, thermostat installation: $35;
   (C)   Miscellaneous commercial duct, thermostat installation: $105;
   (D)   Fire dampers or fire stat. (each): $45;
   (E)   Commercial kitchen hoods and ducts: $110; and
   (F)   A 200% penalty shall be applied if work for which the permit is
required is commenced before the permit is issued. There shall be no transfer
of permits between individuals and/or firms. All units must be approved.
(Prior Code, § 1444.17) (Ord. 54-1988, passed 3-28-1988; Ord. 79-2002, passed
6-10-2002; Ord. 186-2005, passed 11-28-2005; Ord. 214-2009, passed 12-14-2009;
Ord. 34-2012, passed 4-9-2012; Ord. 146-2016, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 1444.18 PLUMBING PERMIT FEES.
   The permit fee for the installation, alteration, remodeling, resetting and
replacing of any plumbing, plumbing fixtures or plumbing system, whether new or
existing, shall be as follows, except for ordinary repairs, including leaks,
worn or damaged faucets, floats and valves, and the cleaning of house drains
and/or sewers not involving the removal or replacement of traps and/or plumbing
fixtures or apparatus.
*Accessory permits
   Residential accessory (each)                          $35
   Grease or oil separator                               $80
   Commercial and industrial accessory (each)            $80
   (*Replace water heater, soil/vent stack, inside conductor, outside
conductor, water line, gas line (per dwelling), water closet, bathtub,
shower, wash basin, sick, disposal, laundry trap, shampoo bowl, sump pump,
janitor’s closet and slop sink. Accessory items may be combined on one
permit.)
Commercial and industrial. New or addition sanitary module  $95 per module
(complex of fixtures within one enclosed room)
Fire protection system. Fees for fire suppression systems (wet, dry, CO2,
chemical, halon and the like) shall be as follows
   Commercial                                            $110 base
   Hood suppression                                      $50
   Residential                                           $50 base
   Sprinkler heads                                       $1 each
   Standpipes                                            $35 each
One-, two- and three-family residential dwellings
   Addition, remodeling                                  $100
   New dwelling                                          $180
 
 
Engineering Plan Review
Review plans for conformance to the city’s ordinances and Development Code
   Small projec$50 – under $50
   Large projec$150 – over $50
Minimum plan review fee would be $150 ($100 storm water, $50 engineering) with
city maximum of $650, plus consultant’s fees
 
(Prior Code, § 1444.18) (Ord. 54-1988, passed 3-28-1988; Ord. 79-2002, passed
6-10-2002; Ord. 114-2003, passed 9-8-2003; Ord. 186-2005, passed 11-28-2005;
Ord. 214-2009, passed 12-14-2009; Ord. 34-2012, passed 4-9-2012; Ord. 146-2016,
passed 12-19-2016)
§ 1444.19 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR ROLL-OFF CONTAINERS IN CITY RIGHT-OF-WAY;
DEPOSIT/FEE.
   (A)   In order to place any type of roll-off container (commonly known as a
“dumpster” or “bagster”) in the city right-of-way, an application must be
completed and a permit must be obtained from the Building Department.
   (B)   Any person to whom a permit is granted shall pay a $100 deposit/fee to
the Building Department. If the container is removed on the specified date, $40
will be returned.
   (C)   Should a roll-off container be placed in the city right-of-way without
prior authorization, there shall be a $50 fine, in addition to the above stated
$100 deposit/fee, which will be non-refundable.
(Prior Code, § 1444.19) (Ord. 132-2012, passed 7-23-2012)
§ 1444.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and shall be fined not
more than $250 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both, for each offense.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation or non- compliance occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 1444.99)
CHAPTER 1446: FIRE DISTRICTS
Section
1446.01   First Fire District.
1446.02   Second Fire District.
Cross-reference:
   Fire Codes, see F.P.
Ch. 1604
   Power to regulate building erection, see Ohio R.C. 737.28
   Power to regulate against fire, see Ohio R.C. 737.21, 737.37
   Removal of unsafe structures, see Ohio R.C. 715.26(B), 715.261
   Right to examine buildings, see Ohio R.C. 3737.14
§ 1446.01 FIRST FIRE DISTRICT.
   The First Fire District of the city is hereby established and described as
follows: beginning at a point on Lot 54 of Kenmore Allotment, which point is
the N. E. corner of the corporate limits of Barberton. Thence westerly on the
north corporation line to the center of Mud Run; thence southerly on the center
of Mud Run to a point on the N.E. line of Lot 31 of Barberton Realty Co.
Allotment and the southerly line of Fairmount Avenue; thence northwesterly to
the N.W. corner of such Lot 31; thence in a generally southwesterly direction
on the rear lines of the lots fronting on Wooster Road, N. to the northeasterly
line of W. State Street; thence southwesterly to the north corner of Lot 290 of
A.A. Moore’s North Barberton Allotment; thence southwesterly on the rear lines
of the lots fronting on Wooster Road, N. to the north corner of Lot 305 of such
allotment and the S.W. line of Portage Street; thence northwesterly to the
north corner of Lot 301 of such allotment; thence southwesterly and westerly on
the southerly lines of Lots 301, 299, 298 and 297 of such allotment to a point
on the east line of Summit Avenue; thence southerly on the easterly lines of
Summit Avenue and Burt Street to the west corner of Lot 27 of the McNamara and
Swigart allotment; thence southwesterly along an alley paralleling Wooster
Road, N. and its extension to the west corner of Lot 2 of such allotment;
thence southwesterly to the north corner of Lot 2 of the John McNamara
Allotment; thence southwesterly on the rear lines of Lots 2, 3 and 4 of such
allotment to the west corner of such Lot 4; thence southerly to the easterly
corner of Lot 12 of the John McNamara allotment and the southwesterly line of
Mack Street; thence southwesterly along the southwesterly lines of Lots 12, 11
and 10 of such allotment and the northwesterly lines of Lots 519, 518, 517 and
516 of the Barberton Heights allotment to the east line of Orchard Avenue;
thence south along Orchard Avenue to the S.W. corner of such Lot 516; thence
southwesterly on the northwesterly line of Wooster Road to the easterly corner
of Portage Park; thence southwesterly to the east line of Lot 201 of the
Pittsburg Valve & Fitting Co. allotment at a point 10.35 feet north of its S.E.
corner; thence south to the northeast corner of Lot 205 of such allotment;
thence south-westerly on the rear lines of the lots fronting on Wooster Road,
N. to the northeasterly line of Erie Street; thence southeasterly along Erie
Street to the northwest line of Wooster Road, N.; thence southwesterly on the
northwest line of Wooster Road to the southerly right-of- way line of the Erie
Railroad; thence southwesterly along such railroad line to the northeasterly
line of Lot 137 of the Van Hyning Heirs Addition; thence southeasterly to the
easterly corner of such Lot 137; thence southwesterly along the rear lines of
the lots fronting on Wooster Road and westerly on the south line of Irish
Alley, and such line extended to Third Street; thence south along Third Street
to the south line of Park Avenue; thence west along the south line of Park
Avenue to the N.W. corner of Lot 1124 of Barberton Sub. B; thence south to the
S.W. corner of Lot 1138 of such allotment; thence southwesterly to the N. E.
corner of Lot 1 of the A.D. Betz allotment at the west line of Fourteenth
Street; thence in a generally southwesterly direction on the rear lines of the
lots fronting on Wooster Road, W. to the N.W. corner of Lot 19 of the Frederick
allotment; thence southwesterly across Nineteenth Street to the N. E. corner of
Lot 20 of the Betz allotment; thence southwesterly on the rear line of the lots
fronting on Wooster Road to the N.W. corner of Lot 601 of the Banner allotment;
thence southwesterly across Twenty-fifth Street to the N. E. corner of Lot 70
of Shaw’s Sub. No. 2; thence southwesterly on the rear lines of the lots
fronting on Wooster Road, W. to the N.W. corner of Lot 4 of the Krancz
allotment; thence southwesterly for a distance of approximately 625 feet to the
N. E. corner of Lot 18 of the Shaw Allotment; thence southwesterly along the
rear lines of the lots fronting on Wooster Road, W. and extended to the west
line of Thirty-first Street, N.W.; thence south on the west line of Thirty-
first Street to the N. E. corner of a lot now or formerly owned by A.A. Basler,
such corner being 130.24 feet north of the north line of Wooster Road; thence
west 120 feet to the N.W. corner of such lot; thence south approximately 140
feet to the N. E. corner of a lot now or formerly owned by J.W. and A. G.
Schriber; thence southeasterly along the east line of such lot 60 feet to the
northerly line of Wooster Road, W.; thence southwesterly across Wooster Road to
a point on the southerly line of Wooster Road which point is the N.W. corner of
a lot now or formerly owned by V.W. and M.M. Slaybaugh; thence southeasterly
along the westerly line of such lot approximately 88 feet to the S.W. corner of
such lot; thence easterly on the south line of such lot to the west line of
Thirty-first Street, S.W.; thence southeasterly across Thirty-first Street to
the S.W. corner of a lot now or formerly owned by A.D. Shaw, et al; thence
easterly on the south line of such lot extended to the east line of such lot;
thence northerly to the S.E. corner of a lot now or formerly owned by S. and M.
Hanic; thence northeasterly along the rear lines of the lots fronting on
Wooster Road, W. and approximately 132 feet from the southerly line of such
street to Twenty-ninth Street, S.W.; thence northeasterly on the rear lines of
the lots fronting on Wooster Road to a point in the center of Hudson Road
159.10 feet southeasterly from the centerline of Wooster Road; thence easterly
approximately 400 feet to the southwest corner of a lot now or formerly owned
by S.J. Neledka, such point being 245 feet southeasterly from the centerline of
Wooster Road; thence in a generally northeasterly direction on the rear lines
of the lots fronting on Wooster Road to the S.E. corner of Lot 40 of Shaw’s
Sub. No. 2; thence northerly across Twenty-fourth Street S.W. to the S.W.
corner of Lot 22 of such subdivision; thence easterly and northerly along the
south and east lines of such Lot 22 to the N.W. corner of Lot 24 of such
subdivision; thence easterly along the rear lines of the lots fronting on
Wooster Road to the west line of Twenty-third Street, S.W.; thence
northeasterly across Twenty-third Street to the S.W. corner of Lot 8 of an
unrecorded Davies Allotment; thence northeasterly on the rear lines of the lots
fronting on Wooster Road to the westerly line of Sixteenth Street, S.W.; thence
northeasterly across Sixteenth Street to a point on the east line thereof 150
feet southerly at right angles from the southerly line of Wooster Road, W.;
thence northeasterly on a line 150 feet from the southerly line of Wooster Road
to the old channel Wolf Creek; thence northerly in such channel to the S.W.
corner of Lot 14 of the Range allotment; thence easterly to the S.W. corner of
Lot 1 of such allotment; thence easterly to the S.W. corner of Lot 395 of the
original plat of Barberton, and the north line of the Akron & Barberton Belt
Line Railroad; thence easterly on such Railroad line to a point 150 feet west
of the west line of Second Street, N.W.; thence southerly on a line 150 feet
west of the west line of Second Street, N.W. to the south line of Lot 69 of
Norton Township; thence easterly on such line to the centerline of the
Pennsylvania Railroad; thence northerly on such Railroad line to a point 150
feet south of the south line of Tuscarawas Avenue; thence easterly on a line
150 feet south of the south line of Tuscarawas Avenue to the west line of Van
Buren Avenue; thence northerly on such line to a point 140 feet north of the
north line of Tuscarawas Avenue; thence westerly on the line 140 feet north of
Tuscarawas Avenue to the centerline of the Pennsylvania Railroad; thence
northeasterly on such Railroad line to the north line of Lot 69 of Norton
Township; thence westerly on the rear of the lots fronting on Huston Street to
the S.E. corner of Lot 4 of the New Portage allotment; thence northerly to the
N. E. corner of such lot; thence northerly across Huston Street to the S.W.
corner of Lot 19 of such allotment; thence northerly on the west line of such
lot 110 feet; thence easterly parallel with Huston Street 66 feet; thence
northerly on the west line of Lot 20 of such Allotment 110 feet to the N.W.
corner of such lot; thence easterly to the S.E. corner of Lot 39 of the New
Portage Allotment No. 2; thence northerly to the N.E. corner of such Lot 39;
thence northeasterly across Brown Street to the S.W. corner of Lot 46 of such
allotment; thence northerly to the N.W. corner of such lot; thence easterly to
the west comer of Lot 71 of the Central Allotment; thence northeasterly on the
rear lines of the lots fronting on Wooster Road N. to the east corner of Lot 70
of such allotment; thence northeasterly to the S.W. corner of Lot 1, Paul
allotment; thence northeasterly on the rear lines of the lots fronting on
Wooster Road, N. to the south property line of property opposite Kellar Street
now or formerly owned by A. and R. Gionti; thence easterly on such property
line to a point which is 175 feet at right angles from the southeasterly line
of Wooster Road N.; thence northeasterly parallel with Wooster Road to the
south line of Lot 1 of the Bederman allotment; thence easterly on the south
line of such allotment to the S.W. corner of Lot 2 of such allotment; thence
northerly to the N. E. corner of such lot; thence northerly across Springfield
Road to the S.W. corner of Lot 364 of the Barberton Realty Co. First Addition;
thence northeasterly on the rear lines of the lots fronting on Wooster Road N.
to the southwesterly line of Norwood Street; thence southeasterly to a point
150 feet at right angles from the S.E. line of Wooster Road, N.; thence
northeasterly parallel with Wooster Road to intersect the northeasterly line of
Coventry Road; thence northeasterly on the northwest line of Coventry Road to
intersect the southeast line of Wooster Road; thence easterly across Coventry
Road to the angle point in Dolly Court; thence easterly along Dolly Court to
the east corporation line of Barberton; thence northerly on such corporation
line to the place of beginning.
(Prior Code, § 1446.01) (Ord. 97-1952, passed 12-22-1952)
§ 1446.02 SECOND FIRE DISTRICT.
   The Second Fire District of the city shall comprise all areas of the city
which are zoned for business, commercial or industrial uses and which are shown
on the Zoning Map of the city.
(Prior Code, § 1446.02) (Ord. 261-1957, passed 12-2-1957)
CHAPTER 1448: INSULATION
Section
1448.01   Requirements for dwellings and additions.
1448.99   Penalty.
§ 1448.01 REQUIREMENTS FOR DWELLINGS AND ADDITIONS.
   Every new dwelling and every new addition to a dwelling shall have properly
installed thermal insulation with the resistance factor of R-19 or U = .05 (U =
coefficient of heat transmission) in or under the roof or in or above the
uppermost ceiling of the structure and shall have properly installed thermal
insulation with the resistance factor of R-11 or U = .07 in the outermost
exterior sidewalls. All insulation shall be of an Underwriters’ Laboratories
listed Class C or Ohio Building Code Class D.
(Prior Code, § 1450.01) (Ord. 93-1974, passed 3-18-1974)
§ 1448.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be fined not more than $100. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation or failure to comply occurs
or continues.
(Prior Code, § 1450.99)
CHAPTER 1450: EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL REGULATION
Section
1450.01   Adoption by reference.
§ 1450.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   Council hereby adopts, by reference as if fully set out herein, the Erosion
and Sediment Control Regulation attached to original Ord. 147-2003, passed 12-
8-2003, as set forth in 40 C.F.R. parts 9, 122, 123 and 124 and referred to as
NPDES Storm Water Phase II, in order to be in compliance with EPA requirements.
(Prior Code, § 1452.01) (Ord. 147-2003, passed 12-8-2003)
CHAPTER 1452: LAND REUTILIZATION PROGRAM
Section
1452.01   Adoption by reference.
§ 1452.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   This Council hereby elects to adopt and implement the procedures set forth
in Ohio R.C. 5722.02 through 5722.15, inclusive, to facilitate the effective
reutilization of non-productive land in the city.
(Prior Code, § 1454.01) (Ord. 136-2011, passed 9-26-2011)
CHAPTER 1454: VACANT PROPERTY REGISTRATION PROGRAM
Section
1454.01   Adoption; purpose.
1454.02   Applicability.
1454.03   Definitions.
1454.04   Owner required to act; enforcement authority.
1454.05   Registration required and penalty.
1454.06   Liability.
1454.07   Appeals.
1454.08   Assignment of registration fees, penalties and fines.
1454.09   Savings clause.
1454.10   Appropriation of fees collected.
§ 1454.01 ADOPTION; PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a vacant property
registration program and to regulate the maintenance of properties which are in
the foreclosure process, abandoned or vacant. This chapter is intended to
reduce and prevent neighborhood blight, to avoid the creation and maintenance
of public nuisances, to ameliorate conditions that threaten the public health,
safety and welfare, to promote neighborhood stability and occupancy by
preserving the condition and appearance of residential properties and the worth
and activity of commercial and industrial properties and to maintain property
values and assessments.
   (B)   There is hereby adopted, then, for the aforementioned purposes and for
the purpose of providing a means of identifying the owner and/or responsible
entities of vacant and/or abandoned properties within the corporate limits of
the city, having a complete contact information on record for these properties
and responsible parties, a registration and maintenance requirement for vacant
and/or abandoned properties.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to waive, relieve or
otherwise excuse an owner of property from compliance with all applicable
codes, ordinances, statutes or laws and the owner shall at all times remain
responsible and liable therefor. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
prevent the enforcement of other provisions of the Barberton Codified
Ordinances, the city’s Development Code or the Ohio Revised Code (ORC) and
nothing in this chapter shall be construed to relieve an owner or interested
party from duties imposed pursuant to any regulatory code, ordinance, statute
or law of the city or state.
(Prior Code, § 1456.01) (Ord. 98-2015, passed 9-14-2015; Ord. 75-2025, passed
6-9-2025)
§ 1454.02 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall be applicable to all residential, commercial, and
industrial structures located within the city, but does not apply to city
properties or county land reutilization corporations organized under R.C.
Chapter 1724.
(Prior Code, § 1456.01) (Ord. 98-2015, passed 9-14-2015; Ord. 75-2025, passed
6-9-2025)
§ 1454.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED. A structure that is unoccupied as the result of the
relinquishment of possession or control by an owner or other person with the
right of possession or control of the structure, a mortgagor or the mortgagor’s
assigns whether or not the mortgagor or mortgagor’s assigns have relinquished
equity and title. A structure may be deemed abandoned when there is evidence of
conditions, taken separately or as a whole, that would lead a reasonable person
to conclude that the property was abandoned, including, but not limited to,
evidence of overgrown or dead vegetation, accumulation of newspapers,
circulars, flyers, mail, past due utility notices, or other means of notice by
publication, the accumulation of junk, litter, trash or debris, absence of
windows or window treatments, absence of furnishings and personal items,
statements of neighbors, delivery agents or similarly situated persons that the
property is abandoned.
   AGENT. A person who acts on behalf of another person or group.
   CODE OFFICIAL. Code Official shall have the same meaning and duties as that
set forth in § 1350.05 of the city’s Development Code.
   CODES. The Barberton Codified Ordinances or those adopted by the code of
ordinances.
   COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL. "Commercial/industrial" as set forth in the city's
Development Code.
   INSPECTOR. A person employed by or under contract with the city to perform
inspections to determine compliance with codes and to order corrective measures
and/or initiate administrative, civil or criminal proceedings.
   OWNER. The registered owner of a property, any person who holds legal or
equitable title to the property, is a mortgagee, a vendee-in-possession,
assignee of rents, executor, trustee, lessee, agent or any other person, firm
or corporation that is directly or indirectly in control of a property. The
owner of a property in default or for which a foreclosure action is pending or
for which a judgment in foreclosure has been issued shall include the
mortgagee, the successor in interest to the mortgagee, the lender or servicing
company and any agent acting for the mortgagee, its successors or a lender or
servicing company. Under this definition, there may be more than one owner of a
property for purposes of this chapter.
   SECURE. All doors and windows which are within 15 feet of the exterior
grade, shall be covered by one-half inch thick plywood attached to the framing
of all such doors and windows by wood screws of a minimum length of one and
one-half inches, placed 12 inches on center. Such plywood shall be painted with
a minimum of two coats of oil-based exterior paint. In order to be considered
secure, a property must also be in compliance with all requirements of the
city’s Property Maintenance Code.
   VACANT.
      (1)   A structure that is not lawfully occupied or that otherwise
qualifies as abandoned under this section.
      (2)   Multi-family residential structures shall be considered vacant when
50% or more of the dwelling units are not lawfully occupied, as set forth in
the city's Development Code or that otherwise qualifies as abandoned under this
section. Personal storage does not count towards the 50% occupied requirement
as such use violates the city's Development Code.
      (3)   Commercial structures shall be considered vacant when all
commercial activity, as set forth in the city's Development Code has ceased at
the site or that otherwise qualifies as abandoned under this section.
      (4)   Multi-tenant commercial structures shall be considered vacant when
50% or more of total square footage is not lawfully occupied, as set forth in
the city's Development Code, or engaging in commercial activity, or that
otherwise qualifies as abandoned under this section. Personal storage and
storage of items not produced, sold, printed, leased, serviced or repaired on
the premise, unless otherwise approved through zoning compliance, does not
count towards the 50% occupied requirement as such use violates the city's
Development Code.
      (5)   Industrial structures shall be considered vacant when all
industrial and/or manufacturing activity, as set forth in the city's
Development Code, has ceased at the site or that otherwise qualifies as
abandoned under this section.
      (6)   Multi-tenant industrial structures shall be considered vacant when
50% or more of the total square footage is not lawfully, as set forth in the
city's Development Code, occupied or engaging in industrial or manufacturing
activity, or that otherwise qualifies as abandoned under this section. Personal
storage and storage of items not produced, sold, printed, leased, serviced or
repaired on the premise, unless otherwise approved through zoning compliance,
does not count towards the 50% occupied requirement as such use violates the
city's Development Code.
      (7)   In determining whether a structure is vacant, the following shall
be considered: The percentage of the overall units not in use; the condition
and value of any items in the structure and the presence of rental or for sale
signs on the property.
      (8)   A property that is temporarily unoccupied and is in the process of
being renovated under proper and unexpired permits shall not be considered
vacant.
      (9)   A property that is listed for sale with a real estate agent under a
fully executed listing agreement shall not be considered vacant for the first
six months of the listing agreement under which the property was first listed
for sale. Such property shall be considered vacant for purposes of this section
upon the expiration of the six month period for which it is first listed for
sale or upon a subsequent re-listing with the same or a different licensed
realtor. Unoccupied property listed as "For Sale by Owner" shall be considered
vacant for purposes of this section.
(Prior Code, § 1456.03) (Ord. 98-2015, passed 9-14-2015; Ord. 75-2025, passed
6-9-2025)
§ 1454.04 OWNER REQUIRED TO ACT; ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Commercial/industrial. The owner of any commercial/industrial
structure that has become vacant, as defined in §
1454.03 of this chapter, shall file: 1. Within 30 days after the structure
first becomes vacant; 2. within 30 days of receiving notice that a structure is
vacant; or 3. within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter,
whichever is later, a registration statement for each such structure which the
Code Official determines is vacant on forms provided for such purposes and
shall be required to pay a vacant structure registration fee as outlined under
the Vacant Commercial/Industrial Structure Registration Fee Schedule.
   Any mortgagee of a commercial/industrial structure which files a foreclosure
action against structure, or for which a foreclosure action is pending, or a
judgment of foreclosure has been issued shall, in addition to all other
requirements of this section, shall provide a cash bond acceptable to the
Building Commissioner or his or her designee, in the sum of not less than
$25,000 to secure the continued maintenance of the structure throughout its
vacancy and remunerate the city for any expenses incurred in inspecting,
securing, repairing, marking and/or making such building safe by any legal
means including, but not limited to, demolition. A portion of said bond in the
amount of $1,000 shall be retained by the city as an administrative fee to fund
an account for expenses incurred in inspecting, securing, repairing and/or
marking said structure and other structure which are involved in the
foreclosure process or vacant.
      (1)   The annual registration fee for a vacant commercial/industrial
structure not in a foreclosure and not located within the established
Historical Overlay District shall be based on the duration of time the
structure has been vacant regardless of a change in ownership. The owner of a
vacant commercial/industrial structure shall pay an annual registration fee as
outlined under the Vacant Commercial/Industrial Registration Fee Schedule. All
governmental agencies shall be exempt from the payment of the annual
registration fee. The registering party shall not be entitled to a refund of
all or any part of the registration fee should the structure no longer be
deemed vacant during the annual registration period.
         The Vacant Commercial/Industrial Registration Fee shall be as follows:
            Year one: $500.00
            Year two: $1,000.00
            Year three: $2,000.00
            Year four: $4,000.00
            Year five and on: $5,000.00
      (2)   The annual registration fee for a vacant historic commercial/
industrial structure not in a foreclosure and located within the established
Historical Overlay District shall be based on the duration of time the
structure has been vacant regardless of a change in ownership. The owner of a
vacant commercial/industrial structure shall pay an annual registration fee as
outlined under the Vacant Commercial/Industrial Registration Fee Schedule. All
governmental agencies shall be exempt from the payment of the annual
registration fee. The registering party shall not be entitled to a refund of
all or any part of the registration fee should the structure no longer be
deemed vacant during the annual registration period.
         The Vacant Historic Commercial/Industrial Registration Fee shall be as
follows:
            Year one: $2,000.00
            Year two: $4,000.00
            Year three: $8,000.00
            Year four: $16,000.00
            Year five and on: $32,000.00
   (B)   Residential. The owner of any residential structure that has become
vacant and has not filed a foreclosure, as defined in §
1454.03 of this chapter, shall file: 1. Within 30 days after the structure
first becomes vacant; 2. within 30 days of receiving notice that a structure is
vacant; or 3. within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter,
whichever is later, a registration statement for each such structure with the
Code Official determines is vacant on forms provided for such purposes. Any
mortgagee of a residential property which files a foreclosure action against
said structure, or for which a foreclosure action is pending, or a judgment of
foreclosure has been issued shall, in addition to all other requirements of
this section, provide a cash bond acceptable to the Building Commissioner, in
the sum of not less than $15,000 to secure the continued maintenance of the
structure throughout its vacancy and remunerate the city for any expenses
incurred in inspecting, securing, repairing, marking and/or making such
building safe by any legal means including, but not limited to, demolition. A
portion of said bond in an amount of $1,000 shall be retained by the city as an
administrative fee to fund an account for expenses incurred in inspecting,
securing, repairing and/or marking said structure and other structures which
are involved in the foreclosure process or vacant.
      (1)   The annual registration fee for a vacant residential structure not
in a foreclosure shall be based on the duration of time the building has been
vacant regardless of change of ownership. The owner of a vacant residential
structure shall pay an annual registration fee as outlined under the Vacant
Residential Registration Fee. All governmental agencies shall be exempt from
the payment of the annual registration fee. The owner shall not be entitled to
a refund of all or any part of the registration fee should the structure no
longer be deemed vacant during the annual registration period.
         The Residential Registration Fee shall be as follows:
            Year one: $200.00
            Year two: $ 400.00
            Year three: $800.00
            Year four: $1,600.00
            Year five and on: $3,200.00
      (2)   The owner shall notify the Code Official or his or her designee
within 20 days of any change in the registration information by filing an
amended registration statement on a form provided for such purposes. The
registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the statements
therein contained in any administrative enforcement proceeding or court
proceeding instituted by the city against the owner of the structure. An owner
shall be liable under this section for failing to register a vacant structure,
paying an appropriate annual registration fee, or timely updating any change in
registration.
      (3)   Registration statement. In addition to other information required
by the Code Official, the registration statement shall include the name, street
address and telephone number of a natural person 21 years of age or older,
designated by the owner as the authorized agent for receiving notices of code
violations and for receiving process in any court proceeding or administrative
enforcement proceeding on behalf of such owner in connection with the
enforcement of this chapter. This person must maintain an office in Summit
County, Ohio, or contiguous county or must actually reside within Summit
County, Ohio or contiguous county. An owner who is a natural person and who
meets the requirements of this division (B) as to location of residence or
office may designate himself or herself as agent.
      (4)   By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this
division (B), the owner is consenting to receive any and all notices of code
violations concerning the registered building and all process in any court
proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding brought to enforce code
provisions concerning the registered structure by service of the notice or
process on the authorized agent. Any owner who has designated an authorized
agent under the provisions of this division (B) shall be deemed to consent to
the continuation of the agent's designation for the purposes of this division
(B) until the owner notifies the code official or his or her designee in
writing of a change of authorized agent or until the owner files a new annual
registration statement. An owner shall be liable under this section for failing
to register an authorized agent.
   (C)   The owner of any vacant commercial/industrial structure shall, within
15 days of registering a vacant structure, cause a physical inspection by the
Building and Fire Departments in the presence of the owner, person in control,
or authorized agent of the owner having responsibility for security and
maintenance of the structure for the purpose of determining the structural
integrity, that it will be safe by firefighters and police officers in times of
emergency, and that it complies with the requirements of this chapter.
Photographs shall be taken of the property that accurately portrays the
condition of the structure. Photographs shall be dated and preserved. An owner
shall be liable under this section for failing to inspect the property or
structure or for failing to maintain the inspection photographs as required by
this section.
   (D)   Any owner who fails to register a vacant structure under the
provisions of this section shall further be deemed to consent to receive, by
posting at the structure, any and all notices of code violations and all
process in an administrative proceeding brought to enforce code provisions
concerning the structure and premises.
   (E)   If the owner or person in control fails or refuses to consent to and
arrange for an inspection, the Building Commissioner or Fire Chief shall obtain
a search warrant from Barberton Municipal Court to authorize inspection of the
structure.
   (F)   The Code Official may issue rules and regulations for the
administration of this section. These rules may designate board-up materials
and methods which must be used when securing a structure beyond the standards
provided so that the boarding is reasonably incapable of being removed by
trespassers or others acting without the owner's consent.
(Prior Code, § 1456.04) (Ord. 98-2015, passed 9-14-2015; Ord. 106-2020, passed
9-28-2020; Ord. 75-2025, passed 6-9-2025)
§ 1454.05 REGISTRATION REQUIRED AND PENALTY.
   (A)   The owner of any vacant structure shall file a registration statement
for each such structure with the code official or his or her designee on forms
provided for such purposes. Any such registration statement shall be deemed
prima facie proof of the statements therein contained in any administrative
enforcement proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the city against the
owner or owners of the structure.
   (B)   The owner of any vacant structure who fails to file a registration
statement for each such structure within the timeframes established by this
chapter or who fails to update a change in registration information within the
timeframes established by this chapter shall be subject to a $50 per day
administrative penalty with a maximum penalty of $1,000.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any other language in this chapter and unless
otherwise specified, any person who violates any provision of this section or
of the rules and regulations issued hereunder and fails to maintain the
property according to the codes shall be guilty of a first degree misdemeanor
and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $200 for each offense. Every
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.
(Prior Code, § 1456.05) (Ord. 98-2015, passed 9-14-2015)
§ 1454.06 LIABILITY.
   (A)   Unless otherwise specifically provided, the owner, the owner’s agent
for the purpose of managing, controlling or collecting rents, and any other
person managing or controlling a structure or premises in any part of which
there is a violation of the provisions of this code, shall be liable for any
violation therein, existing or occurring, or which may have existed or
occurred, at or during any time when such person is or was the person owning or
managing, controlling or acting as agent in regard to said structure or
premises and is subject to injunctions, abatement orders or other remedial
orders.
   (B)   The liabilities and obligations hereunder imposed on an owner shall
attach to a trustee under a land trust holding title to such building,
structure or premises without the right of possession, management or control,
unless said trustee in a proceeding under said provisions of this code
discloses in a verified pleading or in an affidavit filed with the court, the
name and last known address of each person who was a beneficiary of the trust
at the time of the alleged violation and of each person, if any, who was then
acting as agent for the purpose of managing, controlling or collecting rents,
as the same may appear on the records of the trust.
   (C)   The liabilities and obligations imposed on an owner shall attach to
any financial institution, mortgage company or any other person or entity with
or without an interest in the structure or premises who knowingly takes any
action in any judicial or administrative proceeding that is intended to delay
issuance or enforcement of any remedy for any violation of the codes; provided
that, with respect to fines such person shall be liable only for fines which
accrue on or after the date of such action and further provided that no
liability shall be imposed under this section for any action taken in any
proceeding, including a proceeding to foreclose on a lien, that does not delay
or prevent the prosecution of any action brought by the city to enforce the
adopted codes.
   (D)   In the event the city, due to lack of response of an owner or agent,
is required to take action, through its own efforts or via a contract for such
services, to abate a nuisance at a vacant property the owner will be billed for
the cost of the abatement to include all labor and materials needed to correct
the violation. Nuisance abatements shall include, but are not be limited to,
elimination of hazardous conditions, cutting of weeds and overgrowth, securing
and/or boarding of a structure, trash cleanup and disposal and demolition.
(Prior Code, § 1456.06) (Ord. 98-2015, passed 9-14-2015)
§ 1454.07 APPEALS.
   Appeals shall be processed in accordance with § 1310.03(c) of the city’s
Development Code.
(Prior Code, § 1456.07) (Ord. 98-2015, passed 9-14-2015)
§ 1454.08 ASSIGNMENT OF REGISTRATION FEES, PENALTIES AND FINES.
   Registration fees, penalties and fines associated with and collected on
behalf of vacant property registration shall be deposited in a specific Finance
Department code in the annual budget of the city and shall only be expended for
the specific purposes set forth in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1456.08) (Ord. 98-2015, passed 9-14-2015)
§ 1454.09 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   The repeal or amendment herein shall not abrogate or affect any offense or
act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any pending
litigation or prosecution of any right established or occurring prior to the
effective date of this chapter, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 1456.09) (Ord. 98-2015, passed 9-14-2015)
§ 1454.10 APPROPRIATION OF FEES COLLECTED.
   All fees collected shall be paid into the treasury of the city and shall, in
turn, be certified by the Finance Director and appropriated by City Council for
the enforcement of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1456.10) (Ord. 98-2015, passed 9-14-2015)
TITLE EIGHT: HOUSING CODE
CHAPTER 1462: ICC INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Section
1462.01   Most current edition adopted.
1462.02   Purpose.
1462.03   File and distribution copies.
1462.04   Enforcement.
1462.05   Conflict of laws.
1462.06   Amendments.
Editor’s note:
   Section 1462.99 was repealed by Ord. 55-1996, passed 4-22-1996. The penalty
for violations of this chapter is contained in § 1350.03 of the city’s
Development Code.
Cross-reference:
   Adoption of technical codes by reference, see Ohio R.C. 731.231
   Building permits and fees, see B. & H. Ch.
1444
   Building standards, see B. & H. Ch.
1402, Ch.
1404, Ch.
1406
   Insulation, see B. & H. Ch.
1448
   Nuisances, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3767
   Safety, sanitation and health, see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 660
§ 1462.01 MOST CURRENT EDITION ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 731.231, there is hereby adopted by and for the city
that certain code known as the ICC International Property Maintenance Code,
most current edition adopted, promulgated by International Code Council, Inc.,
save and except such portions thereof as may be hereinafter amended or
repealed.
(Prior Code, § 1462.01) (Ord. 55-1996, passed 4-22-1996; Ord. 23-2008, passed
2-25-2008; Ord. 126-2020, passed 10-26-2020)
§ 1462.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the ICC International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted
in §
1462.01 of this chapter, is to establish the minimum acceptable standards for
the maintenance of existing buildings, structures, premises and facilities.
(Prior Code, § 1462.02) (Ord. 55-1996, passed 4-22-1996; Ord. 23-2008, passed
2-25-2008)
§ 1462.03 FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.
   At least one copy of the ICC International Property Maintenance Code, as
adopted in §
1462.01 of this chapter, is on file with the Clerk of Council for inspection by
the public. At least one copy is also on file in the County Law Library. In
addition, the Division of Building Inspection shall have copies available for
inspection by and distribution to the public, at cost.
(Prior Code, § 1462.03) (Ord. 55-1996, passed 4-22-1996; Ord. 23-2008, passed
2-25-2008)
§ 1462.04 ENFORCEMENT.
   The ICC International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted in §
1462.01 of this chapter, shall be enforced by the Building Commissioner in
accordance with § 1350.03 of the city’s Development Code, which is contained in
Part Twelve of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1462.04) (Ord. 55-1996, passed 4-22-1996; Ord. 23-2008, passed
2-25-2008)
§ 1462.05 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   In the event of a conflict between a provision of the ICC International
Property Maintenance Code, as adopted in §
1462.01 of this chapter, and a provision of any other technical code adopted by
the city, the stricter standard shall prevail. In the event of a conflict
between a provision of such code and state law, the state law shall prevail. In
the event of a conflict between a provision of such code and a city ordinance,
resolution, rule or regulation, the city ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 1462.05) (Ord. 55-1996, passed 4-22-1996; Ord. 23-2008, passed
2-25-2008)
§ 1462.06 AMENDMENTS.
   The ICC International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted in §
1462.01 of this chapter, will follow the most current edition adopted of the
IPMC along with corresponding changes made to the section numbers where the
contents do not change, is hereby amended as follows:
   (a)   Deleting “International” and inserting “Ohio” in all references
pertaining to the Building Code, Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code, Electrical
Code, Fire Code and Fuel Gas Code;
   (b)   Deleting all references of “International Zoning Code” and inserting
“Barberton Development Code”;
   (c)   Deleting any and all reference to the ICC (International Code
Council), Chapter 8;
   (d)   Deleting § 104, “Fees”;
   (e)   Adding the following definition to § 202, “General Definitions”:
      TEMPORARY HOUSING. Any tent, trailer or other structure used for human
shelter, not to include recreation purposes, which is designed to be
transportable and which is not attached to the ground, to another structure, or
to any utilities system on the same premises.
   (f)   Inserting into the first paragraph of § 302.4, “Weeds”, the following
verbiage as shown in bold:
      All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or
plant growth in excess of eight (8) inches. All noxious weeds shall be
prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and
vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not
include cultivated flowers and gardens.
   (g)   Adding the following as § 302.7.1:
      302.7.1 – Tents and/or Temporary Housing, as defined herein, shall not be
used to cover or store personal property or equipment and shall not be erected
or used for sleeping purposes for more than seven (7) consecutive days. The
location of tents shall be as provided in Chapter 1140: Table 1140D: Prohibited
Yard Obstructions on Single and Two Family Lots of the Barberton Development
Code.
   (h)   Inserting into the first sentence of § 303.2, “Enclosures”, the
following verbiage as shown in bold:
      Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, containing water more than 24
inches (610 mm) in depth and larger than 250 square feet in size shall be
completely surrounded by a fence or barrier at least 48 inches (1,219 mm) in
height above the finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier away
from the pool.
   (i)   Adding the following regulation to § 304, “Exterior Structure”:
      304.10.1 Decks, porches, balconies and yard areas. No furniture of any
kind shall be located on a deck, porch, balcony or yard area that is not
specifically designed as outdoor furniture and has the ability to resist
moisture, water and corrosion. Additionally, fixtures intended for interior use
shall not be located on a deck, porch, balcony, or yard area such as toilets,
bathtubs, sinks, etc.
   (j)   Inserting into paragraph 1 of § 304.14, “Insect Screens”, the
following verbiage as shown in bold:
      During the period from April 15th to November 1st, every door, window and
other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food
preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be
included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured,
packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of
not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used
for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.
   (k)   Adding the following as § 404.8, “Occupancy Limitations”:
      SECTION 404
      OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS
      404.8 The use of any temporary housing structure as a means of human
shelter is strictly prohibited.
   (l)   Inserting into paragraph 1 of § 602.3, “Heat Supply”, the following
verbiage as shown in bold:
      Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or
more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to
furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from
September 1st to June 1st to maintain a temperature of not less than 68°F
(20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
   (m)   Inserting into paragraph 1 of § 602.4, “Occupiable Work Spaces”, the
following verbiage as shown in bold:
      Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the
period from September 1st to June 1st to maintain a temperature of not less
than 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are occupied.
(Prior Code, § 1462.06) (Ord. 55-1996, passed 4-22-1996; Ord. 101-1999, passed
5-24-1999; Ord. 29-2002, passed 2-25-2002; Ord. 23-2008, passed 2-25-2008; Ord.
40-2008, passed 3-24-2008; Ord. 82-2010, passed 6-14-2010; Ord. 157-2010,
passed 10-11-2010; Ord. 180-2015, passed 11-23-2015; Ord. 18-2022, passed 2-14-
2022; Ord. 86-2025, passed 7-14-2025)
CHAPTER 1464: NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS ASSOCIATION, TRI-COUNTY, MINIMUM
RESIDENTIAL REWIRE ELECTRICAL CODE
Section
1464.01   1996 edition adopted.
1464.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Adoption of technical codes by reference, see Ohio R.C. 731.231
   Electricity generally, see S.U. & P.S. Ch.
1052
   Electrical registration, see B. & H. Ch.
1422,
Ch. 1424
   Electric sign licensing, see B. & H. Ch.
1430
   Electric wiring permit and inspection fees, see B. & H.
1444.02,
1444.16
   National Electrical Code, see B. & H. Ch.
1406
§ 1464.01 1996 EDITION ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 731.231, there is hereby adopted by and for the city
that certain code known as the National Electrical Contractors Association,
Tri-County, Minimum Residential Rewire Electrical Code (1996 edition) for the
purpose of regulating electrical wiring within the city. Each and all of the
regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of said code and hereby referred
to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out herein.
(Prior Code, § 1463.01) (Ord. 52-1996, passed 4-8-1996)
§ 1464.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of the
National Electrical Contractors Association, Tri-County, Minimum Residential
Rewire Electrical Code, as adopted in §
1464.01 of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and
shall be fined not more than $250 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both,
for each offense. Unless otherwise provided, a separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation or non-compliance occurs or
continues.
(Prior Code, § 1463.99)
TITLE TEN: COMMERCIAL MAINTENANCE CODE
CHAPTER 1476: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
Section
1476.01   Definitions.
1476.02   Applicability.
1476.03   Duties and responsibilities of owner and operator.
1476.04   Duties and responsibilities of operator.
1476.05   Buildings or premises damaged.
1476.06   Notice of violation.
1476.07   Administrative provisions.
1476.08   Board of Zoning and Building Appeals; appeals procedure; fee;
demolition hearings.
1476.09   Inspection warrants.
1476.99   Penalty.
Editor’s note:
   This chapter, previously a codification of Ord. 287-1976, passed 11-15-1976,
was re-enacted in its entirety by Ord. 137-1981, passed 7-27-1981.
Cross-reference:
   Power to regulate sanitary condition of buildings, see Ohio R.C. 715.26(A),
715.29
   Removal of unsafe structures, see Ohio R.C. 715.26(B), 715.261
§ 1476.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure, the use of which is incidental to that
of the main building and which is attached thereto or located on the same
premises.
      BUILDING. A combination of materials to form a construction adapted to
permanent or continuous occupancy for use for public, institutional, residence
of two or more living units, business or storage purposes.
      BUILDING CODE. The Building Code of the city.
      COMMERCIAL BUSINESS. Any business which offers for sale goods or
services, but excluding businesses of a manufacturing nature.
      DETERIORATION. The condition or appearance of a building or part thereof,
characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, peeling, rusting or other
evidence of physical decay or neglect, excessive use or lack of maintenance.
      EXPOSED TO PUBLIC VIEW. Any premises, or any part thereof, or any
building, or any part thereof, which may be lawfully viewed by the public, or
any member thereof, from a sidewalk, street, alleyway, licensed open air
parking lot or from any adjoining or neighboring premises.
      EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES. Those portions of a building which are exposed
to public view and the open space of any premises outside of any building
erected thereon.
      EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents and vermin
by eliminating their harborage places, or by removing or making inaccessible
material that may serve as their food by poisoning, spraying, fumigating,
trapping or by any other approved means of pest elimination.
      FIRE CHIEF. The Fire Chief of the city.
      FIRE HAZARD. (See also NUISANCE.) Any thing or any act which increases or
may cause an increase of the hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree than
reasonably necessary for the conduct of the commercial business on the premises
or which may unreasonably obstruct, delay or hinder, or may unreasonably become
the cause of an obstruction, a delay, a hazard or an unreasonable hindrance to
the prevention, suppression or extinguishment of fire.
      GARBAGE. (See also REFUSE.) Putrescible animal and vegetable waste
resulting from handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
      HEALTH OFFICER. The Health Commissioner of the city.
      INFESTATION. The presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests on
the premises which constitute a health hazard.
      MIXED OCCUPANCY. Any building containing one or more dwelling units or
room units and also having a portion thereof devoted to non-dwelling uses.
      NUISANCE.
         (a)   Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity
jurisprudence, or as provided by the statutes of the state or the ordinances of
the city;
         (b)   Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the
health or safety of children whether in a building, on the premises of a
building, or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes, but is not limited to,
abandoned wells, shafts, abandoned basements, abandoned excavations, abandoned
iceboxes, refrigerators, abandoned motor vehicles, any structurally unsound
fences or structures, trash, debris or vegetation such as poison ivy, oak or
sumac, which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors;
         (c)   Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to
health of persons on or near the premises where the condition exists;
         (d)   Unsanitary conditions or anything offensive to the senses or
dangerous to health in violation of this code; and
         (e)   Fire hazards.
      OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of premises, or a
part thereof, whether with or without the knowledge and consent of the owner,
or any person, individually or jointly, entitled to possession regardless of
whether the premises are actually occupied or not.
      PLUMBING. All of the following supplies, facilities and equipment: gas
pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes,
water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower bath,
installed clothes-washing machines, catch basins, vents and any other similar
fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines, and water
pipes and lines utilized in conjunction with air conditioning equipment.
      PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings or
structures thereon, under control by the same operator, devoted to commercial
business use, together with all adjacent land.
      REFUSE. (See also GARBAGE.) Non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of
both combustible and non-combustible wastes such as paper, wrappings, discarded
cigarettes, used cardboard, used tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, scrap, wood,
discarded glass, discarded bedding, broken crockery and similar materials.
      SANITARY SEWER. Any sanitary sewer owned, operated and maintained by the
city, and available for public use for the disposal of sewage.
      SEWAGE. Waste from a flush toilet, bathtub, sink, lavatory, dishwashing
or laundry machine, or the water-carried waste from any other fixture,
equipment or machine.
      STORY. The portion of a building included between the upper surface of
any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above; except that, the
topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper
surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished
ceiling level directly above a basement or cellar is more than six feet above
grade, such basement or cellar shall be considered a STORY.
      STRUCTURE. The combination of any materials, whether fixed or portable
forming a construction, including buildings.
      WASHROOMS. Enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs, showers or
both, and which also includes toilets, lavatories or fixtures serving similar
purposes.
      WATER CLOSET COMPARTMENT. Enclosed space containing one or more toilets
which may also contain one or more lavatories, urinals and other plumbing
fixtures.
      WEATHERING. Deterioration, decay or damage caused by exposure to the
elements.
   (B)   Whenever any words are used in this code, they shall be construed,
unless expressly stated to the contrary, to include the plurals of those words
and/or as if they were followed by the words “or any part thereof”. “Shall”
shall be applied retroactively as well as prospectively.
(Prior Code, § 1493.01) (Ord. 137-1981, passed 7-27-1981)
§ 1476.02 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Every commercial business establishment and the premises on which it
is situated in the city used or intended to be used for commercial business
occupancy and residential structures of two or more living units shall comply
with the provisions of this code, whether or not such building has been
constructed, altered or repaired before or after the enactment of this code,
and irrespective of any permits or licenses which have been issued for the use
or occupancy of the building, or for the installation or repair of equipment or
facilities prior to the effective date of this code. This code establishes
minimum standards for the initial and continued occupancy and use of all such
buildings, and does not replace or modify standards otherwise established for
the construction, repair, alteration or use of the building, equipment or
facilities contained therein, except as provided in division (B) below. Where
there is mixed occupancy, any commercial business use therein shall be
nevertheless regulated by and subject to the provisions of this code.
   (B)   Higher standards shall prevail in case of conflict with other
ordinances or laws. In any case where the provisions of this code impose a
higher standard than set forth in any other ordinances of the city or under the
laws of the state, then the standard as set forth herein shall prevail, but if
the provisions of this code impose a lower standard than any other ordinance of
the city or of state laws, then the higher standard contained in any such other
ordinance or law shall prevail.
   (C)   After the date of enactment hereof, all licenses and permits shall be
issued upon compliance with this code as well as compliance with the ordinance
under which such licenses and permits are granted.
   (D)   No license, permit or other certification of compliance with this code
shall constitute a defense against any violation of any other ordinance of the
city applicable to any structure or premises, nor shall any provision herein
relieve any owner or operator from complying with any such other provision or
any official of the city from enforcing any such other provisions.
(Prior Code, § 1493.02) (Ord. 137-1981, passed 7-27-1981)
§ 1476.03 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNER AND OPERATOR.
   (A)   Hazards and unsanitary conditions. The exterior of the premises and
all structures thereon shall be kept free of all nuisances, and any hazards to
the safety of occupants, pedestrians and other persons utilizing the premises
and free of hazards which include but are not limited to the following:
      (1)   Refuse. Brush, weeds, broken glass, stumps, roots, obnoxious
growths and accumulations of filth, garbage, trash, refuse and debris;
      (2)   Natural growth. Dead and dying trees and limbs or other natural
growth which, by reason of rotting or deteriorating condition or storm damage,
constitute a hazard to persons in the vicinity thereof;
      (3)   Overhangings. Loose and overhanging objects and accumulations of
ice and snow which by reason of location above ground level constitute a danger
of falling on persons in the vicinity thereof; and
      (4)   Ground surface hazards. Holes, excavations, breaks, projections,
obstructions, icy conditions, uncleared snow and excretions of pets and other
animals on walks, driveways, parking lots and parking areas and other parts of
the premises which are accessible to and used by persons on the premises. All
such holes and excavations shall be filled and repaired, walks and steps
replaced and other conditions removed where necessary to eliminate hazards or
unsanitary conditions with reasonable dispatch upon their discovery.
   (B)   Sources of Infestation. Foundation walls shall be kept structurally
sound, free from defects and damage and capable of bearing imposed loads
safely.
   (C)   Chimneys, flues and vent attachments. Chimneys, flues and vent
attachments shall be maintained structurally sound, free from defects and so
maintained as to capably perform at all times the functions for which they were
designed. Chimneys, flues, gas vents or other draft-producing equipment shall
provide sufficient draft to develop the rated output of the connected
equipment, be structurally safe, durable, smoke- tight and capable of
withstanding the action of flue gases.
   (D)   Porches, stairs and balconies. Exterior porches, landings, balconies,
stairs and fire escapes shall be provided with banisters or railings properly
designed and maintained to minimize the hazard of falling, and the same shall
be kept structurally sound, in good repair and free from defects.
   (E)   Exterior of premises. Every commercial business building, including
accessory structures in or about a building or on the lot on which such
building is situated and every building unit and every part thereof, including
fences, shall be maintained in good repair by the operator.
   (F)   Signs and billboards. All permanent signs and billboards exposed to
public view permitted by reason of other regulations or as a lawful non-
conforming use shall be maintained in good repair. All non-operative or broken
electrical signs shall be repaired or shall, with their supporting members, be
removed forthwith.
   (G)   Store fronts. All store fronts shall be kept in good repair, painted
where required, and shall not constitute a safety hazard or nuisance. In the
event repairs to a store front become necessary, such repairs shall be made
with reasonable dispatch and shall be permanent in nature. Any cornice visible
above a store front shall be kept in good repair.
   (H)   Awnings and marquees. Any awning and marquee and its accompanying
structural members which extend over any street, sidewalk or any other portion
of the premises shall be maintained in good repair and shall not constitute a
nuisance or a safety hazard. In the event such awnings or marquees are not
properly maintained in accordance with the foregoing, they shall, together with
their supporting members, be removed forthwith. In the event awnings or
marquees are made of cloth, plastic or of a similar material such cloth or
plastic where exposed to public view shall be maintained and shall not show
evidence of excessive weathering, ripping, tearing or other holes. Nothing
herein shall be construed to authorize any encroachment on streets, sidewalks
or other parts of the public domain.
   (I)   General maintenance. The exterior of every structure or accessory
structure (including fences, signs and store fronts) shall be maintained in
good repair. All surfaces shall be maintained free of broken glass, loose
shingles, crumbling stone or brick.
   (J)   Reconstruction of walls and sidings. All reconstruction of walls and
sidings shall be of standard quality and appearance.
   (K)   Floors, interior walls and ceilings. Floors, interior walls and
ceilings of every structure shall be structurally sound and maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition.
      (1)   Floors generally. Floors shall be considered to be structurally
sound when capable of safely bearing imposed loads and shall be maintained at
all times in a condition so as to be smooth, clean, free from cracks, breaks
and other hazards.
      (2)   Washroom and water closet compartment floors. Washrooms and water
closet compartment floors shall be surfaced with water-resistant material and
shall be kept in a dry, clean and sanitary condition at all times.
   (L)   Supporting structural members. Supporting structural members are to be
kept structurally sound, free of deterioration and capable of bearing imposed
loads safely.
   (M)   Walls and ceilings generally. Walls and ceilings shall be considered
to be in good repair when walls are clean, free from cracks, breaks, loose
plaster and similar conditions. Walls and ceilings shall be kept clean, free of
visible foreign matter, sanitary and well-maintained at all times.
   (N)   Lighting of washrooms. Every washroom and water closet compartment
shall be provided with permanently installed artificial lighting fixtures with
a switch and wall plate so located and maintained that there is no danger of
short-circuiting from water from other bathroom facilities or from splashing of
water.
   (O)   Electrical service generally. All commercial business structures shall
be properly connected to and be provided with electric power through safely
insulated conductors conforming to all codes for the city.
   (P)   Loose or exposed wiring. Except as hereinafter stated, all wiring or
cables shall be properly affixed or attached to the structure, insulation shall
be provided for all wiring and cables and kept in good repair, and no ceiling
or wall fixture shall be used for supplying power to equipment other than that
for which they are designed.
   (Q)   Fuse and protective devices. Maximum fuse sizes consistent with safety
shall be posted conspicuously on the inside cover of all fuse boxes and no fuse
shall be installed therein in excess of the stated maximum except that owners
shall not be responsible for violation in fuse installations without their
knowledge where the correct maximum is stated and the fuse box is located
within any part of the premises which is in the exclusive possession of
occupants other than the owner.
   (R)   Overloading of circuits.
      (1)   Overloading of circuits is prohibited.
      (2)   Where the public officer finds after notice and hearing that by
reason of the appliances and fixtures there is continuing overloading of an
electrical line creating a hazard, the operator shall be required to install a
line of sufficient capacity to absorb the load to which the line is subjected
or otherwise eliminate the conditions causing the overload.
      (3)   For purposes of this section, the public officer may consider the
peak seasonable load to which the line is subjected.
   (S)   Responsibility for garbage removal. The operator shall have the duty
and responsibility of removing garbage.
   (T)   Accumulating refuse regulated. Flammable or combustible liquids or
other materials may not be stored on the premises unless they are of a type
approved for storage by the regulations of the Fire Department, and then only
in such quantities as may be prescribed by the regulations.
   (U)   Compliance; separate living units. The provisions of this section
shall be complied with whether the building is occupied or unoccupied. Each
living unit of a residential structure of two or more living units shall be
treated separately for the purposes of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1493.03) (Ord. 137-1981, passed 7-27-1981)
§ 1476.04 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF OPERATOR.
   (A)   All parts of the premises under the control of the operator shall be
kept in a clean and sanitary condition and the occupant shall refrain from
performing any acts which would render other parts of the premises unclean or
unsanitary or which would obstruct adjacent operators from performing any duty
required hereunder or maintaining the premises in a clean and sanitary
condition.
   (B)   Every operator shall be responsible for the elimination of infestation
in and on the premises, subject to his or her control.
   (C)   Every operator shall maintain all plumbing fixtures in a clean and
sanitary condition and he or she shall not deposit any material in any fixture
or sewer system which would result in stoppage of or damage to the fixture or
sewer system.
   (D)   Where the owner would not otherwise know of a defect of any facility,
utility or equipment required to be furnished hereunder and the same is
defective or inoperable, each operator affected thereby shall upon learning of
such defect provide notice to the owner or person in charge of the premises.
(Prior Code, § 1493.04) (Ord. 137-1981, passed 7-27-1981)
§ 1476.05 BUILDINGS OR PREMISES DAMAGED.
   (A)   Any building or premises damaged by fire, collapse or an act of God to
such an extent that the cost of repair and reconstruction exceeds three-
quarters of the assessed valuation of the dwelling at the time the damage
occurred shall not be repaired or reconstructed unless made to comply in all
respects with all codes and ordinances of the city.
   (B)   Any building or premises damaged by wear and tear, deterioration and
depreciation to such an extent that the cost of repair and rehabilitation to
place it in a safe, sound and sanitary condition exceeds 100% of the assessed
valuation at the time when the repairs or rehabilitation are to be made shall
not be so repaired or rehabilitated unless the building or premises is made to
comply in all respects with the provisions of all codes and ordinances of the
city. A building or premises damaged by wear and tear, deterioration and
depreciation to such an extent that the cost of repair and rehabilitation
exceed the assessed valuation shall be deemed unfit for occupancy and use
unless repaired and rehabilitated pursuant to the provisions of all codes and
ordinances of the city, and in case such building or premises is not so
repaired and rehabilitated it shall be vacated, demolished and removed.
   (C)   If the whole or any part of any building or premises is found
dangerous or unsafe, the Building Commissioner shall notify the owner or, if
the owner cannot be located, his or her agent or the tenant(s), of the unsafe
condition and shall specify the time when such defects shall be remedied. If
none of these parties can be found within the city, the notice may be posted
upon a conspicuous part of the building or premises, or published in a daily
newspaper as directed by the Building Commissioner. When necessary, the
Building Commissioner may order the vacation of the premises in unsafe
condition as well as adjacent premises, and may divert traffic from streets and
sidewalks.
      (1)   The Police Division shall, upon written request of the Building
Commissioner or the Fire Chief, summarily enforce such orders of vacation and
shall divert traffic where necessary.
      (2)   Should the owner, his or her agent, tenant or other interested
party fail to remedy the unsafe condition, the Building Commissioner shall
proceed to make safe the unsafe conditions, and shall report the facts and the
costs of doing this work to the Finance Director who shall order the cost paid
to the one performing the work, and shall assess the cost against the property
in question.
   (D)   Except where ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction, or where
necessary in case of dangerous emergency involving a clear and immediate threat
to human life, concurred in by the Law Director, no building or premises shall
be torn down or demolished, except upon a finding by the Board of Building and
Zoning Appeals, after hearing upon notice to all interested parties, as
provided in §
1476.08(C) of this chapter, that the building or premises qualified for
demolition under this section.
(Prior Code, § 1493.05) (Ord. 137-1981, passed 7-27-1981)
§ 1476.06 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Whenever the Building Commissioner or such other authorized official
determines that there exists a violation of any provision of this code, he or
she shall give notice of such violation to the person or persons responsible
therefor and order compliance.
   (B)   Such notice and order shall:
      (1)   Be in writing;
      (2)   Specify in detail the violation or violations, together with the
respective sections of the code violated;
      (3)   Set a reasonable time, not to exceed ninety days in any event, for
the performance of any act it requires;
      (4)   Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this code;
      (5)   Advise the owner or occupant of the procedure of appeal; and
      (6)   Be served upon the owner or occupant by delivering it to him or her
personally or by leaving the same at his or her residence, office or place of
business with some person of suitable age and discretion who shall be informed
of the contents thereof, or by mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to his
or her last known address, or if the person to be served is unknown, by posting
such notice in some conspicuous place on the building or premises.
(Prior Code, § 1493.06) (Ord. 137-1981, passed 7-27-1981)
§ 1476.07 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Responsibility for enforcement of this code is vested in the Building
Commissioner and all inspections, regulations, enforcement and hearings on
violations of the provisions of this code, unless expressly stated to the
contrary, shall be under his or her direction and supervision. He or she may
appoint or designate such other public officials or employees of the city to
perform duties as may be necessary to the enforcement of this code, including
the making of inspections and holding of hearings.
   (B)   All buildings and premises subject to this code are subject to
inspections by the Building Commissioner if there is reason to believe a
violation exists of a character which is an immediate threat to health or
safety requiring inspection and abatement without delay.
(Prior Code, § 1493.07) (Ord. 137-1981, passed 7-27-1981)
§ 1476.08 BOARD OF ZONING AND BUILDING APPEALS; APPEALS PROCEDURE; FEE;
DEMOLITION HEARINGS.
   (A)   The Board of Zoning and Building Appeals under this code shall be the
same Board previously created under the Housing and Zoning Codes of the city.
   (B)   The Board shall consider appeals from the decision of the official
charged with the enforcement of this code in order that the provisions of the
code may be reasonably applied and substantial justice done where practical
difficulties are apparent or unnecessary hardship would result in carrying out
the strict letter of this code. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or in
part, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed
from and shall make such determination as, in its opinion, ought to be made in
the premises, if the case involved is, in their judgment, not in violation of
the intent of the code, and if public health and safety will not be
jeopardized.
   (C)   (1)   Appeals from the decisions of the official charged with the
enforcement of this code may be made to the Board. The appellant shall file
with the Commissioner of Buildings a notice of appeal specifying the grounds
thereof. The Building Commissioner shall forthwith transmit to the Board all of
the papers constituting the record upon which the actions appealed from were
taken. Appeals will be heard at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
Board. In the event the notice of violation was issued as the result of a
condition constituting an immediate danger to the life, health or safety of the
occupant or the public, the Building Commissioner shall, within 48 hours of the
filing of a notice of appeal, notify the Board of the receipt of the notice of
appeal and ascertain the earliest date a quorum can be obtained and a special
meeting held. The Building Commissioner shall notify the aggrieved party in
writing of the time and place of meeting. The Board shall render a decision
within five days after such meeting. The decision of the Board shall be final.
      (2)   A fee of $25 shall be required before an appeal will be considered.
However, the Board may, where there is a showing of financial distress such
that payment of the fee would result in hardship, waive the payment of such
fee.
   (D)   Whenever the Building Commissioner finds that a building or premises
qualifies for demolition under §
1476.05 of this chapter, and the interested party or parties have failed to
comply with a notice of violation directing remedial action, the Building
Commissioner may request that the Board issue its findings that the building or
premises so qualifies.
      (1)   Upon receipt of the Building Commissioner’s request the Board shall
set a time and place for a hearing and written notice thereof shall be given
not less than 15 days in advance to all interested parties. Notice shall be in
a form approved by the Director of Law, and served personally if the party can
be found. If after diligent effort a party cannot be found within the city, the
notice may be served by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed
with postage pre-paid to the last known address of the party. In the event that
a party cannot be found within the city and no address is known or can be found
for him or her, upon approval of the Director of Law, the notice may be served
by publication once each week for three successive weeks in a newspaper of
general circulation published within the city. In every case a copy of the
notice shall be posted in a prominent place on the building or premises at
least 15 days prior to the hearing.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, INTERESTED PARTY means any person
or entity listed on the assessment roll, found upon the premises, or revealed
by a standard search of the title thereof. Proof of service of the notice upon
all interested parties shall be filed with the Board on or before the date of
hearing.
      (3)   At the hearing, the Board shall receive evidence and examine the
question. An interested party shall have the right to counsel of his or her own
choice to introduce relevant evidence, to cross-examine witnesses and be fully
heard. The Building Commissioner shall be represented by the Director of Law or
a member of his or her staff. The Board shall define by rule the conduct and
procedure to govern hearings hereunder. Before making any finding, the Board
shall require that photographs sufficient and adequate to portray the interior
and exterior condition of the building or premises be submitted to it, and
entered in its files.
      (4)   The Board shall determine its findings by a preponderance of all
the evidence, and enter the same in writing. If the Board finds that the
building or premises qualifies for demolition as aforesaid, the written finding
shall recite the basis thereof in sufficient detail to identify the evidence
relied on to reach the finding. Certified copies of the finding shall be
delivered to the Building Commissioner and each interested party.
(Prior Code, § 1493.08) (Ord. 137-1981, passed 7-27-1981)
§ 1476.09 INSPECTION WARRANTS.
   The Building Commissioner or other officers or inspectors acting for him may
apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for a warrant setting forth
factually the actual conditions and circumstances that provide a reasonable
basis for believing that a nuisance or violation of this code exists on the
premises. If the judge is satisfied as to the matter set forth in the
application, he or she shall authorize the issuance of a warrant permitting
access to an inspection of that part of the premises on which the nuisance or
violation is believed to exist.
(Prior Code, § 1493.09) (Ord. 137-1981, passed 7-27-1981)
§ 1476.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree and shall
be fined not more than $750 or imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both. Each
day a violation continues constitutes a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 1493.99) (Ord. 137-1981, passed 7-27-1981)
CHAPTER 1478: RENTAL PROPERTY REGISTRATION PROGRAM
Section
1478.01   Definitions.
1478.02   Conflict and invalidity.
1478.03   Warranties and liability.
1478.04   Application of other codes.
1478.05   Registration required.
1478.06   Registration form.
1478.07   Change of information on registration form.
1478.08   Rental registration fee; late fee; length of validity; assessment to
taxes.
1478.09   Reduced rate registration rental units.
1478.10   Use of rental registration monies collected.
1478.11   Entry and inspection.
1478.12   Notice of violation of inspection.
1478.13   Board of Zoning and Building Appeals.
1478.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Division of Building Inspection, see B. & H. Ch.
1442
   ICC International Property Maintenance Code, see B. & H. Ch.
1462
   Power to regulate sanitary conditions of buildings, see Ohio R.C. 715.26(A),
715.29
   Residential Building Code of Ohio for One, Two and Three Family Dwellings,
see B. & H. Ch.
1402
§ 1478.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall
apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BARBERTON DEVELOPMENT CODE. The Development Code adopted by ordinance,
and any amendments.
      DWELLING. Any dwelling, dwelling unit, building, structure, or other
living quarters used, intended to be used, or designed to be used, in whole or
in part, for living or sleeping by human occupants. "Temporary housing" as
defined in the IPMC and the Development Code is not a dwelling.
      DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and
forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used, intended to be
used, or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for living, sleeping,
cooking, and eating.
      ICC INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE. The ICC International
Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) adopted by ordinance, and any amendments.
      OCCUPANT. Any person over one year of age living, sleeping, cooking, or
eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling.
      OHIO BUILDING CODE. The Ohio Building Code, as adopted pursuant to R.C.
Chapters 119, 3781, and 3791, and any amendments.
      OHIO RESIDENTIAL CODE. The Ohio Residential Code, as adopted pursuant to
R.C. Chapters 119, 3781, and 3791, and any amendments.
      OPERATOR. Any person or legal entity who, alone or jointly or severally
with others, has charge, care, or control of any premises, or part thereof, in
which there are one or more rental units whether as owner, manager, agent of
the owner or due to conduct that demonstrates the person's position of
responsibility concerning the rental unit.
      OWNER. Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, has
legal title to any rental unit with or without accompanying actual possession
thereof, whether recorded or not, or is the executor, executrix, administrator,
administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of either the person with
legal title or the land contract vendor or vendee.
      PERSON. An individual, partnership, association, company, firm, trust,
corporation, government corporation, department, bureau, agency, or any entity
recognized by law.
      PREMISES. Not only the rental unit and any other buildings of any kind or
nature located on the lot, but also the entire parcel surrounding the
buildings, including, but not limited to fences, walkways, walls, and
appurtenances.
      PROPERTY. The real property parcel upon which the dwelling is situated
upon.
      PROPERTY MAINTENANCE INSPECTOR. The Building Commissioner of the city or
the Building Commissioner's authorized Property Maintenance Inspector.
      PURCHASER. Any person or legal entity, who, alone or jointly or severally
with others, has entered into a contract to become the owner of any rental
unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof. This does not
include transactions pursuant to a land contract.
      RENTAL INSPECTION. The rental inspection as required in this chapter.
      RENTAL REGISTRATION. The rental registration as required in this chapter.
      RENTAL UNIT. A dwelling unit, and/or vacant structure not occupied by the
person with legal title.
   (B)   Whenever the words "dwelling", "dwelling unit", "premises" or "rental
unit" are used in this chapter, they shall be construed as though they were
followed by the words "or any part thereof."
(Prior Code, § 1495.01) (Ord. 65-2009, passed 6-8-2009; Ord. 118-2024, passed
12-9-2024; Ord. 90- 2025, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 1478.02 CONFLICT AND INVALIDITY.
   Where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a
provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or code of
the city existing on the effective date of this chapter, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for the promotion of the health and safety of
the community shall prevail. where a provision of this chapter is found to be
in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or code of the city
existing on the effective date of this chapter, which establishes a lower
standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the
community, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail, and the other
ordinance or code shall be repealed to the extent that it may be found in
conflict with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1495.02) (Ord. 65-2009, passed 6-8-2009; Ord. 118-2024, passed
12-9-2024)
§ 1478.03 WARRANTIES AND LIABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to warrant, insure, or
guarantee that there are no violations of the IPMC, the city's Development
Code, the Ohio Fire Code, the Ohio Residential Building Code or the Ohio
Building Code at a premises, or that the premises is in a clean, sanitary,
safe, or fit condition. Inspections by the Building Department are made for the
purpose of preserving and improving the housing stock and enforcing the IPMC,
the city's Development Code, the Ohio Fire Code, the Ohio Residential Code, and
the Ohio Building Code and are not made on behalf of the occupant, operator,
owner, or purchaser of a premises, or any other person.
(Prior Code, § 1495.03) (Ord. 65-2009, passed 6-8-2009; Ord. 118-2024, passed
12-9-2024)
§ 1478.04 APPLICATION OF OTHER CODES.
   (A)   The IPMC, the city's Development Code, the Ohio Fire Code, the Ohio
Residential Code, and the Ohio Building Code, and any amendments thereto, are
hereby adopted as part of the requirements of this chapter for the purpose of
providing guidance and standards in the application and enforcement of this
chapter and in determining whether the conditions of the premises are
maintained in an approved manner.
   (B)   Where differences occur between the provisions in this chapter and the
provisions that this section adopts, the provisions that impose the higher
standards shall control.
(Prior Code, § 1495.04) (Ord. 65-2009, passed 6-8-2009; Ord. 118-2024, passed
12-9-2024)
§ 1478.05 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   Registration is required on a form, online or in person, provided by the
Building Department. Rental registration is valid for one year beginning April
1 - March 31, regardless of any change in ownership.
(Ord. 118-2024, passed 12-9-2024; Ord. 90-2025, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 1478.06 REGISTRATION FORM.
   The registration form shall include the following information and any
additional information as determined by the Building Department:
   (A)   The total number of rental units the owner owns or that the operator
operates;
   (B)   The number of premises with a rental unit;
   (C)   The address of each premises;
   (D)   The number of rental units on each premises;
   (E)   Information concerning the owner, or if the owner is required to have
an operator, of if the owner has an operator, the form includes:
      (1)   If the owner and/or operator is one or more individuals or a sole
proprietorship, the owner and/or operator’s name, address, date of birth,
driver's license number, and phone number;
      (2)   If the owner and/or operator is a partnership, the name, address,
tax identification number, and phone number of the partnership, and the name,
address, date of birth, driver's license number and phone number of one of the
partners;
      (3)   If the owner and/or operator is a corporation, the name, address,
and phone number of the corporation, the name, address, and phone number of the
corporation's statutory agent, and the name, address, date of birth, driver's
license number and phone number of one of the officers; and
      (4)   If the owner and/or operator is a trust, the name, address, and
phone number of the trust, and the name, address, date of birth, driver's
license number and phone number of one of the trustees.
   (F)   Proof of property and liability insurance for the property.
(Ord. 118-2024, passed 12-9-2024; Ord. 90-2025, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 1478.07 CHANGE OF INFORMATION ON REGISTRATION FORM.
   Within 30 days of any change of information that is required on a
registration form, the owner and/or operator of a rental unit(s) shall contact
the Building Department, either in writing or by email, to update the
information on the registration form.
(Ord. 118-2024, passed 12-9-2024)
§ 1478.08 RENTAL REGISTRATION FEE; LATE FEE; LENGTH OF VALIDITY; ASSESSMENT TO
TAXES.
   (A)   A rental registration fee of $200 per rental unit shall be imposed for
each owner/operator. Example, a dwelling with two separate dwelling units
located on one parcel would require a rental registration fee of $400.
   (B)   If a registration form is filed late, an additional late fee of $50
shall be imposed per unit, per month.
   (C)   Registration shall be valid for one year beginning April 1 - March 31,
regardless of any change in ownership.
   (D)   If an owner/operator fails to register, an additional penalty of $200
per rental unit shall be imposed. These penalties along with the applicable
rental registration will be assessed on the property's taxes.
   (E)   Once the property is assessed according to division (D) of this
section, if the same owner and/or operator fails to pay rental registration for
any rental units for a year or more, such rental registration fee shall
increase to $500 per rental unit.
   (F)   One percent of every rental registration fee shall be held in a
separate fund to be used exclusively for the purchase and distribution of fire
and carbon monoxide detectors for every rental unit. Such detectors shall be
installed by the Barberton Fire Department.
(Ord. 118-2024, passed 12-9-2024; Ord. 90-2025, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 1478.09 REDUCED RATE REGISTRATION RENTAL UNITS.
   Certain rental units are registered at a reduced rate of $20 under a prior
ordinance. Those rental units shall remain at this rate until there is a
violation of this chapter or change of ownership. If there is a violation or a
change in ownership, the rental registration fee shall be set at the current
per unit, per year rate.
(Ord. 118-2024, passed 12-9-2024)
§ 1478.10 USE OF RENTAL REGISTRATION MONIES COLLECTED.
   Money collected under this chapter shall be used exclusively for the
improvement of the housing, infrastructure and administration within the city
and shall be held in a separate account.
(Ord. 118-2024, passed 12-9-2024)
§ 1478.11 ENTRY AND INSPECTION.
   (A)   The Property Maintenance Inspector is authorized and directed to make
inspections to determine the condition of dwellings and premises located within
the city. For the purpose of making the inspections, the property maintenance
inspector is authorized to enter, examine, and survey, at all reasonable times,
all dwellings, dwelling units, and premises. The owner and/or operator or
occupant of every dwelling, on request of the Property Maintenance Inspector,
may give the property maintenance inspector free access to the dwelling and its
premises, at all reasonable times, for the purpose of inspection and
examination. If entry is refused or not obtained, the Property Maintenance
Inspector shall conduct the inspection only as provided by law. This chapter
shall not be construed to require an owner and/or operator or occupant to
consent to a warrantless inspection of a dwelling or premises except as
provided by law.
   (B)   Every occupant of a dwelling shall give the owner and/or operator
access to any part of the dwelling or its premises, at all reasonable times,
for the purpose of making the repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or with any lawful rule or
regulation adopted or any lawful order issued pursuant thereto.
(Ord. 118-2024, passed 12-9-2024)
§ 1478.12 NOTICE OF VIOLATION OF INSPECTION.
   (A)   Whenever the Property Maintenance Inspector determines that there has
been a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, notice/order of the
violation shall be given to the owner and/or operator responsible for
compliance pursuant to the IPMC and/or the city's Development Code.
   (B)   Whenever an owner and/or operator violates or fails to comply with any
of the provisions of the chapter, the Property Maintenance Inspector shall have
the authority to impose an administrative or criminal penalty. The Property
Maintenance Inspector shall consider the following criteria in assessing an
administrative penalty:
      (1)   The extent to which the owner and/or operator has benefitted by the
violation of this chapter;
      (2)   The degree of harm to the public health, safety, and welfare as a
result of the violation of this chapter;
      (3)   The recidivism of the owner and/or operator, including previous
notices and orders to comply and previous enforcement action;
      (4)   Good faith efforts of the owner and/or operator to remedy the
violation of this chapter; and
      (5)   The duration of the violation after a notice and order to comply
was served pursuant to this chapter or § 110.0 of the IPMC.
   (C)   Upon request of the owner and/or operator of the dwelling and/or
dwelling unit to the city, during the process of an eviction, the owner and/or
operator may request a certified letter from the Building Department verifying
the violation of a health, safety, or the IPMC applicable to the statutory
requirements of a legal eviction.
   (D)   The imposition of an administrative fine shall only occur after a
notice/order is provided to the owner and/or operator.
(Ord. 118-2024, passed 12-9-2024)
§ 1478.13 BOARD OF ZONING AND BUILDING APPEALS.
   Any party, including the city, that is aggrieved by an alleged error in an
administrative action made under this chapter may file an appeal with the Board
of Zoning and Building Appeals. Such appeal shall comply with the city's
Development Code.
(Ord. 118-2024, passed 12-9-2024; Ord. 90-2025, passed 7-14-2025)
§ 1478.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   In addition to any criminal penalties that may be imposed pursuant to
this chapter, any person, operator, owner, or purchaser who violates or fails
to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the
following administrative penalties in accordance with the criteria of §
1478.12 (A) and (B) of this chapter:
      (1)   For a first offense, an administrative fine of up to $200.
      (2)   For a second offense, an administrative fine of up to $1,000; and
      (3)   For a third offense, an administrative fine of up to $2,000.
   Such fines shall be paid within 30 days of issuance.
   (B)   If a person, operator, owner, or purchaser fails, neglects, or refuses
to pay an administrative penalty within the time ordered pursuant to this
chapter, then the Property Maintenance Inspector shall notify the city's
Director of Finance. The city's Director of Finance shall certify the
administrative penalty to the Summit County's (County) Fiscal Officer. In
addition to the administrative penalty, an interest rate equal to the current
rate of interest charged by the city on special assessments shall be imposed by
the city for the life of the administrative penalty, added to the
administrative penalty, and collected as provided in this section. The Director
of Finance shall then certify the amount of administrative penalty, including
interest, to the County's Fiscal Officer. The County's Fiscal Officer shall
enter the amount on the tax duplicate of the county as a special assessment
against the owner's property.
   (C)   Strict Liability. The provisions of this chapter are specifically
intended to impose strict liability.
(Prior Code, § 1495.99) (Ord. 65-2009, passed 6-8-2009; Ord. 118-2024, passed
12-9-2024; Ord. 90- 2025, passed 7-14-2025)
CHAPTER 1479: LICENSING PROCEDURES AND REGULATIONS
FOR SHORT-TERM RENTAL UNITS
Section
1479.01   Purpose.
1479.02   Definitions.
1479.03   Short-term rental license required; application; fee.
1479.04   Short-term rental license approval/denial standards.
1479.05   Board of Zoning and Building Appeals.
1479.06   Regulations and standards for short-term rentals.
1479.07   Notice of violation of inspection.
1479.08   Penalties.
1479.09   Discrimination prohibited.
§ 1479.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This Council recognizes that, while short-term rentals can provide
community benefits, the proliferation of short-term rentals (STR) in
residential neighborhoods can adversely impact the health, safety, property,
density and residential character of a neighborhood.
   (B)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a licensing process and
health and safety standards for STR units, while ensuring that such rental use
does not create adverse impacts to residential neighborhoods due to excessive
traffic, noise, density, and safety concerns, among other adverse effects.
(Ord. 141-2025, passed 9-22-2025)
§ 1479.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall
apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning
      BARBERTON DEVELOPMENT CODE. The development code adopted by ordinance,
and any amendments.
      DWELLING. Any dwelling, dwelling unit, building, structure, or other
living quarters used, intended to be used, or designed to be used, in whole or
in part, for living or sleeping by human occupants. TEMPORARY HOUSING as
defined in the International Property Maintenance Code (IMPC) and the
Development Code is not a dwelling.
      DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and
forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used, intended to be
used, or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for living, sleeping,
cooking, and eating.
      HOSTING PLATFORM. A person or entity in whatever form or format that
facilitates, through advertising or any other means, a short-term rental
booking transaction for accommodations between a short-term rental host and
short-term rental guest, including, but not limited to, reservations and/or
collection of payment for such accommodations on behalf of the short-term
rental host. Examples include, but are not limited to, Airbnb, VRBO, and
HomeAway.
      ICC INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE. The ICC International
Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) adopted by ordinance, and any amendments.
      OCCUPANT. Any person over one year of age living, sleeping, cooking, or
eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling.
      OHIO BUILDING CODE. The Ohio Building Code, as adopted pursuant to R.C.
Chapters 119, 3781, 3791, and any amendments.
      OHIO RESIDENTIAL CODE. The Ohio Residential Code, as adopted pursuant to
R.C. Chapters 119, 3781, 3791, and any amendments.
      OPERATOR. Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, has
charge, care, or control of any premises, or part thereof, in which there are
one or more rental units whether as owner, manager, agent of the owner or due
to conduct that demonstrates the person's position of responsibility concerning
the rental unit.
      OWNER. Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, has
legal title to any rental unit with or without accompanying actual possession
thereof, or is the vendor or vendee under a land contract, whether recorded or
not, or is the executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or
guardian of the estate of either the person with legal title or the land
contract vendor or vendee.
      PERSON. An individual, partnership, association, company, firm, trust,
corporation, government corporation, department, bureau, agency, or any entity
recognized by law.
      PREMISES. Not only the rental unit and any other buildings of any kind or
nature located on the lot, but also the entire parcel surrounding the
buildings, including, but not limited to fences, walkways, walls, and
appurtenances.
      PROPERTY. The real property parcel upon which the dwelling is situated
upon.
      PROPERTY MAINTENANCE INSPECTOR. The Building Commissioner of the city or
the Building Commissioner's authorized property maintenance inspector.
      PURCHASER. Any person or legal entity, who, alone or jointly or severally
with others, has entered into a contract to become the owner of any rental
unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof.
      RENTAL INSPECTION. The rental inspection as required in this chapter.
      RENTAL UNIT. A dwelling unit, and/or vacant structure not occupied by the
person with legal title.
      SHORT-TERM RENTAL (STR). Any room or dwelling that is rented wholly or
partly for a fee for less than 30 consecutive days by persons other than the
permanent occupant or owner from which the permanent occupant or owner receive
monetary compensation, whether such compensation is paid directly by the short-
term rental guest or is collected and remitted to the permanent occupant or
owner by a hosting platform.
      STR GUESTS. Persons renting temporary lodging from a short-term rental
host, or through a hosting platform on behalf of the short-term rental host,
for less than 30 consecutive days.
      STR HOST or HOST. The owner and/or permanent occupant of a short-term
rental who offers the short-term rental for temporary lodging.
   (B)   Whenever the words "dwelling", "dwelling unit", "premises" or "rental
unit" are used in this chapter, they shall be construed as though they were
followed by the words "or any part thereof."
(Ord. 141-2025, passed 9-22-2025)
§ 1479.03 SHORT-TERM RENTAL LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEE.
   (A)   No owner and/or operator shall operate, rent, lease, sublease, license
or sublicense a dwelling unit as a STR without a STR license from the Building
Department.
   (B)   The registration form shall include the following information and any
additional information as determined by the Building Department:
      (1)   The total number of rental units the owner owns or that the
operator operates;
      (2)   The number of premises with a rental unit;
      (3)   The address of each premises;
      (4)   The number of rental units on each premises;
      (5)   If the owner is required to have an operator, or if the owner has
an operator, the form shall include:
         (a)   If the owner and/or operator is one or more individuals or a
sole proprietorship, the owner's name, address, date of birth, driver's license
number, and phone number;
         (b)   If the owner and/or operator is a partnership, the name,
address, tax identification number, and phone number of the partnership, and
the name, address, date of birth, driver's license number and phone number of
one of the partners;
         (c)   If the owner and/or operator is a corporation, the name,
address, and phone number of the corporation, the name, address, and phone
number of the corporation's statutory agent, and the name, address, date of
birth, driver's license number and phone number of one of the officers; and
         (d)   If the owner and/or operator is a trust, the name, address, and
phone number of the trust, and the name, address, date of birth, driver's
license number and phone number of one of the trustees;
   (C)   Proof of liability insurance for the STR, or proof that the STR and
the STR owner or operator are named insured under liability of insurance, with
limits not less than $1,000,000.
   (D)   If applicant is a tenant, proof of possession of the dwelling unit by
a valid lease agreement that allows for subleasing, or other verification of
the tenant's right to possession of the premises. Evidence of a prohibition to
sublease the dwelling unit shall be grounds for denial of a short-term rental
license.
   (E)   Proof of payment of all applicable taxes, including real estate taxes,
due as of the date of submission of the application.
   (F)   All information required under division (C) of this section for a STR
license application shall be updated within 30 days of a change in status. The
owner and/or operator of a rental unit(s) shall contact the Building
Department, either in writing or by email, to update the information on the
registration form. Failure to update information on the registration form shall
result in a $100 administrative fee.
   (G)   Every STR license application shall be accompanied by a fee of $200.
Every license issued shall be given a license number. Licenses shall be valid
for one year commencing on March 31 of each year, unless revoked by the
Building Department. Licenses issued under this section are not transferrable
from one owner to another or from one premises to another.
   (H)   If a registration form is filed late, an additional late fee of $50
shall be imposed per unit, per month.
   (I)   Registration shall be valid for one year, except:
      (1)   If false information is provided to the Building Department on the
registration form, an additional fine of $50 shall be assessed; or
      (2)   A transfer of title to a rental unit has been completed.
   (J)   Required notification. Within 48 hours of submitting the application
for a STR unit operating permit to the Building Department, the operator shall
send a neighborhood notice form supplied by the Building Department, by first-
class mail or hand delivery to all property owners whose property is adjacent
to the property at which the STR unit is proposed. The operator shall provide
the Building Department the names and addresses to which notices were sent. For
the purposes of this section, adjacent properties are those that abut the
proposed STR unit, those directly across the street or alley from the proposed
STR unit, and those that are diagonal across the street or alley from the
proposed STR unit.
   (K)   If an owner/operator fails to register, an additional penalty of $100
per rental unit shall be imposed. These penalties along with the applicable
rental registration will be assessed on the property's taxes.
   (L)   One percent of every STR unit fee shall be held in a separate fund to
be used exclusively for the purchase and distribution of fire and carbon
monoxide detectors for every rental unit. Such detectors shall be installed by
the Barberton Fire Department.
(Ord. 141-2025, passed 9-22-2025)
§ 1479.04 SHORT-TERM RENTAL LICENSE APPROVAL/DENIAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   No license shall be issued unless it has been determined that the
dwelling meets all health, fire, safety and building code standards.
Consideration shall be made as to whether the owner has violated, does not
meet, or has failed to comply with, any of the terms and conditions of the
license, this chapter, or any applicable city or state laws, rules, regulations
or executive orders, including, but not limited to the Development Code, as
well as any evidence regarding nuisances or illegal activity concerning the
owner or the subject property and, in particular, any recorded violations. The
Building Department may deny a license on consideration of such evidence, in
accordance with rules and regulations established by the Building Department
pursuant to §
1479.03.
   (B)   Upon verification and approval by the City Building Department and
city divisions as required in division (A) of this section, the Building
Department shall issue a license which shall indicate:
      (1)   The license number;
      (2)   The street address of the STR;
      (3)   The name, street address, mailing address, email address, and
telephone or cell phone number of the owner of the dwelling to be used for STR
purposes;
      (4)   The name, street address, mailing address, email address, and
telephone or cell phone number of the operator of the dwelling, if any, to be
used for STR purposes;
      (5)   The maximum number of occupants.
   (C)   The Building Department may suspend or revoke a license if the
applicant makes any false statement in connection with the application because
the premises covered by the license is no longer in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter or any applicable provisions of this Code, or if
the licensee has failed to comply with any applicable city or state laws,
rules, regulations or executive orders. The decision whether to suspend or
revoke a license shall be made in accordance with rules and regulations
established by the Building Department pursuant to §
1479.03 and
1479.04.
(Ord. 141-2025, passed 9-22-2025)
§ 1479.05 BOARD OF ZONING AND BUILDING APPEALS.
   Any party, including the city, that is aggrieved by an alleged error in an
administrative action made under this chapter may file an appeal thereof with
the Board of Zoning and Building Appeals within seven days from the date of the
Building Department's action. Such appeal shall comply with the city's
Development Code. The Board may sustain, disapprove, or modify the Building
Department's action. If a license is suspended or revoked, the licensee may not
operate the dwelling unit as a STR while the decision to suspend or revoke the
license is on appeal.
(Ord. 141-2025, passed 9-22-2025)
§ 1479.06 REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS FOR SHORT-TERM RENTALS.
   (A)   No owner may rent or lease a STR for a period of more than 30 days or
less than 24 hours.
   (B)   The maximum number of persons permitted overnight in a STR is two per
bedroom, plus two additional persons.
   (C)   Each bedroom of a STR shall have interior access to a bathroom,
whether private or shared, such that a guest has access to a bathroom without
exiting the dwelling.
   (D)   Every STR shall be equipped with the following:
      (1)   Working smoke detectors adjacent to each sleeping area in each
dwelling unit as required in §
1479.03(L) ; and
      (2)   One or more carbon monoxide detection devices which shall be
installed and maintained as close to the center of the dwelling unit and within
close proximity to the living and sleeping areas of the dwelling unit; and
   (E)   Excessive or unnecessary noise in violation of Codified Ordinance §
635.02, is prohibited at all times on the STR property.
   (F)   The owner and/or operator shall provide proper trash and recycling
containers for the guests and shall notify STR guests of the trash and recycle
collection days for the property as well as any applicable rules and
regulations regarding leaving or storing trash on the exterior of the property.
   (G)   Every owner, operator and STR guest shall comply with all other
applicable city and state laws, rules, regulations, and executive orders.
(Ord. 141-2025, passed 9-22-2025)
§ 1479.07 NOTICE OF VIOLATION OF INSPECTION.
   (A)   Whenever the Building Department determines that there has been a
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, notice/order of the
violation shall be given to the owner and/or operator responsible for
compliance pursuant to the IPMC and/or the city's Development Code.
   (B)   Whenever an owner and/or operator violates or fails to comply with any
of the provisions of the chapter, the Building Department shall have the
authority to impose an administrative or criminal penalty. The Property
Maintenance Inspector shall consider the following criteria in assessing an
administrative penalty:
      (1)   The extent to which the owner and/or operator has benefitted by the
violation of this chapter;
      (2)   The degree of harm to the public health, safety and welfare as a
result of the violation of this chapter;
      (3)   The recidivism of the owner and/or operator, including previous
notices and orders to comply and previous enforcement action;
      (4)   Good faith efforts of the owner and/or operator to remedy the
violation of this chapter; and
      (5)   The duration of the violation after a notice and order to comply
was served pursuant to this chapter or the IPMC.
   (C)   Upon request of the owner and/or operator of the dwelling and/or
dwelling unit to the city, during the process of an eviction, the owner and/or
operator may request a certified letter from the Building Department verifying
the violation of a health, safety, or the IPMC applicable to the statutory
requirements of a legal eviction.
   (D)   The imposition of an administrative fine shall only occur after a
notice/order is provided to the owner and/or operator.
(Ord. 141-2025, passed 9-22-2025)
§ 1479.08 PENALTIES.
   (A)   (1)   In addition to any criminal penalties that may be imposed
pursuant to this chapter, any person, occupant, operator, owner, or purchaser
who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to the following administrative penalties in accordance with
the criteria of §
1479.03 and
1479.07(D):
         (a)   For a first offense, an administrative fine of up to $100;
         (b)   For a second offense, an administrative fine of up to $500; and
         (c)   For a third offense, an administrative fine of up to $1,000.
      (2)   Such fines shall be paid within 30 days of issuance.
   (B)   If a person, occupant, operator, owner, or purchaser fails, neglects,
or refuses to pay an administrative penalty within the time ordered pursuant to
this chapter, then the Building Department shall notify the city's Director of
Finance. The city's Director of Finance shall certify the administrative
penalty to the county's Fiscal Office. In addition to the administrative
penalty, an interest rate equal to the current rate of interest charged by the
city on special assessments shall be imposed by the city for the life of the
administrative penalty, added to the administrative penalty, and collected as
provided in this section. The Director of Finance shall then certify the amount
of administrative penalty, including interest, to the county's Fiscal Officer.
The county's Fiscal Officer shall enter the amount on the tax duplicate of the
county as a special assessment against the owner's property.
   (C)   Money collected under divisions (A) and (B) of this section shall be
used as set forth in §
1479.03(L).
   (D)   In addition to any administrative penalties that may be imposed
pursuant to division (A) of this section, any person, occupant, operator,
owner, or purchaser who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall
be fined not more than $500 and/or imprisoned not more than 60 days.
   (E)   Application of prior convictions. A conviction or convictions obtained
prior to the effective date of this chapter shall constitute a conviction or
convictions for purposes of enforcement of the minimum mandatory penalties
required by this section. Each separate count of which a person has been
convicted shall constitute a separate violation of a section of the IPMC, the
city's Development Code, the Ohio Residential Code or the Ohio Building Code.
   (F)   Continuing violations. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
   (G)   Strict liability. The provisions of this chapter are specifically
intended to impose strict liability.
(Ord. 141-2025, passed 9-22-2025)
§ 1479.09 DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.
   No owner or operator shall do the following:
   (A)   Decline a STR to a STR guest based on race, religion, color, sex,
sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin, age,
disability, ethnic group;
   (B)   Impose different terms or conditions on a STR based on race, religion,
color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin,
age, disability, ethnic group; or
   (C)   Advertise a STR that discourages or indicates a preference for or
against a short-term rental guest based on race, religion, color, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin, age, disability,
ethnic group.
(Ord. 141-2025, passed 9-22-2025)
PART SIXTEEN: FIRE PREVENTION CODE
   Chapter
      
1604.   Ohio and National Fire Codes
      
1606.   Fire Department: Plan Review and System Test Fees
      
1608.   Nursing Homes and Rest Homes
      
1610.   Smoke Detectors
      
1612.   Oil and Gas Wells: Emergency Information and Regulations
CHAPTER 1604: OHIO AND NATIONAL FIRE CODES
Section
1604.01   Adoption of Ohio Fire Code.
1604.02   Inspection and permit fees.
1604.03   Torch applied roofing material.
1604.04   Adoption of National Fire Codes.
1604.05   File and distribution copies.
1604.06   Bureau of Fire Prevention established; duties.
1604.07   Definitions.
1604.08   Districts in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is
prohibited.
1604.09   Districts in which storage of flammable liquids in outside
aboveground tanks is prohibited.
1604.10   Districts in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is
restricted.
1604.11   Routes for vehicles transporting explosives and dangerous articles.
1604.12   Fire lanes.
1604.13   Modifications.
1604.14   Conflict of laws.
1604.15   Arson Bureau established.
1604.16   Fire report copy fee; revolving fund.
1604.17   Fire loss claims.
1604.18   Rapid entry key lock boxes required.
1604.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Adoption of codes by reference, see Ohio R.C. 731.231
   Air pollution control, see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 610
   Arson, see GEN. OFF.
642.09
   False alarms, see GEN. OFF.
648.08, 648.09; S.U. & P.S.
1062.02
   Fire control in trailer camps and tourist cabins, see B.R. & T.
860.10(b)(6), (7)
   Fire Districts, see B. & H. Ch.
1446
   Fire Division, see CHTR. §
4.03(b); ADM. Ch.
240
   Fires in park and recreation areas, see S.U. & P.S.
1068.06(f)
   Gasoline, oils and paints, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3741
   Hotels, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3731
   Justifiable use of force by fireman to suppress riot, see GEN. OFF.
648.03
   Open burning, see GEN. OFF.
610.09(i), 660.13, 660.20
   State Fire Marshal, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3737
   Tampering with fire safety equipment, see GEN. OFF.
642.11(a)(4), (b)
   Venting of heaters and burners, see GEN. OFF.
660.01
§ 1604.01 ADOPTION OF OHIO FIRE CODE.
   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 731.231, there is hereby adopted by and for the city,
for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to
life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the Ohio
Fire Code, recommended by the state’s Department of Commerce, Division of State
Fire Marshal, being the current edition thereof, as submitted by the state, and
the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted,
modified or amended, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully
as if set out at length herein and from the date on which this section takes
effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 1604.02) (Ord. 1-1999, passed 1-11-1999)
§ 1604.02 INSPECTION AND PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Inspection fees.
      (1)   Inspection fees:
         (a)   Foster care/day care (11 or less): $15;
         (b)   Day care facility: $25;
         (c)   Facility needing letter or signature: $10; and
         (d)   Oil and gas wells with issuance of permit: $25.
      (2)   All other occupancy would receive the first FPB inspection free.
      (3)   If violations are found and follow-up inspections are needed, a fee
of $25 per inspection shall be charged to the occupant.
      (4)   The first follow-up inspection fee shall be waived; provided, all
violations are corrected at that time.
   (B)   Permits/fees required by the Barberton Fire Department.
      (1)   Tents and air-supported structures (for purpose of public assembly,
as defined in the Ohio Fire Code): $10;
      (2)   Fireworks exhibition: $250;
      (3)   Hot roof work (torch applied, hot tar and the like): $10 (BBD
permit required);
      (4)   Explosives, use: $100;
      (5)   Temporary storage of explosives or fireworks: $50/day;
      (6)   Bonfire (greater than three hours): $5 (must have copy of Ohio EPA
permit);
      (7)   Bowling lane/pin refinishing: $10; and
      (8)   Fumigation and thermal insecticidal fogging: $10.
   (C)   Exception. Facilities involved in long-term activities on various days
may purchase a permit for the calendar year; provided, they notify the Fire
Department 24 hours in advance of said activity: $100.
   (D)   Violation. Failure to acquire appropriate permit, as well as any
violation of this chapter, shall be subject to penalties as set forth in §
1604.99 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1604.021) (Ord. 115-2003, passed 9-8-2003)
§ 1604.03 TORCH APPLIED ROOFING MATERIAL.
   (A)   The Council hereby declares the application of torch applied bitumen
roofing material to be a “process which produces conditions hazardous to life
or property”, as regulated by § FM-103.1 of the Ohio Fire Code (current
edition).
   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall apply torch applied bitumen
roofing material to any structure within the city without complying with all of
the requirements of § FM-103.0 of the Ohio Fire Code (current edition).
(Prior Code, § 1604.025) (Ord. 1-1999, passed 1-11-1999)
§ 1604.04 ADOPTION OF NATIONAL FIRE CODES.
   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 731.231, there is hereby adopted by and for the city,
for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to
life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the
National Fire Codes, recommended by the National Fire Protection Association,
International, being the current edition thereof, as submitted by the National
Fire Protection Association (NFPA), and the whole thereof, save and except such
portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, and the same is
hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein and
from the date on which this section takes effect, the provisions thereof shall
be controlling within the limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 1604.03) (Ord. 1-1999, passed 1-11-1999)
§ 1604.05 FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.
   Complete copies of the Ohio Fire Code and the National Fire Codes, as
adopted in §§
1604.01 and
1604.04 of this chapter, respectively, are on file with the Fire Prevention
Bureau.
(Prior Code, § 1604.04)
§ 1604.06 BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION ESTABLISHED; DUTIES.
   (A)   The Ohio Fire Code, the National Fire Codes and this Part Sixteen
shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire Prevention in the Division of Fire,
which is hereby established and which shall be operated under the supervision
of the Chief of the Fire Division.
   (B)   The Chief of the Fire Division shall direct the Fire Marshal, or such
other fire officer he or she deems appropriate, to be in charge of the Bureau
of Fire Prevention. Such officer shall carry out the duties and
responsibilities of the Bureau of Fire Prevention as prescribed by the Chief.
   (C)   The Chief shall appoint, by appropriate means, one of the captains (or
an officer of rank equal to that of shift commander) of the Fire Division to
serve in the Bureau of Fire Prevention as the Fire Marshal. Such officer shall
carry out the duties and responsibilities prescribed by the Chief of the Fire
Division.
   (D)   The Fire Chief may assign, by appropriate means, other officers as
necessary to serve as Deputy Fire Marshal in the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
Such officers shall serve at the discretion of the Chief for any length of time
the Chief deems proper and shall carry out the duties and responsibilities
prescribed by the Fire Marshal or other responsible authority placed in charge
of the Bureau by the Chief of the Fire Division.
   (E)   A report of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be made annually and
transmitted to the Mayor. It shall contain all proceedings under this Fire
Prevention Code, with such statistics as the Chief of the Fire Division may
wish to include therein. The Chief of the Fire Division shall also recommend
any amendments to the Fire Prevention Code which, in his or her judgment, are
desirable.
(Prior Code, § 1604.05) (Ord. 106-1999, passed 5-10-1999)
§ 1604.07 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Wherever the word “municipality” is used in the Ohio Fire Code or the
National Fire Codes, it shall be held to mean the city.
   (B)   Wherever the term “corporation counsel” is used in the Ohio Fire Code
or the National Fire Codes, it shall be held to mean the Director of Law of the
city.
   (C)   References to other officers or personnel in the Ohio Fire Code and
the National Fire Codes shall be held to mean the equivalent officer or
personnel of the city.
(Prior Code, § 1604.06)
§ 1604.08 DISTRICTS IN WHICH STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS IS
PROHIBITED.
   Districts in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited
are hereby established as follows.
   (A)   The storage of explosives, ammunition and blasting agents shall be
prohibited in areas of the city that are zoned residential, with the exceptions
as set forth in Ohio Fire Code §§ 1301:7-7-30 and FM-3001.1.
   (B)   The storage of explosives, ammunition and blasting agents shall only
be permitted in areas of the city zoned either industrial or commercial.
Permission must be obtained prior to the storage of explosives, ammunition, and
blasting agents from the City Fire Marshal’s office, in accordance with Ohio
Fire Code § 1301:7-7-30.
(Prior Code, § 1604.07) (Ord. 115-2003, passed 9-8-2003)
§ 1604.09 DISTRICTS IN WHICH STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS IN OUTSIDE
ABOVEGROUND TANKS IS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Districts in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground
tanks is prohibited are hereby established as follows.
      (1)   Storage of flammable and/or combustible liquid in above-ground
tanks shall be prohibited in areas of the city zoned as residential, with the
exceptions as set forth in Ohio Fire Code § 1301:7-7-28 and National Fire
Protection Association Standards 30, 30A and 31, current edition.
      (2)   Above-ground storage tanks used for storage of flammable and
combustible liquids are permitted in areas zoned industrial or commercial after
receiving a permit from the City Fire Marshal’s office in accordance with the
Ohio Fire Code § 1301:7-7-28, and shall meet the following requirements.
         (a)   Tanks shall be installed according to NFPA 30, current edition,
and manufacturers’ recommendations.
         (b)   Tanks shall be permitted only after a determination that any and
all safety concerns are addressed, including, but not limited to, soil
stability and support pads.
         (c)   Tanks shall be installed inside a spill containment area with a
capacity not less than 125% of the tanks’ total capacity.
         (d)   The tank shall bear the label of an approved testing laboratory
showing approved usage.
      (3)   Any tank shall be removed when its continued existence in its
present condition creates a distinct hazard or nuisance due to a change in
applicable codes, change in condition of installation, surroundings or
discontinued use.
   (B)   Districts in which new bulk plants for flammable liquids are
prohibited are hereby established as follows.
      (1)   Storage of flammable and/or combustible liquid in bulk plants shall
be prohibited in areas of the city zoned as residential, with the exceptions as
set forth in Ohio Fire Code § 1301:7-7-28 and National Fire Protection
Association Standards 30, 30A and 31, current edition.
      (2)   Bulk plants used for storage of flammable and combustible liquids
are permitted in areas zoned industrial or commercial after receiving a permit
from the City Fire Marshal’s office in accordance with the Ohio Fire Code §
1301:7-7-28.
      (3)   A permit shall be issued for any hazardous material in excess of 55
gallons in a liquid state or 55 pounds in a bulk or solid state. The permit
shall be free of charge.
(Prior Code, § 1604.08) (Ord. 115-2003, passed 9-8-2003)
§ 1604.10 DISTRICTS IN WHICH BULK STORAGE OF LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS IS
RESTRICTED.
   Districts in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted are
hereby established as follows.
   (A)   In areas of the city zoned residential, no storage or use or liquefied
petroleum gas shall be permitted except: temporary or limited use of small
quantities, each tank less than 60 pounds, or a quantity which does not create
a safety hazard or nuisance. These may be permitted under special rules
established by the City Fire Marshal’s office for each case. This rule does not
apply to liquefied petroleum gas bottles of 30 pounds or under used for cooking
at residences or used for recreational vehicles.
   (B)   In areas of the city that are zoned either industrial or commercial,
facilities offering liquefied petroleum gas for sale on a bottle exchange basis
shall limit the quantity held in stock to 20 containers with a maximum
individual capacity of 30 pounds. Prior to a facility offering liquefied
petroleum gas for sale or maintaining a stock of containers, the facility shall
permit the Fire Marshal or his or her designee to inspect the facility and
shall obtain approval from the Fire Marshal or his or her designee concerning
placards, traffic barriers, defoliation, cabinet construction, clearances and
locks.
   (C)   In areas of the city that are zoned either industrial or commercial,
above-ground outside storage of liquefied petroleum gases may be permitted in
accordance with National Fire Protection Association 58, Standard for the
Storage and Handling of Liquefied Petroleum Gases, current edition, as
interpreted by the Fire Marshal and this chapter, and in compliance with O.A.C.
1301:7-7-61.
   (D)   Any location having more than two 20-pound or greater liquefied
petroleum gas bottles for sale or exchange and/or having liquefied petroleum
gas containers with more than 50 pounds shall provide the Fire Department with
the name of the location, the address, the telephone number, the minimum and
maximum amounts of liquefied petroleum gas on site, what type of containers
(i.e. 20-pound bottles, bulk storage tank), a 24-hour emergency contact name
and number and a map or diagram showing the tank and/or storage containers in
relationship to the location.
(Prior Code, § 1604.09) (Ord. 115-2003, passed 9-8-2003)
§ 1604.11 ROUTES FOR VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES AND DANGEROUS ARTICLES.
   (A)   Routes for vehicles transporting explosives and blasting agents shall
be as determined by Council.
   (B)   Routes for vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals and other
dangerous articles shall be as determined by Council.
(Prior Code, § 1604.10)
§ 1604.12 FIRE LANES.
   Fire lanes shall be established by the Director of Public Safety, the Police
Chief and the Fire Chief.
(Prior Code, § 1604.11)
§ 1604.13 MODIFICATIONS.
   The Fire Marshal shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the
Ohio Fire Code and the National Fire Codes upon application in writing by the
owner or lessee, or his or her duly authorized agent, when there are practical
difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of such codes;
provided that, the spirit of the codes shall be observed, public safety secured
and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification, when
granted or allowed, and the decision of the Fire Marshal thereon, shall be
entered upon the records of the Fire Division, and a signed copy shall be
furnished the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 1604.12) (Ord. 106-1999, passed 5-10-1999)
§ 1604.14 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   In the event of any conflict between any of the provisions of the Ohio Fire
Code, the National Fire Codes or this Part Sixteen, the higher or stricter
standard shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 1604.13)
§ 1604.15 ARSON BUREAU ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   An Arson Bureau is hereby established and the same shall be
incorporated into the Fire Prevention Bureau of the Division of Fire. Such
Bureau shall be operated under the supervision of the Fire Marshal, or such
other fire officer as designated by the Fire Chief. The Fire Marshal, as
provided in §
1604.06 of this chapter, shall perform any and all duties in the Arson Bureau
required by the Fire Chief or his or her designee.
   (B)   The Fire Marshal, or his or her designee, is hereby charged with the
responsibility of being present at all fires, investigating the causes thereof,
examining witnesses, compelling the attendance of witnesses and the production
of books and papers, and performing all other acts necessary to the effective
discharge of such duties as stated in Ohio R.C. 737.27.
(Prior Code, § 1604.14) (Ord. 106-1999, passed 5-10-1999)
§ 1604.16 FIRE REPORT COPY FEE; REVOLVING FUND.
   (A)   The Arson Bureau is hereby authorized to assess insurance companies,
corporations and individuals, the sum of $5 for each copy of a fire report.
   (B)   The Finance Director is hereby authorized and directed to establish a
revolving fund which shall be known as 2D22, “Arson Bureau Revolving Fund”.
(Prior Code, § 1604.15) (Ord. 28-1977, passed 2-7-1977)
§ 1604.17 FIRE LOSS CLAIMS.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted by the Council of the city, for the purpose of
providing for the total cost of removing, repairing or securing a fire-damaged
building, the procedure described in Ohio R.C. 3929.86(C) and (D), together
with all amendments thereto as of 3-17-1987, as adopted by the Ohio General
Assembly. This section of the Ohio Revised Code, along with any amendments
thereto, is hereby incorporated by reference herein as fully as if set out at
length.
   (B)   The Clerk of Council is hereby directed to file a certified copy of
original Ord. 150-1991, passed 10-28-1991, with the Ohio Superintendent of
Insurance.
   (C)   The procedure described in Ohio R.C. 3929.86(C) and (D), as adopted
herein, shall apply only to fire losses that occur after the filing of the
certified copy of original Ord. 150-1991 with the Ohio Superintendent of
Insurance.
   (D)   The Finance Director shall carry out the duties prescribed in Ohio
R.C. 3929.86(C) and (D), as adopted herein.
   (E)   In accordance with Ohio R.C. 731.231, a complete copy of Ohio R.C.
3929.86(C) and (D), as adopted herein, is on file with the Clerk of Council for
public inspection and also on file in the Summit County Law Library, fourth
floor of the Summit County Courthouse.
(Prior Code, § 1604.16) (Ord. 150-1991, passed 10-28-1991)
§ 1604.18 RAPID ENTRY KEY LOCK BOXES REQUIRED.
   (A)   The following structures shall be equipped with a rapid entry key lock
system, manufactured by Knox- Box Rapid Entry System or a system approved by
the Chief of Fire, at an accessible location near the main entrance of the
structure or at a location approved by the Fire Marshal:
      (1)   All buildings in the city having an automatic alarm system or
equipped with an automatic fire suppression system, except one-, two- and
three-family owner-occupied dwellings;
      (2)   Multi-family residential structures, including senior citizen
apartment/condo complexes, that have restricted access through locked doors and
have a common corridor for access to living units;
      (3)   All high rise buildings (i.e., structures having floors at or above
50 feet above ground level);
      (4)   Commercial and industrial buildings identified by fire officials as
difficult to access during emergencies; and
      (5)   All complexes containing multiple businesses (such as plazas, strip
malls and the like) shall be required to have a minimum of one lock box
containing keys for every business.
   (B)   All new construction subject to this section shall have the rapid
entry lock box installed and operational prior to the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy.
   (C)   All structures in existence on the effective date of this section
shall have a rapid entry key lock box installed whenever a building permit is
issued or two years from the effective date.
   (D)   The Fire Division shall be authorized to implement rules and
regulations for the rapid entry key lock box system.
   (E)   The owner or operator of a structure required to have a rapid entry
key box shall, at all times, keep a key or keys in the box that will allow for
complete and unobstructed access to the structure and all out buildings
associated with the structure. These keys are to be marked and identified in a
manner approved by the Fire Marshal.
   (F)   Any person who owns or operates a structure subject to this section
shall be subject to the penalties set forth in §
1604.99 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1604.17) (Ord. 64-2010, passed 6-14-2010)
§ 1604.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of the Ohio Fire Code or the
National Fire Codes herein adopted or fails to comply therewith, or violates or
fails to comply with any order made thereunder, or builds in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder
or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has
been taken, or fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by a
court of competent jurisdiction, shall severally for each and every such
violation and non-compliance respectively, be found guilty of a misdemeanor of
the second degree. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be
required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable
time. When not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions
are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
(Prior Code, § 1604.99) (Ord. 115-2003, passed 9-8-2003)
CHAPTER 1606: FIRE DEPARTMENT: PLAN REVIEW AND
SYSTEM TEST FEES
Section
1606.01   Plan review.
1606.02   Acceptance test/inspection fees.
1606.03   Partial system test.
1606.04   Multiple systems in occupancy.
1606.05   Fee collection/certificate of acceptance.
§ 1606.01 PLAN REVIEW.
   (A)   All plans submitted to the Fire Department for review shall incur a
charge of $55 per hour of review. This fee will be paid to the Building
Department at the time of the issuance of the permit. A permit shall not be
issued until a certificate of acceptance is issued by the Fire Prevention
Bureau. This certificate shall indicate the number of hours dedicated to the
review of said plans. The certificate shall also indicate date and time plans
received by the Fire Department, date reviewed and a date of issuance.
   (B)   A minimum charge of one hour shall apply. The Building Department
shall then forward a copy of the permit to the Fire Prevention Bureau.
(Prior Code, § 1606.01) (Ord. 116-2003, passed 9-8-2003)
§ 1606.02 ACCEPTANCE TEST/INSPECTION FEES.
   (A)   Underground water supply (NFPA 24) (certification required).
      (1)   Test/inspection of underground pipe: $50;
      (2)   Re-tests/inspection: $75 each; and
      (3)   Subsequent re-test/inspection increase in increments of: $25.
   (B)   Sprinkler and standpipe system acceptance test.
      (1)   Test/inspection fee: $50;
      (2)   Re-tests/inspection: $75 each; and
      (3)   Subsequent re-test/inspection increase in increments of: $25.
   (C)   Fire pump acceptance test.
      (1)   Test/inspection fee: $50;
      (2)   Re-tests/inspection: $75 each; and
      (3)   Subsequent re-test/inspection increase in increments of: $25.
   (D)   Fire detection system/fire alarm acceptance test.
      (1)   Test/inspection fee: $50;
      (2)   Re-tests/inspection: $75 each; and
      (3)   Subsequent re-test/inspection increase in increments of: $25.
   (E)   Hood and duct system acceptance test.
      (1)   Test/inspection fee: $50;
      (2)   Re-tests/inspection: $75 each; and
      (3)   Subsequent re-test/inspection increase in increments of: $25.
   (F)   Carbon dioxide, halon, dry chemical, foam or other wet chemical
suppression system acceptance test.
      (1)   Test/inspection fee: $50;
      (2)   Re-tests/inspection: $75 each; and
      (3)   Subsequent re-test/inspection increase in increments of: $25.
   (G)   Performance. The performance of any type of acceptance test not listed
above shall be subject to the following fee schedule:
      (1)   Test/inspection fee: $50;
      (2)   Re-tests/inspection: $75 each; and
      (3)   Subsequent re-test/inspection increase in increments of: $25.
   (H)   Licensure. Installer of all fire systems must be licensed by the
state.
(Prior Code, § 1606.02) (Ord. 116-2003, passed 9-8-2003)
§ 1606.03 PARTIAL SYSTEM TEST.
   (A)   For performance of a partial system test, no fee will be assessed.
   (B)   Subsequent partial re-test, due to unforeseen reasons, a fee of $25
shall be assessed per section of the system that is re-tested. This shall be in
addition to the final system test.
(Prior Code, § 1606.032) (Ord. 116-2003, passed 9-8-2003)
§ 1606.04 MULTIPLE SYSTEMS IN OCCUPANCY.
   In the event the occupancy has multiple systems that are or are not
interconnected, a separate test fee shall apply to each separate system. (i.e.,
sprinkler and alarm system with sprinkler flow alarm attached to fire alarm
control panel).
(Prior Code, § 1606.033) (Ord. 116-2003, passed 9-8-2003)
§ 1606.05 FEE COLLECTION/CERTIFICATE OF ACCEPTANCE.
   The Fire Prevention Bureau shall submit a certificate of acceptance to the
Building Department that includes date or dates of all tests performed, time
test performed and date of issuance of certificate. The Building Department
shall then forward a copy of the occupancy permit to the Fire Prevention
Bureau.
(Prior Code, § 1606.034) (Ord. 116-2003, passed 9-8-2003)
CHAPTER 1608: NURSING HOMES AND REST HOMES
Section
1608.01   Fire protection equipment required.
1608.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   American Insurance Association Fire Prevention Code, see F.P.
1604.01
   Bureau of Fire Prevention, see F.P.
1604.05
   Fire Division, see CHTR. §
4.03(b); ADM. Ch.
240
   Rest homes; nursing homes, see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3721
§ 1608.01 FIRE PROTECTION EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.
   Nursing homes and rest homes, as licensed by the state, shall meet the
following requirements.
   (A)   Sprinkler system and fire alarm system. The emergency alarm reporting
system shall be connected to a third party alarm monitoring system. Each
licensed address shall require a separate third party alarm monitoring system.
The city municipal fire alarm system shall be considered as a third party
monitoring system as long as it remains in operation.
      (1)   All nursing homes and rest homes shall be equipped with a
conforming sprinkler system throughout these buildings occupied in whole or in
part by the patients or patrons. The type of system employed, the manner in
which it is installed and the maintenance of the system shall be in conformity
with the recommendations of the American Insurance Association.
      (2)   (a)   All nursing homes and rest homes shall be equipped with an
approved emergency alarm reporting system. The system shall consist of the
following:
            1.   Approved manually operated alarm reporting devices located
near each station of the key personnel;
            2.   A water flow alarm reporting device interconnected with the
required sprinkler system; and
            3.   Sufficient approved alarm sounding bells, horns or other
audible devices, so located as to be clearly audible throughout the patient and
personnel areas.
         (b)   Installation, maintenance, proper repair and testing of the
connection shall be at the expense of, and shall be the responsibility of, the
nursing home and rest home operators.
   (B)   Fire extinguishers.
      (1)   Portable fire extinguishers shall be provided in conformity with
the following schedule:
         (a)   In each story, cellar and basement, in the proportion of not
less than one extinguisher to each 1,250 square feet of floor area, so that
there will be not more than 50 feet of travel distance between extinguishers;
         (b)   One at or near each end of each indoor place of assembly;
         (c)   One in each kitchen;
         (d)   One in each shop;
         (e)   One in each heater room, except that for small heater rooms the
extinguisher may be placed outside and near a doorway to the heater room; and
         (f)   One at every location where a special fire hazard necessitates
the availability of an extinguisher.
      (2)   The size and number of the extinguishers shall be as conditions
dictate; except that, the types provided shall be not less effective than the
following:
         (a)   For general use, where water would be the prime extinguishant,
an extinguisher of not less than two and one-half gallons capacity, water-type,
with an Underwriters’ Laboratory Classification of “2-A”;
         (b)   For shops, kitchens and heater rooms, an extinguisher of not
less than two and one-half gallons capacity, foam-type, with an Underwriters’
Laboratory Classification of “2-A, 4-B”, or a five pound carbon dioxide-type
with an Underwriters’ Laboratory Classification of not less than “1-B, C”, or a
dry chemical type with an Underwriters’ Laboratory Classification of not less
than “4-B, C”; and
         (c)   For electrical and other determined special hazards, the above-
noted carbon dioxide type or dry chemical types shall be installed.
(Prior Code, § 1608.01) (Ord. 117-2003, passed 9-8-2003)
§ 1608.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, for a first
offense, be fined not more than $200 or imprisoned not more than three months,
or both, and for a second or subsequent offense, be fined not more than $500 or
imprisoned not more than six months, or both. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 1608.99) (Ord. 36-1972, passed 2-28-1972)
CHAPTER 1610: SMOKE DETECTORS
Section
1610.01   Definitions.
1610.02   Installation in existing dwelling units.
1610.03   Power supply; alternative systems.
1610.04   Permits.
1610.05   Maintenance.
1610.06   Removal; tampering.
1610.07   National Fire Protection Association standards.
1610.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Alarm systems, see S.U. & P.S. Ch.
1062
   False alarms, see GEN. OFF.
648.08, 648.09; S.U. & P.S.
1062.02
   Fire Division, see CHTR. §
4.03(b); ADM. Ch.
240
   Smoke detector systems for apartment buildings and condominiums, see Ohio
R.C. 3781.104
   Tampering with fire safety equipment, see GEN. OFF.
642.11(a)(4), (b)
§ 1610.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIRE ALARM SYSTEM. A functionally related group of devices that, when either
automatically or manually activated, will sound an audio or visual device on or
off the protected premises.
   RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCIES. Those occupancies in which sleeping accommodations
are provided for normal residential purposes. The term includes all buildings
designed to provide sleeping accommodations, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Hotels, motels, dormitories, as defined in Ch. 16 and 17 of the
National Fire Protection Association Standard 74, 1989 edition (the “NFPA”);
      (2)   Apartments, as defined in Ch. 18 and 19 of the NFPA;
      (3)   Lodging or rooming houses, as defined in Ch. 20 of the NFPA;
      (4)   One- and two-family dwellings, as defined in Ch. 21 of the NFPA;
and
      (5)   Board and care facilities, as defined in Ch. 22 and 23 of the NFPA.
   SLEEPING AREA. The area or areas of the family unit in which the bedrooms or
sleeping rooms are located. Where bedrooms or rooms ordinarily used for
sleeping are separated by other use areas, such as kitchens or living rooms,
but not bathrooms or closets, they shall be considered as separate SLEEPING
AREAS for the purpose of this chapter and shall require protection.
   SMOKE DETECTOR. A single station device capable of sensing visible or
invisible particles of combustion and providing a suitable audible alarm
thereof within the area to be protected, and certified as having met
Underwriter’s Laboratories’ Standard No. 217 for single and multiple-station
smoke detectors.
(Prior Code, § 1610.01) (Ord. 72-1991, passed 4-22-1991)
§ 1610.02 INSTALLATION IN EXISTING DWELLING UNITS.
   (A)   The owner of each existing dwelling unit or units shall install smoke
detectors as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   Smoke detectors shall be installed outside of each separate sleeping
area in the immediate vicinity of each sleeping area and on each additional
story of the dwelling, including basements and cellars, but not including crawl
spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split
levels, a smoke detector need be installed only on the upper level; provided
that, the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level; except
that, if there is a door between levels, then a detector is required on each
level. All detectors shall be approved and listed and shall be installed in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
(Prior Code, § 1610.02) (Ord. 72-1991, passed 4-22-1991)
§ 1610.03 POWER SUPPLY; ALTERNATIVE SYSTEMS.
   (A)   In existing dwelling units, power supply to the smoke detector may be
provided by a self-monitored battery, or the smoke detector may be wired
directly to the dwelling’s power supply (hardwired) in accordance with NFPA
Standard 70.
   (B)   As an alternative to self-contained smoke detectors, an approved fire
alarm system may be installed.
(Prior Code, § 1610.03) (Ord. 72-1991, passed 4-22-1991)
§ 1610.04 PERMITS.
   No smoke detector or alternative fire detection system shall be directly
connected (hardwired) to the electrical system of the structure unless it has
been individually approved and an electrical permit has first been obtained
from the Division of Building Inspection of the city.
(Prior Code, § 1610.04) (Ord. 72-1991, passed 4-22-1991)
§ 1610.05 MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   The occupant of any dwelling unit shall be responsible for replacing
the battery in battery-operated smoke detectors.
   (B)   The property owner shall be responsible for all maintenance other than
battery replacement.
(Prior Code, § 1610.05) (Ord. 72-1991, passed 4-22-1991)
§ 1610.06 REMOVAL; TAMPERING.
   No person shall remove or render a smoke detector inoperative.
(Prior Code, § 1610.06) (Ord. 72-1991, passed 4-22-1991)
§ 1610.07 NATIONAL FIRE PROTECTION ASSOCIATION STANDARDS.
   This chapter is intended to be used with and supplemented by the applicable
provisions of Volume 3 of the National Fire Protection Association Standard 74,
1989 edition, entitled Standards For Installation, Maintenance and Use of
Household Fire Warning Equipment, and the applicable provisions of Volume 5 of
the National Fire Protection Association Standard 101, 1991 edition, entitled
Safety to Life from Fire in Buildings and Structures. These applicable
provisions and any subsequent updates thereof are hereby incorporated into this
chapter by reference. If there is any conflict between this chapter and these
supplemental standards, this chapter, and any rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 1610.07) (Ord. 72-1991, passed 4-22-1991)
§ 1610.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who fails to install or maintain smoke detectors as required by
this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and shall be
fined not more than $250 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both, for each
offense.
(Prior Code, § 1610.99) (Ord. 72-1991, passed 4-22-1991)
CHAPTER 1612: OIL AND GAS WELLS: EMERGENCY INFORMATION AND REGULATIONS
Section
1612.01   Emergency information.
1612.02   Safety/emergency equipment.
1612.03   Requirements.
1612.99   Penalty.
§ 1612.01 EMERGENCY INFORMATION.
   (A)   All owners, agents and operators of oil and gas wells located within
the city shall place on file in the Fire Department a written emergency shut-
off procedure for each well and the components thereof, which shall include
schematics, with diagrams, an emergency (24-hour) telephone number and other
emergency information requested by the Fire Chief. This information must be
provided at least ten days prior to the start of drilling. Should such
emergency information change, the owner, agent or operator shall notify the
Fire Department of the changes within 24 hours of the change, in writing. This
information is required for all current and future wells within the city.
   (B)   Prior to drilling oil and gas wells within the city, and continuing
until the well has been permanently plugged, equipment removed and the site
reclaimed, there shall be erected and maintained at all times at the entrance
of all the access roads, and at the site of the well, a sign with the
designated address and street number, Ohio Department of Natural Resources
permit number, name of the well, and name, address 24-hour emergency telephone
number of the owner, agent or operator of the well. All required signs shall be
updated within seven days of any changes of this information. This section
shall also apply to wells currently located in the city.
   (C)   All owners, agents and operators of oil and gas wells located within
the city shall place on file with the Fire Department, schematics, maps or
diagrams, drawn to scale, the size of which may be designated by the Fire
Chief. These schematics, maps or diagrams shall depict the following
information:
      (1)   Location and length of all access roads;
      (2)   Location, size and capacity of all tanks and tank batteries and
production equipment;
      (3)   Location and length of all transmission pipelines from well head to
all distribution points;
      (4)   Location of all valves in the well pipeline system, including, but
not limited to, control valves, shut-off valves, one-way valves, back flow
prevention valves or check valves used to regulate the direction, volume or
termination of product flow;
      (5)   Size of casings at ground level;
      (6)   Location of all boundary lines and rights-of-way pertinent to the
operation of the well or production equipment; and
      (7)   Location of all structures, roadways, railways, waterways and
public assembly areas within 300 feet of any wellhead or component that is
integral to the oil and gas production.
(Prior Code, § 1614.01) (Ord. 118-2003, passed 9-8-2003)
§ 1612.02 SAFETY/EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT.
   All oil and gas wells and related production equipment located in the city
shall have the following emergency markings or markers.
   (A)   All major control valves, including shut-off valves, check valves and
one-way valves, at the wellhead, from the separator to the tank, and from the
tank to the distribution point, shall be painted red.
      (1)   The location of each of these valves shall be identified by the
installation of a yellow indicator post with the top six inches painted red.
      (2)   All indicator posts shall be positioned in such a manner that the
top of the post will extend at least 12 inches above the native snow line,
which is 30 inches, and the bottom of the post shall be located as close to the
valve as possible.
   (B)   All storage tanks serving multi-well heads shall have all control
valves identified on the indicator posts with the street address of the
applicable wellheads.
   (C)   All pipelines shall be marked every 200 feet or closer, if
appropriate, with yellow indicator posts which extend at least 12 inches above
the native snow line, which is 30 inches.
      (1)   All pipeline indicator posts shall be erected to allow for a
straight line-of-sight orientation to conform with the existing terrain.
      (2)   Each major directional product flow change juncture which deviates
appreciably from the straight line-of-sight shall be marked with an indicator
post.
      (3)   All pipeline indicator posts shall be marked with black arrows that
identify the direction of product flow.
   (D)   All storage tanks shall be marked with a sign with the designated
address or street number, Ohio Department of Natural Resources permit number,
name of the well and name, address and 24-hour emergency telephone number of
the owner, agent or operator of the well. All required signs shall be updated
within seven days of any change of this information.
   (E)   All storage tanks shall be labeled in accordance with National Fire
Protection Association, Standard 704, regarding identification of the fire
hazards of the material stored within. This information shall be readable for a
distance of 300 feet, from the normal access to the storage tank or tank
battery.
   (F)   The site of each well shall have a sign, visible and readable at a
distance of 100 feet, stating, “NO SMOKING WITHIN 25 FEET”.
(Prior Code, § 1614.02) (Ord. 118-2003, passed 9-8-2003)
§ 1612.03 REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All oil and gas wells located within the city shall comply with the
following requirements.
      (1)   A backflow prevention valve, check valve or one-way valve shall be
installed between the storage tank and its associated well head, which shall be
permanently marked and approved by the Fire Department. The owner, agent or
operator of the well shall arrange for the Fire Department to be present when
the valve is installed.
      (2)   Pipelines from the wellhead to the separator and from the storage
tank to the distribution or sales point shall be installed at least 24 inches
below the surface of the ground. These pipelines shall have a protective
coating or cover or a cathode ground protection In accordance with the National
Fire Protection Association, Standard 30; American National Standards
Institute, No. B31; Petroleum Equipment Institute Nos. 100 or 200, or such
other standard that the Fire Department approves.
      (3)   Well heads, storage tank batteries and remote production equipment
sites shall be enclosed with an eight-foot chain link security fence with the
access doors locked at all times, which shall be installed prior to commencing
any production or transmission activities. Well heads shall be covered with
chain link fencing to provide security and protection.
      (4)   All outlet valves, distribution point valves or sale line valves
shall be locked at all times, except when involved to directly supervised off-
loading activities.
      (5)   All transmission pipelines from the well head to the primary
separating or storage tank, from the separator or production equipment to the
appropriate storage tank, and from the storage tank to the distribution or
sales point, shall be tested, in the presence of the Fire Department, either
hydrostatically or pneumatically, in accordance with the National Fire
Protection Association, Standard 30; American National Standards Institute, No.
B31; Petroleum Equipment Institute Nos. 100 or 200, or such other standard that
the Fire Department approves, or a test designated by the Fire Department at
the maximum anticipated operating pressure, or the maximum regulated relief
pressure of the well head, but in no case less than 50 pounds per square inch,
before the pipeline is connected to the system or put in service.
      (6)   All petroleum storage tanks shall be tested to assure that the
standards of the National Fire Protection Association, Standard 30; American
National Standards Institute, No. B31; or Petroleum Equipment Institute Nos.
100 or 200; have been met. These tanks shall be pressure tested at no less than
two and one-half pounds per square inch for vertical tanks and three to five
pounds per square inch for horizontal tanks, depending upon the size of the
task. This is done before the tank is connected to the system or put into
service.
      (7)   All oil and gas well systems with a detectable odor shall have an
odor-filtering device.
      (8)   Access roads shall be constructed prior to well installation, which
meet the load limitations and dimensions for fire equipment, which shall be
maintained during well production and operations, and which shall be removed
when the site is restored pursuant to this section.
   (B)   All owners, agents and operators of oil and gas wells located within
the city shall obtain a final inspection of the well and its components and
shall obtain written approval from the Fire Department before a well may be
placed into production or before any phase of production is initiated.
   (C)   All owners, agents and operators of oil and gas wells located within
the city shall report any change of ownership or any alteration, modification
or variation in equipment or operation to the Fire Department within 24-hours,
in writing, of any change in such information.
   (D)   All owners, agents and operators of oil and gas wells located within
the city shall immediately report to the Fire Department any condition or
situation that may create an emergency or pose an imminent danger to persons,
property or the environment.
   (E)   All owners, agents and operators of oil and gas wells located within
the city shall arrange for the Fire Department to inspect and test any repair
or alteration that is made to the well or its components.
   (F)   All owners, agents and operators of oil and gas wells located within
the city shall, within 30 days after ending operation of a well, dismantle and
remove all equipment, plug the well in an approved manner, reclaim the soil to
its native state and restore the site to a condition that the city approves.
   (G)   No person shall disrupt or alter any oil or gas well production
activities located within the city, or any well or its components, without
written approval from the owner, agent or operator of the well, and the
notification of the Fire Department.
   (H)   No person shall build upon or modify any terrain within the city that
is within 300 feet of an oil or gas well or its components, including access
roads, transmission pipelines or production equipment, without the prior
approval of the Fire Department.
   (I)   The Fire Department may order any oil or gas well located within the
city to be shut down if any of the requirements of this section or state law
are not met, or at any time that the well or its components create an emergency
or an imminent danger to person, property or the environment.
(Prior Code, § 1614.03) (Ord. 118-2003, passed 9-8-2003)
§ 1612.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Unless otherwise stated, whoever violates any of the provisions of
this chapter, or fails to comply therewith, or violates or fails to comply with
any order made thereunder, or builds in violation of any detailed statement of
specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder or any certificate or
permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or fails to
comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by a court of competent
jurisdiction, is severally for each and every such violation and non-
compliance respectively, guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. The
imposition of one penalty for any violations shall not excuse the violation or
permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or
remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. When not otherwise
specified, a separate offense shall be deemed committed each ten days that
prohibited conditions are maintained.
   (B)   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
(Prior Code, § 1614.99) (Ord. 118-2003, passed 9-8-2003)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
A.   FRANCHISES AND AGREEMENTS
      
B.   EASEMENTS
      
C.   VACATING OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
      
D.   DEDICATION AND PLAT APPROVAL
      
E.   ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY
      
F.   LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY
      
G.   GRADE LEVELS AND CHANGE OF STREET NAME
      
H.   ANNEXATION AND DETACHMENT OF TERRITORY
      
I.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
Editor’s note:
   The Barberton Code of Ordinances comprises all ordinances and resolutions of
a general and permanent nature. The provisions of such general and permanent
ordinances and resolutions are set forth in full in this code of ordinances.
   References must be made frequently to many special ordinances and
resolutions, particularly those relating to property, such as easements,
vacations, dedications, plat approvals, acquisition’s, disposals, leases and
the like. In the following Tables A through I, all such ordinances and
resolutions are listed. These tables list ordinances and resolutions
chronologically by subject and include both a citation to and a brief
description of each ordinance and resolution.
TABLE A: FRANCHISES AND AGREEMENTS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./ Date
Res.  Passed Description
No.
B. 1, 3-20-  To Central Union Telephone Co., to supply telephone service.
P. 22 1893
B. 1, 2-6-   To Barberton Telephone Co., to maintain telephone lines.
P. 43 1894
18    9-4-   To Babcock, Walsh and Robinson, to construct and operate a street railway.
      1894
B. 1, 5-20-
P.    1895   To W.S. Holloway, to erect, maintain and operate telephone lines.
190
B. 1, 5-24-
P.    1895   To L.K. Mihills, to erect and maintain telephone poles and lines.
186
B. 1, 10-22- To Akron, Cuyahoga Falls Rapid Transit Co., to construct, extend and operate
P.    1895   street railway on certain streets.
218
-     4-13-  To Babcock, Walsh and Robinson, amending Ord. 18, to construct and operate
      1896   street railway.
B. 1, 10-12-
P.    1898   To Akron, Cuyahoga Falls Rapid Transit Co., to supply street lighting.
280
B. 2, 1-9-   To Akron, Cuyahoga Falls Rapid Transit Co., to light streets.
P. 5  1900
B. 3, 3-24-
P.    1902   To Sun Vapor Street Light Co., to light streets and alleys.
214
B. 2, 8-18-
P.    1902   To Northern Ohio Traction Co., to furnish electric lights for the city.
249
B. 3, 3-9-   To J.A. Artly and J.W. Seidell, to supply gas.
P. 24 1903
B. 3, 11-30-
P.    1903   To O.C. Barber, to construct and maintain electric lighting system.
139
B. 3, 5-24-  To Postal Telegraph Cable Co., to construct and maintain its telegraph line in
P.    1904   the city.
270
B. 4, 8-22-  To H.A. Gait, to supply gas.
P. 38 1904
B. 4, 1-16-  To Mohican Oil and Gas Co., to supply gas.
P. 71 1905
B. 4, 4-30-
P.    1906   To Mohican Oil and Gas Co., to supply gas.
188
B. 5, 4-17-  To Barberton Light and Power Co., to supply electricity.
P. 19 1911
B. 5, 6-5-   To Akron & Barberton Belt Line Railroad Co., to construct and operate railroad
P. 36 1911   on certain streets.
58    8-5-   To Sun Vapor Street Light Co., to supply electricity to the city.
      1912
428   10-23- To East Ohio Gas Co., to supply gas.
      1916
1261  6-10-  To Akron & Barberton Belt Line Railroad Co., to construct and maintain
      1924   railroad.
1475  8-2-   To Akron & Barberton Belt Line Railroad Co., to construct and maintain siding.
      1926
1489  8-25-  To East Ohio Gas Co., to supply gas.
      1926
1547  1-17-  To Northern Ohio Power and Light Co., to maintain electric railroad.
      1927
87-   7-18-  To Erie R.R. Co. and J.T. McLane, for main railroad siding.
1927  1927
91-   8-2-   To Northern Ohio Power and Light Co., supplementing Ord. 1547, to maintain
1927  1927   street railroad.
108-  11-21- To Erie R.R. Co., to construct and maintain switch track.
1927  1927
168-  11-26- To Northern Ohio Power and Light Co., for lighting streets.
1928  1928
183-  12-17- To East Ohio Gas Co., to supply gas.
1928  1928
11-   4-3-   To Ohio Edison Co., for lighting streets.
1933  1933
R-54- 12-18- To Jack Yurick, to remove garbage and night soil.
1933  1933
36-   6-18-  To Ohio Edison Co., for lighting streets.
1934  1934
10-   1-11-  To East Ohio Gas Co., to supply gas.
1935  1935
14-   2-18-  To Ohio Edison Co., for lighting streets.
1935  1935
R-74- 12-16- To Jack Yurick, to dispose of garbage and night soil.
1935  1935
10-   4-6-   To Akron Transportation Co., for street railway.
1936  1936
32-   7-6-   To Ohio Edison Co., for lighting streets.
1936  1936
85-   4-24-  To East Ohio Gas Co., to supply gas.
1939  1939
21-   2-19-  To Ohio Edison Co., to provide electric lights for one year.
1940  1940
49-   6-17-  To Akron Transportation Co., for street railway.
1940  1940
18-   2-17-  To Ohio Edison Co., for lighting streets.
1941  1941
50-   6-2-   To Akron Transportation Co., to supply public transportation for 15 years.
1941  1941
37-   4-6-   To Ohio Edison Co., for lighting streets.
1942  1942
3-    1-18-  To Ohio Edison Co., to supply electricity for traffic-control units.
1943  1943
4-    1-18-  To Ohio Edison Co., to supply electricity for municipal activities.
1943  1943
4-    2-7-   To Jack Yurick, to remove garbage and night soil for two years.
1944  1944
23-   5-15-  To East Ohio Gas Co., to supply gas.
1944  1944
30-   6-19-  To Ohio Edison Co., for lighting streets.
1944  1944
20-   6-18-  To Ohio Edison Co., for lighting streets.
1945  1945
42-   8-19-  To Jack Yurick, for collection and removal of garbage for two years.
1946  1946
29-   4-8-   To Akron Transportation Co., amending Ord. 50-1941, for electric street
1948  1948   railway.
35-   5-22-  To Portage Lakes Transportation Co., for bus service.
1950  1950
50-   7-2-   To Portage Lakes Transportation Co., amending § 3, Ord. 35-1950, for bus
1951  1951   services.
98-   12-15- To Ohio Edison Co., to supply lights for municipal activities.
1952  1952
62-   7-6-   To Portage Lakes Transportation Co., amending § 5, Ord. 35-1950, for bus
1953  1953   services.
117-  8-16-  To Portage Lakes Transportation Co., amending Ord. 62-1953, for bus services.
1954  1954
94-   6-20-  To Portage Lakes Transportation Co., amending Ord. 35-1950, for bus services.
1955  1955
146-  8-20-  To Portage Lakes Transportation Co., amending Ord. 35-1950, for bus services
1956  1956   and rates.
157-  7-15-  To Portage Lakes Transportation Co., amending § 5, Ord. 35-1950, for bus
1957  1957   services.
109-  5-17-  Amends § 5 of Ord. 35-1950, as amended, regarding fares for bus service by
1958  1958   Portage Lakes Transportation Co.
5-    1-18-  Rates for East Ohio Gas Co.
1960  1960
120-  6-13-  To Akron Transportation Co., for bus service for five years.
1960  1960
213-  11-14- Amends § 4 of Ord. 120-1960 regarding fares for bus service from Akron
1960  1960   Transportation Co.
48-   5-4-   Fixes maximum electricity rates of Ohio Edison Co.; provides for street
1964  1964   lighting and traffic- control and warning lights.
221-  10-18- Declares that CATV systems are a public utility and provides for the
1965  1965   regulation of such systems.
45-   3-7-   To Akron Telerama, Inc., for right to erect, maintain and operate television
1966  1966   transmission facilities for 20 years.
137-  7-18-  Amends § 4 of Ord. 48-1964.
1966  1966
5-    1-2-   Amends § 4 of Ord. 128-1965, regarding contracting with Akron Transportation
1968  1968   Co. for bus services for five years.
173-  7-6-   To Ohio Edison Co., the right to construct, operate and maintain complete
1970  1970   electric system for 25 years.
223-  8-31-  To Akron Metropolitan Regional Transit Authority, to provide transportation
1970  1970   facilities for one year.
240-  9-14-  To Altran Service, Inc., for mass transportation service for five years.
1970  1970
31-   2-15-  To Barberton Intra Bus Co., for mass transportation service for one year.
1971  1971
53-   3-15-  Repeals §§ 1, 2 and 3 of Ord. 43-1964 regarding maximum rates and terms of
1971  1971   service of Ohio Edison Co., its successors and assigns.
111-  6-7-   To Akron Telerama, Inc., the right to erect, maintain and operate television
1971  1971   transmission facilities for 20 years.
221-  10-25- To Akron Metropolitan Regional Transit Authority, to provide transportation
1971  1971   facilities for one year.
181-  7-30-  To Ohio Edison Co., for supplying electricity for traffic signals.
1973  1973
182-  7-30-  To Ohio Edison Co., for supplying electricity for streets, ways and public
1973  1973   places.
206-  6-17-  Fixes maximum rates charged by Ohio Edison Co., and other terms of service;
1974  1974   repeals Ord. 53-1971.
112-  5-21-  To Ohio Edison Co., for lighting streets; repeals Ord. 182-1973.
1979  1979
255-  11-5-  Consents to transfer by Warner Communications, Inc., of one-half stock in
1979  1979   Warner Cable Corp. to American Express Co.
283-  12-22- To Ohio Edison Co., for supplying electricity for traffic signals; repeals
1980  1980   Ord. 181-1973.
237-  12-28- To Ohio Edison Co., for supplying electricity for streets, ways and public
1981  1981   places; repeals Ord. 283-1980.
32-   2-22-  To Ohio Edison Co., for supplying electricity for streets, ways and public
1982  1982   places; repeals Ord. 237-1981.
93-   5-10-  To Ohio Edison Co., for supplying electricity for traffic signals; repeals
1982  1982   Ords. 283-1980 and 32-1982.
Res.  12-9-  Consents to reacquisition by Warner Communications, Inc., of 50% ownership of
256-  1985   Warner Amex Joint Venture from American Express Co.
1985
250-  12-11- To Ohio Edison Co., for lighting public streets; repeals Ord. 237-1981.
1989  1989
72-   7-23-  To Warner Cable Communications, Inc., to construct, operate and maintain a
1990  1990   cable television system for 20 years.
29-   3-11-  To Marks Cablevision of Green, Inc., to construct, operate and maintain a
1991  1991   cable television system for 15 years.
49-   3-25-  Amends Ord. 72-1990.
1991  1991
Res.  12-23-
189-  1991   Approves transfer of franchise from Warner Cable to Time Warner Entertainment.
1991
91-   6-26-  Approves the rate change for basic cable television service by Time Warner
1995  1995   Entertainment Co., effective 7-14-1994.
70-   4-28-  Approves the rate charged for basic cable television service by Time Warner
1997  1997   Entertainment Co., effective 1-1-1996.
68-   6-10-  Approves the Akron- Summit County Energy Special Improvement District
2019  2019   Residential Program Plan.
89-   9-9-   Adopts the AFSCME agreement between the city and AFSCME Local 265.
2019  2019
93-   9-9-   Enters in a contract for the ODOT Bridge Inspection Program.
2019  2019
94-   9-9-   Applying for federal STP funds for a city roadway improvement project.
2019  2019
95-   9-9-   Amending a supply agreement for the Natural Gas Aggregation Program.
2019  2019
96-   9-9-   Entering into a contract with Jack Doheney for the purchase of an Elgin Broom
2019  2019   Bear Sweeper.
97-   9-9-   Entering into a contract with Ream & Haager Environmental Laboratory, Inc. for
2019  2019   analytical services.
101-  9-9-   Entering into a contract with Henschen & Associates for a case management
2019  2019   system.
102-  9-9-   Entering into a contract with Blue Technologies, Inc., for the purchase of a
2019  2019   document management system.
103-  9-9-   Supporting the Ohio Municipal League position on H.B. 49 and H.B. 5
2019  2019   (centralized tax collection).
104-  9-9-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with NFP Corporate Services
2019  2019   (OH), Inc., for the purpose of consulting and brokerage services.
107-  9-23-  Authorizing the Mayor to proceed with a change order to perform electrical
2019  2019   installation on three water well platforms.
108-  9-23-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with Cargill Inc., for the
2019  2019   2019/2020 Street/Road Salt Program.
118-  10-28- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a professionals services contract with
2019  2019   Rudzek Excavating, Inc. for construction services.
122-  10-28- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with the USEPA for the
2019  2019   Brownfield cleanup.
123-  10-28- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with T&M Associates to assist
2019  2019   with the Brownfield assessment grant.
126-  11-12- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a professional engineering services
2019  2019   contract with CT Consultants for construction administrative services.
132-  11-25- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an access and maintenance sharing
2019  2019   agreement with the City of Akron for proposed traffic signalization at the
             intersection of Grand Boulevard and E. State Street.
134-  12-9-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with The Eclipse Companies to
2019  2019   perform expansion and additional improvements to The Betz Ditch Floodway
             Detention Basin.
135-  12-9-  Authorizing the Law Director to enter into a one-year contract with the County
2019  2019   Legal Defender’s Office to provide legal representation to indigent persons.
137-  12-9-  Authorizing the Director of Public Safety to enter into contracts in the year
2019  2019   of 2020 for the ordinary and daily operation of municipal departments.
Res.  12-9-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the county for pavement
138-  2019   maintenance.
2019
143-  12-16- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with Ganley Ford for the
2019  2019   purchase of a new police cruiser.
144-  12-16- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with Medical Mutual of Ohio for
2019  2019   employee medical coverage.
152-  12-16- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with Roetzel & Andress for
2019  2019   labor and employee law representation.
Res.  2-10-  Authorizing the execution of a local jail capital project grant agreement with
02-   2020   respect to the Barberton jail facility.
2020
Res.         Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a supplemental water pollution control
04-   1-27-  loan fund agreement with the Ohio EPA and the Ohio Water Development Authority
2020  2020   for the planning, design and/or construction of the Norton Acres package plant
             elimination improvements.
07-   2-10-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a one- year contract with Oriana House
2020  2020   Incorporated for the 2020 community corrections contract.
13-   2-24-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a professional services contract with
2020  2020   United Earthworks, LLC for construction services for the Brentwood Estates
             sanitary sewer and package plant elimination project.
16-   3-9-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a professional engineering services
2020  2020   contract with CT Consultants for assistance with the identification and
             correction of inflow and infiltration problems in Norton Acres.
17-   3-9-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a professional engineering services
2020  2020   contract with CT Consultants for assistance with the identification and
             correction of inflow and infiltration problems in the sanitary sewer system.
24-   3-18-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with Butcher & Son Excavating,
2020  2020   Inc. for the 2020 residential demolition program for the demolition of 25
             residential structures.
Res.  4-27-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a cooperative agreement for the design of
51-   2020   wastewater treatment plant improvements with the Ohio Water Development
2020         Authority.
94-   9-14-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the City of Norton and
2020  2020   Copley Township for jail services through December 31, 2021.
108-  9-28-  Authorizing the city to enter into a contract with Zoll medical Corporation in
2020  2020   the amount of $56,880 for the purchase of four CPR units.
112-  9-28-  Authorizing the Mayor to extend the current agreement with the City of Norton
2020  2020   that will allow the City of Barberton Building Department to assume authority
             for all building code administrative functions within Norton limits.
120-  10-12- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with Ameriseal & Restoration
2020  2020   LLC for wastewater treatment plant improvements.
121-  10-12- Authorizing the city to enter into a contract with Vasu Communications, Inc.
2020  2020   in the amount of $196,672.96 for the purchase of a new radio system.
28-   5-10-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute an agreement between the City of Barberton
2021  2021   and the City of Norton extending the current joint economic development
             district agreement (JEDD).
44-   5-10-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a one- year agreement with the City of New
2021  2021   Franklin, whereby the Law Department will provide prosecutorial services to
             the City of New Franklin for an annual fee of $16,000.
50-   5-24-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with Perrin Asphalt and
2021  2021   Concrete, for the asphalt paving portion of the 2021 street resurfacing
             program.
51-   5-24-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with Specialized Construction,
2021  2021   Inc. for the chip and seal portion of the 2021 street resurfacing program.
52-   5-24-  Authorizing the City to enter into a contract with Henderson Products, Inc. in
2021  2021   the amount of $41,604 for the purchase, manufacturing, and installation of a
             body package.
53-   5-24-  Authorizing the City to enter into a contract with Hissong Kenworth of
2021  2021   Richfield in the amount of $73,686 for the purchase of a new 2022 Kenworth
             T270 dump truck cab and chassis.
59-   5-24-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into joint applications between the City of
2021  2021   Norton and the City of Barberton to apply for the Ohio Public Works
             Commission’s (OPWC) state capital improvement program (SCIP).
60-   5-24-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into joint applications between the City of
2021  2021   Summit and the City of Barberton to apply for the Ohio Public Works
             Commission’s (OPWC) state capital improvement program (SCIP).
             Authorizing the Mayor to enterinto a professional services contract with
65-   6-14-  Wichert Insurance Company, constituting a one year extension of the current
2021  2021   contract, for the city’s property/vehicle/liabili ty insurance coverage, due
             to expire June 28, 2021.
66-   6-14-  Authorizing the Finance Director to execute and deliver a lease-purchase
2021  2021   agreement with Huntington Public Capital Corporation, Huntington National
             Bank, for 3 years.
70-   6-14-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an Agency Agreement with the Barberton
2021  2021   Community Improvement Corporation.
73-   6-14-  Authorizing the city to enter into a contract with Hissong Kenworth for the
2021  2021   purchase of a new 2022 Kenworth T370 Truck cab and chassis.
74-   6-14-  Authorizing the city to enter into a contract with Henderson Products Inc. in
2021  2021   the amount of $80,435 for the purchase, manufacturing and installation of a
             body package.
75-   6-14-  Authorizing the city to enter into a contract with Henderson Products Inc. in
2021  2021   the amount of $87,018 for the purchase, manufacturing and installation of a
             body package.
78-   6-14-  Authorizing the city to enter into a contract with Hissong Kenworth for the
2021  2021   purchase of a new 2022 Kenworth T370 Truck cab and chassis.
             Authorizing all actions necessary to support the continuation of a
79-   6-14-  governmental natural gas aggregation program with the opt- out provisions
2021  2021   pursuant to R.C. § 4929.26, directing to execute an amendment to its supply
             agreement with Constellation Newenergy to continue a natural gas aggregation
             program beyond November 2021 when the current supply agreement ends.
76-   6-28-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a professional engineering services
2021  2021   contract with North Bay Construction, Inc. for wastewater treatment plant
             improvements.
77-   7-12-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a professional engineering services
2021  2021   contract with CT Consultants, for the wastewater treatment plant phases 3B and
             3C project.
87-   6-28-  Authorizing the Barberton Municipal Court to enter into a contract with
2021  2021   Tenable Protective Services, Inc. for a period of one year to provide unarmed
             uniformed security officers.
Res.  6-28-  Authorizing the city to apply for, accept, and enter into a water pollution
88-   2021   control loan fund (WPCLF) agreement on behalf of the city for construction of
2021         wastewater facilities.
91-   7-12-  Authorizing the city to enter into an agreement with Vermeer, for the purchase
2021  2021   of an excavator.
             Authorizing the execution of an agreement with Southwest Summit Council of
95-   7-26-  Governments (SWSCOG), the City of Norton and the Township of Copley in
2021  2021   connection with the lease-purchase of information technology equipment for
             SWSCOG.
105-  9-13-  Authorizing the city to enter into a contract with Akron Tractor and
2021  2021   Equipment, Inc. in the amount of $88,245.00 for the purchase of a new Holland
             Workmaster 95 cab tractor with and Alamo RM180 rear mounted boom mower.
113-  10-11- Authorizing the city to enter into a contract with Stryker in the amount of
2021  2021   $93,467.24 for the purchase of four power-load cot fastener systems.
145-  11-7-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with Perrin Asphalt & Concrete in
2022  2022   the amount of $36,500 to tear out the existing tennis courts and install a new
             tennis court at Breitenstine Park.
146-  11-7-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with Paragon Concrete in the
2022  2022   amount of $28,600 to tear out the existing basketball court an install a new
             court and basketball hoops at McCafferty Park.
153-  11-14- Authorizing the city to enter into contract with Van Devere Chevrolet, not to
2022  2022   exceed the amount of $89,694 for the purchase of a new 2022 Chevy Silverado
             5500 dump truck.
155-  11-14- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with Perrin Asphalt Company in
2022  2022   the amount of $38,500 to tear out the existing tennis courts and install a new
             tennis court at Breitenstine Park.
159-  11-28- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with Metlife for employee dental
2022  2022   and vision coverage beginning January 1, 2023 through December 31, 2024 for
             dental and January 1, 2023 through December 31, 2025 for vision.
168-  11-28- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with Tim Lally Chevrolet in an
2022  2022   amount not to exceed $224,046 to purchase police vehicles.
             Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a one- year contract with Medical Mutual
169-  12-12- of Ohio (MMO), through a partnership with Summit County Health Connection, for
2022  2022   employee benefits which include medical and prescription coverage beginning
             January 1, 2023 through December 31, 2023.
Res.  12-12- Authorizing the Mayor, or designee, to enter into contract with the Ohio
172-  2022   Department of Transportation (ODOT) for bridge inspection program services.
2022
177-  12-12- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with Ream & Haagger Environmental
2022  2022   Laboratory Inc. for analytical services in 2023 and 2024.
180-  12-19- Approving and authorizing the execution of a development agreement between the
2022  2022   city and D.R. Magic Marketplace, LLC concerning the redevelopment of certain
             real property in the city.
Res.  12-19- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with the Ohio Department of
181-  2022   Transportation (ODOT) for the improvement of 4th Street from West Lake Avenue
2022         to Norton Avenue.
Res.         Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with the Ohio Department of
182-  12-19- Transportation (ODOT) for the improvement of Hopocan Avenue from Hillsdale
2022  2022   Avenue to 8th Street NW, North Avenue from 17th Street NW to Barber Road, and
             Snyder Avenue from 2nd Street SW to 5th Street SE.
3-    1-23-  Authorizing the Mayor, or designee, to enter into a five-year lease to own
2023  2023   contract with Toshiba Business Solutions as the city's copy machine supplier.
             Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with GPD Group Inc. (GPD), for
4-    1-23-  general professional engineering services, including but not limited to,
2023  2023   permissive and residential street resurfacing programs, infrastructure
             improvement design/management, street crack sealing, street striping, and
             miscellaneous engineering/manageme nt services.
Res.  2-13-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with the Ohio Department of
5-    2023   Transportation (ODOT) for the improvement of Wooster Road North/State Street.
2023
7-    2-13-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with Cargill Incorporated for the
2023  2023   2023 street/road salt program through the Community University Education
             Regional Purchasing Council of Governments (CUE- COG).
9-    2-13-  Authorizing the Mayor to exercise the three one-year options offered in the
2023  2023   2018 garbage and recycling contract to provide the weekly residential curbside
             garbage/recycling collection for the city.
27-   3-13-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with Butcher & Son Excavating,
2023  2023   Inc. for the 2023 Residential Demolition Program.
33-   3-13-  Authorizing a change order for the increased price of color, concrete,
2023  2023   equipment rental and basketball hoop, with Paragon Concrete.
35-   3-13-  Authorizing the Mayor to purchase 250 water meter interface units, registers
2023  2023   and the meter bodies from Neptune Equipment Company (NECO), in the amount of
             $73,750.
38-   3-27-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with SecuriTec for the purchase
2023  2023   and installation of surveillance systems in the parks.
Res.  3-27-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with the Ohio Department of
40-   2023   Transportation (ODOT) for the improvement of 4th Street NW.
2023
43-   3-27-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with Kunkle & Sons Property
2023  2023   Maintenance LLC, for the 2022 East Hudson Sewer Construction.
45-   3-27-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with CXT, Inc. for the purchase
2023  2023   of restrooms for McCafferty Park.
49-   4-10-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with Ohio CAT for the purchase of
2023  2023   a new CAT PC-306 24" cold planer (grinder).
Res.  4-10-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with the Ohio Department of
50-   2023   Transportation (ODOT) for Safe Route to School (SRTS) Infrastructure Project
2023         funding.
52-   4-10-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with MTech Company for the
2023  2023   purchase of a new GapVax Combination Jet/Vacuum Machine.
53-   4-10-  Authorizing the city to enter into contract with Hissong Kenworth of Richfield
2023  2023   (Kenworth) for the purchase of a new 2024 Kenworth T480 snow and ice truck.
54-   4-10-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with Ohio CAT for the purchase of
2023  2023   a new 2023 Model 926M Wheel Loader.
55-   4-24-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with RIP Medical Debt in the
2023  2023   amount not to exceed $110,000.
59-   4-24-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a one- year contract with Oriana House
2023  2023   Incorporated for the 2023 Community Corrections Contract.
61-   4-24-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a professional engineering services
2023  2023   contract with Burgess & Niple for the Wolf Creek Dam Upgrade Project, Phase 1
             Design.
62-   4-24-  Authorizing the Law Director to enter into a one-year contract with the Legal
2023  2023   Defender’s Office of Summit County, to provide legal representation to
             indigent persons in the amount of $170 per case.
63-   4-24-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with SnC Construction Company LLC
2023  2023   for improvements to Barberton Fire Station 1 in the amount of $118,735.
65-   5-8-   Amending Ordinance 26-2022, contract between the Fire Department and Pfund
2023  2023   Superior Sales, to reflect an increase in the approved amount to $224,161.
69-   5-8-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with Perrin Asphalt and Concrete
2023  2023   for the asphalt paving portion of the 2023 street resurfacing program and
             Edgewood Park and Tuscora Park Pickle Ball Courts.
71-   5-8-   Amending Ordinance 43-2023, contract with Kunkle & Sons Property Maintenance
2023  2023   LLC, to reflect an increase in the approved amount to $68,712.26.
72-   5-22-  Authorizing the execution of a lease- purchase agreement between Freedom
2023  2023   Financial, and the city, for the purpose of acquiring a fire pumper truck.
73-   5-22-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with Atlantic Emergency Solutions
2023  2023   in the amount of $875,439 to purchase a Pierce Saber Pumper.
Res.  5-22-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with the Ohio Department of
76-   2023   Transportation (ODOT) for the improvement of Hopocan Avenue.
2023
Res.  6-12-  Amending Res. 40- 2023 by increasing the amount of the contract with ODOT to
80-   2023   $345,923 based on bids that ODOT received higher than the estimated cost.
2023
Res.  6-12-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with ODOT for the purpose of
82-   2023   resurfacing and reconstruction of Wooster Road from 31st Street to Hudson Run
2023         Road, and Hudson Run Road to 2nd Street NW.
83-   6-12-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with Wichert Insurance Company
2023  2023   for property, vehicle, equipment and liability insurance in the amount of
             $396,331.
84-   6-26-  Authorizing the Barberton Municipal Court to enter into contract with U.S.
2023  2023   Royce Protection Service, for a one-year period to provide unarmed uniformed
             security officers.
             Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a professional engineering services
85-   6-26-  contract with CT Consultants, for additional construction administration,
2023  2023   construction inspection, and environmental assistance support services, not to
             exceed $118,700.
90-   7-10-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract to sell various city properties
2023  2023   that have never been identified for market-rate residential development.
93-   7-10-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with DWA Recreation, in an amount
2023  2023   of $129,810.84 to replace the play structure at College Park.
101-  7-24-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with CXT Inc., in the amount of
2023  2023   $160,000 to be used for the purchase of restrooms for Decker Park.
102-  7-24-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract for the 2023 concrete and
2023  2023   sidewalk replacement program.
103-  7-24-  Authorizing the city to enter into contract for the construction of two 60-
2023  2023   inch check valves for the South Van Buren Railroad Culvert.
104-  7-24-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with American Ramp Company in the
2023  2023   amount of $284,100 for the purchase of skateboard park equipment.
106-  7-24-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute an agreement to purchase the property at 36
2023  2023   through 38 14th Street NW, under the Hazard Mitigation Grant Program.
107-  7-24-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with the County of Summit Animal
2023  2023   Control for a services agreement.
110-  7-24-  Amending Ordinance 38-2023 to reflect an increase in the approved amount to
2023  2023   $157,000, due to the increased cost of additional cameras at Lake Anna Park,
             College Park, Avilee Webb Park, Decker Park and Edgewood Park.
120-  9-11-  Authorizing a change order in the amount of $237,290.67 with North Bay
2023  2023   Construction, Inc. to provide a bulk water filling station with backflow
             protection for the water distribution system at the WWTP.
122-  9-25-  Authorizing the Utility Department to enter into contract with Cavanaugh
2023  2023   Construction Company in the amount of $61,897.50 for the reconstruction of a
             24" storm sewer 10' deep that is failing on Hopocan Avenue.
127-  9-25-  Amending Ordinance 102-2023 to reflect an increase in the bid amount, not to
2023  2023   exceed $100,000, due to replacing sidewalk in poor condition bounded by and
             along 1st and 2nd Street including several ADA ramps.
128-  9-25-  Authorizing the Mayor, or designee, to execute an agreement to purchase the
2023  2023   property at 480 West Tuscarawas Avenue.
131-  10-9-  Authorizing the Mayor, or designee, to enter into contract with Simonson
2023  2023   Construction Services LLC in the total bid cost of $1,181,018 to replace water
             mains on Taylor Road.
132-  10-9-  Authorizing a change order in the amount of $184,631.95 with United Earthworks
2023  2023   LLC, for the Brentwood Estates Sanitary Sewer and Package Plant Elimination;
             Phase 3.
133-  10-9-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with Butcher & Sons, for the
2023  2023   demolition of 401 Newell St.
139-  10-23- Authorizing a change order for additional road pavement related to East Huston
2023  2023   Sewer, in an increased amount of $59,700 with Perrin Asphalt and Concrete.
146-  11-13- Authorizing the Mayor, or designee, to enter into contract with Regional
2023  2023   Income Tax Agency’s (RITA) Legal Program for collection purposes.
149-  11-13- Authorizing the Mayor, or designee, to enter into contract with the Direct
2023  2023   Indictment Program of Summit County in the amount of $21,000.
             Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a one- year contract with Summit County
153-  11-13- for the Summit County Health Connection, for employee benefits which include
2023  2023   medical and prescription coverage beginning January 1, 2024 through December
             31, 2024.
155-  11-27- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract to sell various city properties.
2023  2023
156-  11-27- Authorizing the city to enter into contract with Fechko Excavating in the
2023  2023   amount of $4,841,390.92 for the reconstruction of South Van Buren.
160-  12-18- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with GPD Group Inc., for
2023  2023   professional engineering services for the construction administration and
             inspection services for the South Van Buren Project.
22-   3-11-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with Butcher & Son Excavating,
2024  2024   Inc. for the 2024 Residential Demolition Program.
27-   3-25-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a three- year contract with OpenGov, a
2024  2024   cloud based budgeting and planning software, in the amount of $60,675.
29-   3-25-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with Hydra-Stop LLC, for the
2024  2024   procurement of valve insertion equipment.
30-   4-15-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with Marks Construction, for
2024  2024   Snyder Ave Stream Restoration and Flood Mitigation Project, in the amount of
             $316,934.70.
34-   4-29-  Amending Ordinance 27-2024 to reflect an increase in the amount to
2024  2024   $152,156.00.
35-   4-29-  Authorizing the Mayor, or his designee, to enter into contract with Norman
2024  2024   Eckinger, Inc. in the amount of $2,782,654.00 for the WWTP Sludge De- watering
             Building Rehabilitation Project.
40-   5-13-  Authorizing the Mayor to approve the renewal contract with MedMutual Life for
2024  2024   group life insurance from January 1, 2023 through December 31, 2024.
43-   5-13-  Authorizing the Director of Finance to execute and deliver a lease-purchase
2024  2024   agreement with Huntington National Bank.
45-   5-13-  Authorizing the Mayor to approve the renewal contract with MedMutual Life for
2024  2024   group life insurance from January 1, 2025 through December 31, 2025.
48-   5-28-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with Statewide Ford for the
2024  2024   purchase of two fully outfitted Ford police interceptors utility vehicles, in
             the amount of $129,876.00
50-   5-28-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with Karvo Companies, Inc. for
2024  2024   the asphalt paving portion of the 2024 Street Resurfacing Program.
69-   9-9-   Authorizing the city to enter into contract with Vasu Communications, Inc. in
2024  2024   the amount, not to exceed, $505,901.23 for the purchase of a new radio system.
78-   9-23-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with Fabrizi Trucking for the
2024  2024   concrete sidewalk program for a total bid cost of $94,532.
83-   9-23-  Authorizing the Mayor, or his designee, to enter into contract with Tim Lally
2024  2024   Chevrolet in an amount not to exceed $69,000 to purchase an outfitted 2024
             Chevy Silverado K9 vehicle.
91-   10-14- Authorizing the Mayor, or his designee, to approve the renewal contract with
2024  2024   Summit County for the Summit County Health Connection Program.
97-   10-28- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a three- year agreement with the City of
2024  2024   New Franklin, whereby the Law Department will provide prosecutorial services
             to the City of New Franklin.
98-   10-28- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a three- year contract with the City of
2024  2024   Green, whereby the Law Department will provide prosecutorial services to the
             City of Green.
99-   10-28- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a three- year agreement with the City of
2024  2024   Norton, whereby the Law Department will provide prosecutorial services to the
             City of Norton.
100-  10-28- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with Enterprise Fleet Management
2024  2024   for the lease of vehicles through the Region VIII Education Service Center
             Ohio/TIPS Program.
101-  11-12- Adopting and approving the collective bargaining agreement between the city
2024  2024   and IAFF Local 329.
102-  11-12- Authorizing the Mayor, or his designee, to enter into contract with CXT Inc.,
2024  2024   in the amount of $125,000.00.
103-  11-12- Authorizing the Mayor, or his designee, to enter into contract with Kenmore
2024  2024   Construction, to replace water mains on Wooster Road West with a total project
             cost of $2,462,159.00.
98-   10-28- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a three-year contract with the City of
2024  2024   Green, whereby the Law Department will provide prosecutorial services to the
             City of Green.
99-   10-28- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a three-year agreement with the City of
2024  2024   Norton, whereby the Law Department will provide prosecutorial services to the
             City of Norton.
100-  10-28- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with Enterprise Fleet Management
2024  2024   for the lease of vehicles through the Region VIII Education Service Center
             Ohio/TIPS Program.
101-  11-12- Adopting and approving the collective bargaining agreement between the city
2024  2024   and IAFF Local 329.
102-  11-12- Authorizing the Mayor, or his designee, to enter into contract with CXT Inc.,
2024  2024   in the amount of $125,000.00.
103-  11-12- Authorizing the Mayor, or his designee, to enter into contract with Kenmore
2024  2024   Construction, to replace water mains on Wooster Road West with a total project
             cost of $2,462,159.00.
109-  11-5-  Adopting and approving the collective bargaining agreement between the city
2024  2024   and AFSCME Local 265.
110-  11-25- Authorizing the Mayor, or his designee, to enter into contract with Kenmore
2024  2024   Construction for Newell Street and Norton Avenue improvements for a total bid
             cost of $732,407.07.
113-  11-25- Amending Ordinance No. 89-2023.
2024  2024
114-  11-25- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with Delta Dental to provide
2024  2024   employee dental coverage, beginning January 1, 2025 through December 31, 2026.
             Authorizing the Mayor, or his designee, to enter into contract with Hasenstab
2-    2-10-  Architects for architectural services for schematic design for the City Hall
2025  2025   and Justice Center project, in the City of Barberton, and the cost is not to
             exceed $104,200 and contingent on an agreement with the Barberton Community
             Foundation's vote on funding this project.
3-    1-13-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with the Ohio Department of
2025  2025   Transportation (ODOT) for the improvement of N. Van Buren (PID 122321) and
             nearby area to install and rebuild sidewalk.
4-    1-13-  Authorizing the city to renew the city's user agreement with the Summit
2025  2025   County-Akron Regional Radio System (SCCA8RRS).
             Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with GPD Group Inc. (GPD), for
5-    1-13-  general professional engineering services, including but not limited to,
2025  2025   permissive and residential street resurfacing programs, infrastructure
             improvement design/management, street crack sealing, street striping, and
             miscellaneous engineering/management services.
6-    1-13-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with Cargill Incorporated for the
2025  2025   2025 street/road salt program through the Community University Education
             Regional Purchasing Council of Governments (CUE-COG).
13-   1-27-  Authorizing the Mayor, or his designee, to enter into contract with Haywood
2025  2025   Electric Inc for Second Street Festoon lighting install for a total bid cost
             of $122,380.25.
14-   1-27-  Authorizing the Mayor, or his or her designee, to enter into contract with
2025  2025   KIKO to hold an auction to sell items remaining in 107 5th Street building
             before the building is demolished.
16-   1-27-  Authorizing the Mayor, or his or her designee, to enter into contract with
2025  2025   North Bay Construction, Inc. in the amount of $717,288.00 for the return
             sludge pump station improvements at the Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP).
17-   2-10-  Authorizing the Law Director to enter into a one-year contract with the Legal
2025  2025   Defender's Office of Summit County, to provide legal representation to
             indigent persons in the amount of $230 per case.
20-   2-10-  Amending Ordinance No. 69-2024, "enter into contract Vasu Communications
2025  2025   Inc.," to reflect the new total amount of $508,932.25 for the purchase of a
             new radio system.
21-   2-10-  Authorizing the City of Barberton to enter into contract with T&M Associates
2025  2025   to carry out the recently awarded $500,000 U.S. EPA Assessment Brownfield
             Grant.
23-   2-24-  Authorizing the Mayor, or his designee, to enter into contract with a
2025  2025   contractor for the demolition of the city owned building at 107 5th Street.
31-   3-10-  Authorizing the Mayor, or his designee, to enter into a three-year contract
2025  2025   with Public Consulting Group to pay 10% of approximately $136,148 to be
             collected annually.
34-   3-10-  Authorizing the Mayor, or his designee, to enter into contract with Butcher
2025  2025   and Sons for the 2025 Residential Demolition Program.
Res.  4-14-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with the Ohio Department of
41-   2025   Transportation (ODOT) for the improvement of Van Buren and nearby area to
2025         install and rebuild sidewalk.
50-   4-28-  Approving the collective bargaining agreement between the City of Barberton
2025  2025   and the Ohio Patrolmen's Benevolent Association (OPBA) Blue/Gold Bargaining
             Units, effective from January 1, 2025 through December 31, 2027,
51-   4-28-  Authorizing the Mayor, or his designee, to enter into contract with McLean
2025  2025   Equipment located in Hudson, Ohio for the purchase of a paver, not to exceed
             $160,000.
52-   5-12-  Authorizing the Mayor, or his designee, to enter into contract with Barbicas
2025  2025   Construction Co. (Barbicas) for the asphalt paving portion of the 2025 Street
             Resurfacing Program.
55-   5-12-  Authorizing the Mayor, or his designee, to enter into contract with NFP
2025  2025   Corporation Services (OH) Inc. (NFP), for the purpose of consulting and
             brokerage services for the city.
56-   5-12-  Authorizing the Mayor, or his designee, to enter into contract with Simonson
2025  2025   Construction Services Inc. in the amount of $553,709.50.
57-   5-12-  Authorizing the Mayor, or his designee, to enter into contract with Simonson
2025  2025   Construction Services Inc. in the amount of $311,095.00.
58-   5-12-  Authorizing the Mayor, or his designee, to enter into contract with Simonson
2025  2025   Construction Services Inc. in the amount of $264,206.00.
64-   5-27-  Authorizing the Mayor, or his designee, to enter into contract with Brown
2025  2025   Equipment Company (BEC) in the amount of $500,000.00 for the purchase of a new
             RAMVAC HX-9 TA.
Res.  5-27-  Authorizing the Mayor to revise the contract with the Ohio Department of
68-   2025   Transportation (ODOT) for the improvement of N Van Buren (PID 122321) and
2025         nearby area to install and rebuild sidewalk.
73-   6-9-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract with Konstruction King Inc., in
2025  2025   the amount of $913,682.00, for the concrete paving project.
74-   6-9-   Authorizing the Mayor, or his designee, to enter into contract with Wichert
2025  2025   Insurance Company, for a one-year renewal of the city's property, vehicle,
             equipment, and liability insurance.
             Authorizing the Barberton Municipal Court to enter into contract with U.S.
81-   6-23-  Royce Protection Service (fka, Tenable Protective), for a one-year period
2025  2025   running July 1, 2025 through June 30, 2026 to provide unarmed uniformed
             security officers.
             Authorizing the Mayor or his designee to amend the natural gas supply
83-   6-23-  agreement and enter into an agreement with IGS Energy, which submitted the
2025  2025   lowest rate formulation via a request for proposal (RFP) due to the current
             program set to expire in October of 2025.
103-  7-28-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into joint applications between the City of
2025  2025   Norton and the City of Barberton to apply for the Ohio Public Works
             Commission's (OPWC) State Capital Improvement Program (SCIP).
104-  7-28-  Authorizing the Mayor, or his designee, to enter into an agreement with Adair
2025  2025   Asset Management for the purpose of obtaining certain tax liens.
124-  8-4-   Authorizing the Mayor, or his designee, to enter into contract with Kenmore
2025  2025   Construction (Kenmore) to replace the water main on Stratford Street, for a
             total bid cost of $916,350.00.
133-  9-9-   Authorizing the Director of Finance to execute and deliver a lease-purchase
2025  2025   agreement with Huntington National Bank.
135-  9-9-   Authorizing the city to enter into contract with Pfund Superior Sales, in the
2025  2025   amount of $318,925.00 for the purchase of a 2027 Ford F-450 Life Line
             "Superliner" Ambulance for the Fire Department.
147-  10-13- Authorizing the Director of Finance to enter into a lease to purchase an
2025  2025   agreement with NCL Government Capital on behalf of Southwest Summit Council of
             Governments (SWSCOG) for Zetron Max Dispatch Equipment.
149-  10-13- Authorizing the City of Barberton to enter into contract with Zetron to
2025  2025   purchase Zetron Max Dispatch Equipment, in the amount of $116,223.55, on
             behalf of Southwest Summit Council of Governments (SWSCOG).
150-  10-13- Authorizing the Mayor, or his designee, to approve the renewal contract with
2025  2025   Summit County for the Summit County Health Connection Program.
158-  11-10- Authorizing the Mayor to approve the renewal contract with MedMutual Life for
2025  2025   group life insurance from January 1, 2026 through December 31, 2026.
159-  11-10- Authorizing the Mayor to approve the renewal contract with MetLife for
2025  2025   employee vision coverage beginning January 1, 2026 through December 31, 2027.
167-  11-24- Authorizing the Director of Finance to enter into contract with the Auditor of
2025  2025   the State of Ohio and the accounting firm of Julian and Grube, Inc., to
             perform annual audits for the City of Barberton, for fiscal years 2025-2029.
168-  11-24- Authorizing the Director of Finance to execute and deliver a lease-purchase
2025  2025   agreement with Huntington Public Capital Corporation, Huntington National
             Bank.
171-  11-24- Authorizing the Mayor, or his designee, to enter into contract with Hissong
2025  2025   Kenworth of Richfield (Kenworth), in the amount of $786,992.00, for the
             purchase of three new 2025 Kenworth T480 snow and ice trucks.
174-  12-8-  Authorizing the City of Barberton to enter into a five year agreement with
2025  2025   Blue Technologies, for the time period of January 1, 2026 through December 31,
             2030.
            
 
TABLE B: EASEMENTS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./ Date
Res.  Passed Description
No.
B. 2, 8-30-  To Akron & Barberton Belt Line Railroad Co., for railroad on certain parts of
P.    1902   Second Street and Bolivar Road.
256
B. 2, 11-3-
P.    1902   To Northern Ohio Traction Co., for electric street railroad on Cogan Street.
278
Res.  3-16-
B. 3, 1903   To city, for water pipe on Erie R.R. Co. property.
P. 30
B. 3, 7-13-  To Nypano R.R. Co., for additional track across Cornell Street.
P. 77 1903
B. 3, 8-17-  To Akron & Barberton Belt Line Railroad Co., for railroad over portions of
P.    1903   Second Street and Bolivar Road.
102
B. 3, 11-16-
P.    1903   To Nypano R.R. Co., for additional railroad tracks across Fourth Street.
133
B. 3, 1-18-  To Akron & Barberton Belt Line Railroad Co., for railroad over parts of Bolivar
P.    1904   Road, Second Street and Robinson Avenue.
158
B. 4, 10-16- To Akron & Barberton Belt Line Railroad Co., for railroad across and upon
P.    1905   Fourth Street.
147
B. 4, 11-12- To Akron & Barberton Belt Line Railroad Co., for railroad across Robinson
P.    1906   Avenue.
226
B. 4, 11-12-
P.    1906   To Akron & Barberton Belt Line Railroad Co., for railroad across Bolivar Road.
228
B. 5, 11-13- To Akron & Barberton Belt Line Railroad Co., for railroad track across Hopocan
P. 76 1911   Avenue.
141   6-17-  To city, for land on A.D. Betz allotment for sewer purposes.
      1913
143   6-26-  To city, for land parcels in A.D. Betz allotment and A.A. Moore’s Peerless
      1913   allotment.
144   6-26-  To city, for Lot 10, Block 1; D.J. Crossley and M.J. Crossley, for sewer
      1913   purposes.
146   6-26-  To city, for right-of- way across Storm Sewer District No. 3.
      1913
Res.  6-26-  To city, across Lot 47 in A.A. Moore’s Peerless allotment.
147   1913
148   6-26-  To city, across Lot 9, Block 1, of A.D. Betz allotment.
      1913
300   5-3-   To city, for electric wires across property of Pennsylvania Co.
      1915
395   6-7-   To Punctureless Auto Tire Co., for railway switch track across Springfield
      1916   Road.
691   6-16-  To Akron & Barberton Belt Line Railroad Co., for side track.
      1919
1006  2-20-  To city, to conduct sewer pipes across Pennsylvania R.R. Co. & B. & O. R.R. Co.
      1922   right-of-way.
1029  4-14-  To Akron & Barberton Belt Line Railroad Co., to construct railroad across
      1922   Hopocan Avenue.
1076  10- 2- To Northern Ohio Traction & Light Co., for extension of street railroad system.
      1922
1098  1-15-  To Northern Ohio Traction & Light Co., for extension of wires on Hopocan and
      1923   Shannon Avenues.
Res.  11-17- To city, for water pipe across right-of- way of Erie R.R. Co.
1303  1924
97-   6-4-   To city, accepting deeds of A.E. Smith and F.E. Smith for sanitary sewer right-
1928  1928   of-way.
Res.  4-7-
31-   1930   To city, from J. and I. Schultz for sewers.
1930
56-   6-20-  To Ohio Edison Co., for right to use Copley New-Portage Road.
1932  1932
Res.  11-18-
69-   1935   To city, from W.H. Hornberger for sewer.
1935
31-   6-1-   To city, from Seiberling Rubber Co. for sewer.
1936  1936
49-   9-9-   To city, from Akron & Barberton Belt Line Railroad Co. for sewer.
1936  1936
63-   11-23- To city, for sewage disposal plant.
1936  1936
72-   12-21- To city, from K. Sungyi for sewer.
1936  1936
74-   12-21- To city, from H. Slee, et al., for water main.
1936  1936
78-   12-28- To city, from Pennsylvania R.R. Co. for sewer.
1936  1936
80-   12-28- To city, from Akron & Barberton Belt Line Railroad Co. for sewer.
1936  1936
81-   12-29- To city, for land for sewer main.
1936  1936
5-    2-15-  To Bartrum Rubber Co., to erect power lines.
1937  1937
9-    2-15-  To city, amending Ord. 80-1936, regarding Akron & Barberton Belt Line Railroad
1937  1937   Co. for sewer.
21-   3-7-   To East Ohio Gas Co., for gas main.
1938  1938
90-   7-24-  To Pittsburgh Plate Glass Co., for pipe line.
1940  1940
34-   4-6-   To Ohio Edison Co., for electric lines across property of the city.
1942  1942
40-   9-3-   To Ohio Bell Telephone Co., for certain land owned by the city for radio phone
1946  1946   receiving station.
16-   4-7-   To East Ohio Gas Co., for pipe line.
1947  1947
12-   2-19-  To Ohio Edison Co., to extend transmission facilities.
1951  1951
28-   3-17-  To Ohio Edison Co., to extend transmission facilities.
1952  1952
99-   10-19- To Columbia-Southern Co., to construct steel waste pipe over lands owned by the
1953  1953   city.
6-    2-1-   To Columbia-Southern Co., to construct sewer over land owned by the city.
1954  1954
39-   5-3-   To Columbia-Southern Co., for sewer line in Lot 6.
1954  1954
122-  8-1-   To Columbia-Southern Co., to construct bridge over Hudson Run Road.
1955  1955
141-  8-6-   To Columbia-Southern Co., to erect telephone poles.
1956  1956
91-   5-6-   To Board of Education, for sewer purposes.
1957  1957
202-  10-6-  Easement with Babcock & Wilcox Co. and Akron & Barberton Belt Line Railroad.
1958  1958
168-  8-8-   To city, for water well adjacent to Pigeon Run on Ohio Edison property.
1960  1960
145-  7-31-  Aerial and other easements necessary to reconstruct Tuscarawas Avenue viaduct.
1961  1961
86-   5-3-   To Board of Summit County Commissioners, for changing Tuscarawas River.
1965  1965
100-  5-1-   Releasing easement on Lots 226 and 287 of Columbia Heights allotment No. 2 as
1967  1967   no longer needed by the city.
163-  9-3-   To city, for maintaining water line in Lot 20 of Coventry Township.
1968  1968
81-   5-3-   From M & C Inc., for storm sewer with existing storm sewer laterals and catch
1971  1971   basins.
257-  11-20- To city, for installation of sanitary sewers and storm sewers on property of
1972  1972   Barco, an Ohio partnership.
7-    1-15-  To city, for installation of sanitary sewers and storm sewers on property of
1973  1973   James L. Williams, et al.
101-  5-7-   To city, from Robert Gormley, et al., for installation of water line in
1973  1973   Shenandoah Highlands allotment.
287-  11-12- To city, for installation of sanitary sewer on property of Bernard Construction
1973  1973   Co.
324-  9-23-  From the Bernard Construction Co., in Lots 19 and 29 of original Norton
1974  1974   Township, for water main purposes.
78-   3-10-  From Robert Gormley, et al., for installation of sanitary sewer line from Fifth
1975  1975   Street to Shenandoah Highlands Section A.
153-  5-5-   From Austin Guirlinger, for installation of sanitary and storm sewers.
1975  1975
224-  7-7-   From Sam Holt, Jr., for a sanitary sewer line.
1975  1975
33-   2-2-   To PPG Industries, Inc., to dispose of waste treatment sludge.
1976  1976
76-   4-19-  From Steve Manolis et al., for sanitary sewer line west of Thirty-first Street
1976  1976   to Coop Store.
101-  5-10-  For use of Ohio Canal properties between northern corporation limits and Snyder
1976  1976   Avenue.
274-  10-18- From Board of Education for storm sewer line on Second Street S.E. for two
1976  1976   years.
144-  7-5-   Releasing 15 feet along the east side of Lots 5 and 6 of Austin Estates
1977  1977   Subdivision “G”.
249-  10-3-  Appropriation of temporary easement in and to property in Coventry Township,
1977  1977   Lot 16, Tract 15, for highway purposes.
250-  10-3-  Appropriation of temporary easement in and to property in Coventry Township,
1977  1977   Tract 14, for highway purposes.
268-  10-17- Appropriation of temporary easement in Coventry Township, Tract 15, Lot 16, and
1977  1977   in Tract 14, for highway purposes.
277-  11-7-  Appropriation of temporary easement in Lot 10 of the Ammerman and Davies
1977  1977   allotment for highway purposes.
322-  12-5-  Appropriation of two temporary easements in Lots 73, 74 and 75 of the D.W.
1977  1977   Snyder allotment for highway purposes.
9-    1-3-   Amends Ord. 322-1977.
1978  1978
34-   2-6-   To Babcock & Wilcox Co., for an overhead transmission line across Robinson
1978  1978   Avenue.
294-  12-26- Appropriation of an easement in Original Lot 58, formerly Norton Township, for
1979  1979   highway purposes.
126-  6-2-   To city, from George L. Joseph, Sr., and James H. Gomez, for maintenance and
1980  1980   repair of a sewer, bounded by Twenty- seventh Street, South Avenue and Thirty-
             first Street N.W.
194-  9-13-  Authorizes obtaining an easement from La-Ma Construction Co. for the Valley
1982  1982   Avenue storm sewer.
204-  12-27- Authorizes easement with City of Akron for Mud Run Ditch widening and cleaning.
1983  1983
205-  12-27- Authorizes modification and combination of annually renewable utility easements
1983  1983   over Ohio Canal and Tuscarawas River.
41-   3-26-  Authorizes permanent easements with Conrail.
1984  1984
275-  11-10- Authorizes obtaining easements for Wolf Creek and Tuscarawas River sewer
1986  1986   projects.
21-   1-26-  Authorizes release of two sewer easements.
1987  1987
37-   2-9-   Appropriation of permanent and temporary easement designated T-21 for sanitary
1987  1987   sewers.
39-   2-9-   Appropriation of permanent and temporary easements designated T-10 and T-12 for
1987  1987   sanitary sewers.
41-   2-9-   Appropriation of permanent and temporary easement designated T-22 for sanitary
1987  1987   sewers.
57-   2-23-  Appropriation of permanent and temporary easement designated W-63 for sanitary
1987  1987   sewers.
59-   2-23-  Appropriation of permanent and temporary easement designated W-40 for sanitary
1987  1987   sewers.
61-   2-23-  Appropriation of permanent and temporary easement designated W-46 for sanitary
1987  1987   sewers.
63-   2-23-  Appropriation of permanent and temporary easement designated W-35 for sanitary
1987  1987   sewers.
65-   2-23-  Appropriation of permanent and temporary easement designated T-44 for sanitary
1987  1987   sewers.
67-   2-23-  Appropriation of permanent and temporary easement designated T-20 for sanitary
1987  1987   sewers.
69-   2-23-  Appropriation of permanent and temporary easement designated T-23 for sanitary
1987  1987   sewers.
71-   2-23-  Appropriation of permanent and temporary easements designated T-11, T-13 and T-
1987  1987   24 for sanitary sewers.
73-   2-23-  Appropriation of permanent and temporary easement designated T-72 for sanitary
1987  1987   sewers.
75-   2-23-  Appropriation of permanent and temporary easement designated T-76 for sanitary
1987  1987   sewers.
77-   2-23-  Appropriation of permanent and temporary easement designated W-67 for sanitary
1987  1987   sewers.
212-  9-28-  To Ohio Edison Co. for power lines at 30 Second Street S.W. and 5047 Van Buren
1987  1987   Street.
274-  11-23- Appropriation of permanent easement designated No. 16 for storm sewers.
1987  1987
276-  11-23- Appropriation of permanent and temporary easements designated Nos. 22 and T-22
1987  1987   for storm sewers.
200-  9-25-  Authorizes negotiating easements for the Fifth Street N.E. storm sewer project.
1989  1989
129-  7-9-   Authorizes agreement with the state for sanitary sewer easement for the street
1990  1990   garage.
131-  7-23-  To Ronald Cline for access to property on Twenty-eighth Street S.W. in Norton.
1990  1990
157-  9-10-  Authorizes easement for utility purposes with the Adjutant General’s Office -
1990  1990   Ohio National Guard.
52-   4-13-  Agreement between the city and Magnum Commercial Realty for ingress and egress
1992  1992   to the Diamond Match Building.
73-   6-8-   Authorizes temporary easement with Barberton Citizens Hospital for two years
1992  1992   (50 feet of Tuscora Park property).
190-  11-23- Authorizes conveyance of storm sewer easement to the state for the State Street
1992  1992   Project.
56-   4-12-  Authorizes the release of the existing easement at 1383 Wooster Road W.
1993  1993
109-  9-13-  Accepting easement lying within Hopocan Avenue from Barry Traver of the Akron &
1993  1993   Barberton Belt Line Railroad track.
137-  8-15-  Appropriation of permanent easement for the installation of sewer lines and/or
1994  1994   water for the Stuver Industrial Property Project.
82-   6-12-  Agreement with Babcock & Wilcox Co. to allow the city to supply signage and
1995  1995   landscape to the entrance of the Stuver Industrial Park.
102-  7-10-  Accepting the sewer easement depicted on the Columbia Center plat.
1995  1995
205-  11-25- Authorizes ten-foot wide water and sewer easement in favor of Barberton
1996  1996   Citizens Hospital Co.
225-  12-16- Authorizes storm sewer easement in favor of Babcock & Wilcox Co.
1996  1996
195-  11-24- Appropriation of permanent and temporary easements for the Wooster Road/Erie
1997  1997   Street Bridge Project.
78-   4-27-  Authorizes storm sewer easement and release agreement with LRC Realty, Inc.,
1998  1998   for the Walgreen’s Project.
55-   3-22-  Authorizes easement agreement with Gordon A. Sweet for construction of the
1999  1999   Young Avenue sanitary sewer.
124-  5-24-  Authorizes easement agreement at the Columbia United Church of Christ for the
1999  1999   installation of a pedestrian/signal controller.
149-  6-28-  Appropriation of permanent and temporary easements in connection with the
1999  1999   Fairview Avenue Bridge Project.
150-  6-28-  Authorizes five easement agreements in connection with the Horn and Dunn
1999  1999   Streets storm sewer.
176-  7-26-  Authorizes easement agreement with Helen Okolish.
1999  1999
197-  9-13-  Granting an easement to Mark Horste, 529 E. Baird Avenue, for driveway
1999  1999   purposes.
266-  12-13- Accepting a ten-foot utility easement from the Barberton Community Development
1999  1999   Corp. for construction of a water line from Snyder Avenue to Foundation Place.
111-  5-29-  Authorizes easement agreement with Tony Lehner for installation of a pump
2001  2002   station on his property at Thirty- first Street S.W.
62-   4-28-  Authorizes a limited access easement with the state’s Department of
2003  2003   Transportation for 0.267 acre of city property adjacent to State Route 21.
149-  9-11-  Granting an easement of parking spaces in a city-owned lot currently open to
2006  2006   the public so as to facilitate settlement of the appropriation litigation
             pending in the county’s Probate Court.
180-  10-9-  Executing a utility easement in favor of the Babcock & Wilcox Co., for purposes
2006  2006   of expanding the permissible uses of an already exiting storm sewer easement
             granted to B&W.
88-   6-11-  Authorizing two easements, one on Van Buren Road and a second on the Russell
2007  2007   Avenue Landfill property to Metro Parks.
58-   5-9-   Authorizing a permanent easement of 0.0466 acre on the east side of Van Buren
2011  2011   Avenue, south of the Tuscarawas River for the Summit County Bridge replacement
             project.
59-   5-9-   Authorizing a temporary easement of 0.0402 acre on the east side of Van Buren
2011  2011   Avenue south of the Tuscarawas River, for the duration of the Summit County
             Bridge replacement project.
14-   3-14-  Authorizing a sewer/water easement through city-owned property at McCafferty
2016  2016   Park.
             Authorizing the Mayor to execute easements granting Ohio Edison Co. right-of-
91-   9-12-  way to a city-owned property at Thirty-first Street S.W. (parcel #0116022) to
2016  2016   provide electric access to a new business establishment with the City of
             Norton.
94-   9-26-  Amending Ord. 14-2016.
2016  2016
122-  11-14- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an access easement agreement with Brookside
2016  2016   Land Company.
45-   4-23-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a water and sewer easement agreement with
2018  2018   Billy A. Dawson in the amount of $3,200.
64-   6-11-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a sewer easement agreement with DS OH
2018  2018   Limited Partnership in the amount of $8,000.
36-   4-8-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a sanitary sewer easement with William and
2019  2019   Jane Dodd for a subdivision development.
42-   4-22-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a sanitary sewer easement with Linda A.
2019  2019   Weigand in the amount of $1,350.
43-   4-22-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a sanitary sewer easement with Vandevere
2019  2019   Real Estate Ltd. in the amount of $2,800.
44-   4-22-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a sanitary sewer easement with James E.
2019  2019   Fisher in the amount of $400.
45-   4-22-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a sanitary sewer easement with Alex- Elsie
2019  2019   Stavarz, LLC, in the amount of $5,170.
46-   4-22-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a sanitary sewer easement with Gerald A.
2019  2019   and Leslie K. Flohr in the amount of $2,900.
47-   4-22-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a sanitary sewer easement with Thomas A.
2019  2019   Dayton in the amount of $6,020.
48-   4-22-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a sanitary sewer easement agreement with
2019  2019   the Board of Education of the Norton School District in the amount of $9,100.
106-  9-23-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a sewer easement agreement with VanDevere
2019  2019   Real Estate, Ltd., in the amount of $5,000.
120-  9-12-  Allowing an easement along Parcel Number 4601022 and Parcel Number 4601016
2022  2022   providing access to several non-city owned parcels.
            
 
TABLE C: VACATING OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
B. 1, P. 45   2-12-1894   Part of Bolivar Road.
B. 1, P. 281  4-10-1899   Alley between Third and Fourth Streets.
B. 1, P. 285  8-21-1899   Part of Sterling Avenue.
B. 2, P. 29   10-1-1900   Part of Sterling Avenue.
B. 2, P. 203  1-20-1902   Leake Avenue, Paige Avenue, Ninth Street.
B. 2, P. 243  7-14-1902   Part of Sterling Avenue.
B. 3, P. 206  3-7-1904    Part of Third Street.
B. 4, P. 67   1-9-1905    Robinson Avenue.
B. 4, P. 140  8-28-1905   Part of Bolivar Road.
B. 4, P. 154  12-11-1905  Fourth Street.
B. 4, P. 263  4-29-1907   Part of Seventh Street.
B. 4, P. 263  4-29-1907   Part of Fourth Street.
B. 4, P. 335  3-23-1908   Part of Sterling Avenue.
B. 4, P. 336  3-23-1908   Alley east of Second Street.
B. 4, P. 349  5-25-1908   Part of old road from Akron to New Portage within
                          corporate limits.
B. 4, P. 425  5-17-1909   Part of Norton Avenue.
100           2-3-1913    Alley from Summit Street easterly to lands of H.D.
                          Swigart.
340           10-11-1915  Parts of Hall and Perry Avenues.
382           4-17-1916   Part of Michigan Street.
421           9-6-1916    Part of Burt Street.
521           11-5-1917   Part of Range Street.
529           12-1-1917   Part of Wuchter Avenue.
554           12-17-1917  Part of Ninth Street.
583           4-1-1918    Part of Ninth Street.
713           10-6-1919   Part of W. Moreland Avenue.
1038          7-3-1922    Alley between Lake and Hopocan Avenue.
1069          9-5-1922    Cross Street, part of Hall Avenue, Wuchter Avenue and
                          Frase Avenue.
1093          12-4-1922   Part of Etling Avenue and Robinson Street.
61-1935       12-16-1935  South Fourth Street.
12-1936       3-16-1936   Part of Fourth Street.
37-1937       5-17-1937   Part of Douglas Avenue.
119-1940      11-18-1940  Part of Fuller Avenue, Wunderlich Avenue, Third
                          Street.
9-1947        2-17-1947   Part of Portage Street.
83-1947       12-15-1947  Part of Nineteenth Street.
47-1950       7-3-1950    Parts of E. Lake Avenue, Seventh Street N.E. and
                          Eighth Street N.E.
18-1953       3-16-1953   Thirty-third Street.
22-1957       2-4-1957    Certain alley between Yale Street and Harvard Avenue.
112-1957      6-17-1957   Part of Fifth Street S.W. from Ford Avenue S. and
                          Palmer Avenue.
230-1957      10-21-1957  Part of Third Street N.E.
47-1958       4-21-1958   Part of Staire Street, Frank Street, George Street
                          and Nineteenth Street N.W.
160-1958      7-21-1958   Part of Conrad Street from Ettle Drive to its north
                          termination.
10-1959       4-6-1959    Part of Sixth Street N.W.
111-1960      6-6-1960    Part of Walter Avenue from Ford Avenue east to its
                          northern termination.
140-1960      6-20-1960   Parts of several streets and alleys.
204-1960      10-17-1960  Alley between Twenty-first and Twenty-second Streets
                          north from Oak Avenue, a distance of 240 feet.
86-1962       6-4-1962    Parts of Eighth Street N.W., Seventh Street N.W.,
                          Creedmore Avenue and Holmes Avenue.
30-1962       6-18-1962   Portage Street from Wooster Road N. to New Street.
156-1962      12-17-1962  Huston Street between the Akron & Barberton Belt Line
                          Railroad and the Tuscarawas River.
96-1964       6-15-1964   Part of Wooster Road N., which adjoins the Burkhardt
                          Consolidated Corp. property.
192-1965      9-20-1965   Alley extending from the north line of Goodrich
                          Avenue to the south line of Kenmore Avenue.
151-1967      7-3-1967    Part of Park Avenue from Ninth Street N.W. to the
                          west line of Barberton Subdivision.
228-1967      10-20-1967  Twenty-foot strip on south side of E. Hopocan Avenue
                          between Seventh Street N.E. and Eighth Street N.E.
                          Alley between E. Hopocan Avenue and E. Lake Avenue
6-1968        1-15-1968   extending from Seventh Street N.E. to Eighth Street
                          N.E.
145-1968      7-15-1968   Alley east of Twenty- fourth Street from Oak Avenue
                          to a point 280 feet south.
                          Part of Seventh Street N.E. from south line of
149-1969      7-21-1969   Hopocan to south line of Major allotment, Second
                          Addition.
                          Alley south of Hopocan Avenue between Third Street
353-1970      1-4-1971    N.W. and Second Street N.W. and part of adjoining
                          alley extending south from first alley 132 feet.
263-1971      12-6-1971   Part of land running from north line of Lot 10 of
                          major reallotment to south line of Hopocan Avenue.
275-1971      12-20-1971  Part of Madison Avenue south of Yonkers Street.
208-1972      9-18-1972   Alley between Twenty-third Street and Twenty-fourth
                          Street from Oak Avenue to Shannon Avenue.
261-1972      1-2-1973    Parts of Tracy Avenue, Palmer Avenue and Diamond
                          Avenue.
61-1973       4-2-1973    Alley extending from 235.48 feet east of Fourteenth
                          Street to 1099.03 feet west of Fifteenth Street.
103-1973      5-21-1973   Portage Street from Wooster Road N. to New Street.
251-1974      7-15-1974   Davies Court from north line of Northview Avenue to
                          west line of Lindbergh Street.
383-1974      11-4-1974   St. Clair Avenue from Evergreen north to corporation
                          line.
412-1974      12-2-1974   Hall Avenue from south line of Lot 167 to southeast
                          corner of Lot 175.
38-1978       2-6-1978    Alley between Second Street N.W. and Wooster Road N.
249-1978      9-5-1978    Part of Wooster Road N.
229-1980      10-13-1980  Alley bounded by Ries Street and Thirty-first Street
                          S.W.
239-1980      10-27-1980  Amends Ord. 229-1980.
32-1981       3-9-1981    A 20-foot alley between Twenty- third Street and
                          Twenty-second Street north of Wooster Road W.
33-1981       3-9-1981    Part of Lake Avenue from Ninth Street N.E. to dead
                          end, a 15-foot strip.
27-1983       1-24-1983   Part of old East State Street Viaduct.
46-1983       3-14-1983   Part of Dale Avenue.
182-1983      12-27-1983  Coventry Road., from Waterloo Road to 200 feet north
                          of Camp Street.
168-1984      10-8-1984   Alley from Romig Avenue southeasterly 163.09 feet to
                          the north-south alley parallel to Wooster Road N.
96-1986       4-14-1986   Part of Etling Avenue.
169-1986      7-14-1986   Public right-of-way in Austin Heights Phase II
                          Subdivision.
231-1986      9-29-1986   Wade Avenue.
232-1986      9-29-1986   Part of Creedmore Avenue, from west side of Sixth
                          Street N.W. to the railroad tracks.
233-1986      9-29-1986   Alley running northerly from Hiram between Young and
                          Romig Avenues.
200-1987      9-14-1987   Robinson Street, from south line of W. Huston Street
                          to end of Robinson.
201-1987      9-14-1987   Kolocci Alley.
                          One alley running south from Park Avenue, and one
236-1989      11-13-1989  alley running from Second Street N.W. to Third Street
                          N.W.
90-1990       5-14-1990   Alley running from Second Street N.W. to Third Street
                          N.W.
159-1990      9-10-1990   Part of W. Tuscarawas Avenue.
119-1991      9-9-1991    Sixth Street N.E.
191-1991      12-9-1991   Alley between Ries Street and Wayne Street.
205-1992      12-21-1992  Eva Avenue.
74-1993       5-10-1993   Part of Stratford Street, from Fairlawn Road W. to
                          the dead end.
37-1994       3-21-1994   Fifth Street N.W., between Wooster Road W. and the
                          alley.
94-1994       6-13-1994   Part of Tenth Street N.W., from Brady Avenue to
                          Norton Avenue.
96-1996       9-23-1996   Lamberton Avenue, between First Street S.E. and Van
                          Buren Avenue.
8-1998        1-26-1998   Fifteen-foot alley between W. State and Hiram
                          Streets.
34-1998       3-9-1998    Old Fifteenth Street N.W. and parts of Raymond,
                          Wilbur and Perry Avenues.
50-1998       4-27-1998   South end of Frase Street, from the dead end to the
                          B. & C. Industries, Inc., property line.
76-2004       6-14-2004   Cleveland Court.
31-2005       3-14-2005   Duff Drive North and a section of Frew Drive.
                          A 50-foot section of Portage Street, located on the
7-2012        2-27-2012   playground and parking lot of Portage Elementary
                          School.
62-2013       5-28-2013   Vacating a 50-foot by 16-foot section of the West
                          Tuscarawas Alley.
                          Vacation of 951 linear feet of E. Paige Avenue
01-2017       1-23-2017   starting 20 linear feet east of the Fifth Street N.E.
                          right-of-way to western most property line of parcel
                          #01.11017.
                          Approximate 192 linear feet of May Street starting at
8-2025        1-13-2025   the northern parcel line of 01.04367 and moving south
                          towards Coventry Road.
                         
 
TABLE D: DEDICATION AND PLAT APPROVAL
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No.    Date Passed Description
B. 1, P. 46      2-12-1894   Accepting land for street purposes.
Res. B. 3, P. 34 4-27-1903   Grandview allotment.
B. 3, P. 129     11-2-1903   Shaw allotment, Subdivision No. 2.
310              6-7-1915    Certain land from J.T. Miller and A. Miller.
326              8-9-1915    Certain land from A. Christman for park purposes.
341              10-18-1915  Certain land from W. and C. Weisberger for opening
                             Columbia Road.
346              10-18-1915  Certain land from B.F. and S. Tracy.
347              11-1-1915   Certain land from B.F. Tracy, S. Tracy, J.W. Tracy
                             and S. Tracy.
349              11-1-1915   Certain land from M.J. and L.B. Alexander for park
                             purposes.
423              10-2-1916   Certain land in B.F. Tracy’s West Barberton
                             allotment.
537              12-10-1917  Accepting various property deeds for sewer
                             purposes.
538              12-27-1917  Lot 1 of Alexander Square of reallotment of Lot
                             347.
Res. 1092        12-4-1922   Certain land from Ric-Wil Co. for street purposes.
1441             6-7-1926    Certain land from C.H. and G.M. Holcomb for street
                             purposes.
1442             6-7-1926    Certain land from C.E. and M.M. Boring for street
                             purposes.
1443             6-7-1926    Certain land from N. Middleton, et al., for street
                             purposes.
1544             12-6-1926   Parcel of land between Brady and Norton Avenues
                             for street purposes.
1548             12-6-1926   Certain land from A.A. Moore for sidewalk
                             purposes.
62-1927          5-23-1927   Land from Northern Ohio Power and Light Co., for
                             street purposes.
Res. 25-1928     3-5-1928    Accepting deed of E.M. Thornton for water works.
181-1928         11-26-1928  Certain land in East Barberton for park purposes.
Res. 75-1929     4-15-1929   Deed of Pearl Mae McConough.
Res. 94-1929     5-6-1929    Deed of H.B. and E. Clark.
Res. 146-1929    7-29-1929   Deed of J. and F. Zupec.
156-1929         8-19-1929   Deed of J. and M. Jevc.
161-1929         8-30-1929   Deed of J. and J. Mondec.
169-1929         9-16-1929   Deed of T. and M. Kovacic.
Res. 184-1929    10-7-1929   Deed of P. and A. Mayers.
Res. 185-1929    10-7-1929   Deed of H. Cox.
38-1937          5-17-1937   Deed of Board of Education.
64-1938          8-15-1938   Deed of estate of G.W. Romig.
96-1939          5-15-1939   Estate of J.A. Bernard for street purposes.
30-1949          5-2-1949    Deed from Pitcairn Co. for certain land on Norton
                             Avenue.
94-1950          12-18-1950  Deed from P.L. Maloney for street purposes.
49-1952          6-16-1952   Deed from R.B. Maloney for street purposes.
102-1954         8-2-1954    Plat of J.C. Baker, et al., of certain property in
                             Norton Township.
118-1955         8-1-1955    Certain property from J.C. Baker, et al., in
                             Norton Township.
13-1956          2-6-1956    Plat of B.W. Bierce, et al., of property in
                             Coventry Township.
29-1956          4-2-1956    Plat of R. Walton of Lot 86, Norton Township.
237-1957         11-4-1957   Plat of Homewood Ranch allotment.
273-1957         12-16-1957  Plat of A.O. Austin, part of Lot 17, Tract 15, to
                             be used for street purposes.
278-1957         12-16-1957  Property in Coventry Township for street purposes.
97-1958          4-21-1958   Plat of Wilson Acres allotment, First Addition.
203-1958         9-15-1958   Plat of Jackson Court.
216-1959         12-7-1959   Plat of part of Thirty- third Street.
171-1960         8-8-1960    Intent to use one-half acre adjacent to McCafferty
                             Park for park purposes only.
189-1961         11-20-1961  Intent to use Outlot 69 for street purposes.
                             Accepting the plat of dedication of Macy Avenue,
117-1962         7-2-1962    and confirming the dedication of the street
                             thereon shown.
67-1963          5-27-1963   Certain streets in Boulevard Heights allotment,
                             Second Addition.
10-1964          2-3-1964    Part of Lots 292, 328, 329 and 330 of Boulevard
                             Heights allotment for a public street.
Res. 127         7-20-1964   Part of Lots 68 and 69 of the original Barberton
                             Plat, as 1964 part of Wooster Road.
Res. 205         11-16-1964  Disclaimer of intention to use Lots 5, 12 and 19
                             of the 1964 Kneifel allotment for street purposes.
                             Accepting deed of Board of Education of Barberton
41-1965          3-1-1965    for lands located on Newton Street for park
                             purposes.
104-1966         6-6-1966    Accepting plat of Barber Knolls allotment.
194-1966         10-3-1966   0.8446 acre donated by Breitenstine to the city
                             for park purposes.
195-1966         10-3-1966   Part of Lot 95 of original Norton Township
                             dedicated as Breitenstine Park.
126-1967         6-5-1967    Part of original Lots 9 and 10, Tract 15 of
                             Coventry Township for street purposes.
161-1967         7-17-1967   15.3768 acres of Lot 86 in Norton Township for
                             park purposes.
                             Plat of Tuscarawas Avenue E. from 210.30 feet east
109-1968         6-3-1968    of Ninth Street N.E. to east edge of Lots 15 and
                             16 of Schwinn Estates, for street purposes.
222-1969         9-29-1969   Plat of Austin Estates allotment, Section A, for
                             street purposes.
                             Plat of Austin Estates allotment, Section B,
158-1971         7-6-1971    confirming dedication of streets and public ways
                             thereon.
                             Plat of Shenandoah Highlands Subdivision, Section
110-1972         6-5-1972    A, confirming dedication of streets and public
                             ways thereon.
37-1973          2-19-1973   Plat of Eagon Street, a 50-foot right-of- way 817
                             feet south of Waterloo Road.
                             Plat of Shenandoah Highlands Subdivision, Section
48-1973          3-19-1973   B, confirming dedication of streets and public
                             ways thereon.
76-1973          4-16-1973   Plat of Austin Drive, a 60-foot right-of- way
                             1,884 feet east of Fifth Street S.E.
157-1976         7-6-1976    Five-foot strip on Snyder Avenue along College
                             Park.
                             Plat of Austin Estates Subdivision, Sections F and
252-1976         11-1-1976   G, confirming dedication of streets and public
                             ways thereon.
                             Plat of Austin Estates Subdivision, Section F,
280-1976         10-18-1976  confirming dedication of streets and public ways
                             thereon.
120-1977         6-20-1977   Plat of Austin Estates Subdivision, Section H,
                             subject to engineering approval.
314-1977         11-21-1977  Plat of Franklin Avenue and Eighth Street N.E.
58-1978          2-20-1978   Plat of Austin Estates Subdivision, Section C,
                             subject to engineering approval.
59-1978          2-20-1978   Plat of Austin Estates Subdivision, Section I,
                             subject to engineering approval.
102-1978         4-3-1978    Plat of Austin Heights Subdivision, Phase I.
106-1979         6-18-1979   Plat of northeast area of Austin Drive and Fifth
                             Street S.E., subject to engineering approval.
127-1979         6-18-1979   Plat of Austin Estates Subdivision, Section D,
                             subject to engineering approval.
                             Plat of subdivision of Lots 1 through 4 at the
145-1979         7-2-1979    northwest corner of Van Buren Avenue and Siyder
                             Avenue, subject to engineering approval.
271-1980         12-22-1980  Plat of 49 lots in Austin Heights Subdivision,
                             subject to engineering approval.
                             Dedication of part of Thirty-third Street and
82-1981          6-8-1981    Thirty-fifth Street S.W., part of Lot 95, formerly
                             Norton Township.
46-1988          3-9-1988    Plat of Phase I-South Barberton Housing
                             Development.
63-1989          4-10-1989   Plat of Austin Estates Subdivision, Section J,
                             subject to engineering approval.
209-1989         10-9-1989   Plat of 17 lots for Phase II of the Anna Dean Farm
                             Subdivision.
                             Final subdivision for L.H. Stewart of property at
59-1990          3-12-1990   Robinson Avenue, east end of E. Ford Avenue,
                             subject to engineering approval.
60-1990          3-12-1990   Plat of Austin Heights Subdivision, Addition 2,
                             subject to engineering approval.
46-1991          3-25-1991   Plat of Hyacinth Acres Subdivision Phase II,
                             subject to engineering approval.
124-1991         7-22-1991   Plat of Austin Estates Subdivision, Section K,
                             subject to engineering approval.
                             Plat of Anna Dean Farms Subdivision, Phase III,
134-1991         8-19-1991   subject to engineering approval, for record
                             purposes only.
178-1991         11-12-1991  Accepting dedication of Mansion Drive and Mansion
                             Court in Austin Estates Subdivision, Section J.
                             Final subdivision plat of 11 lots in Elson Acres,
55-1992          4-27-1992   located on Bell and George Streets and Haven and
                             Elson Avenues.
101-1992         6-22-1992   Final subdivision plat for a major subdivision at
                             Austin Estates, Section L.
                             Final subdivision plat of Anna Dean Farms, Phase
122-1992         7-27-1992   IV, 28 lots, subject to the approval of the
                             Engineering Department.
                             Final subdivision plat for a major subdivision at
123-1992         7-27-1992   Austin Heights, Addition No. 3, four lots, subject
                             to approval of the Engineering Department.
124-1992         7-27-1992   Approving dedication of Twenty-eighth Street S.W.
                             and Wayne Street extension.
142-1992         9-28-1992   Accepting dedication of Madison Avenue and
                             Huntsberger Drive extension.
148-1992         9-28-1992   Accepting dedication of Orchard Court.
203-1992         12-21-1992  Accepting dedication of S. Azalea Boulevard.,
                             Glenmere Place and E. Heatherwood Drive.
4-1993           1-11-1993   Accepting dedication of Anna Dean Lane and a
                             portion of Shenandoah Boulevard in Austin Estates.
122-1993         7-26-1993   Final subdivision plat for Austin Estates, Section
                             M, Phase I.
123-1993         7-26-1993   Final subdivision plat for Austin Estates, Section
                             N.
132-1994         7-25-1994   Accepting dedication of Elson Avenue.
133-1994         7-25-1994   Accepting dedication of Stuver Place.
134-1994         7-25-1994   Accepting dedication of Anna Dean Farms, Phase V.
161-1994         10-24-1994  Accepting the Austin Villas dedication plat.
                             Dedicating and accepting the Columbia Center plat
79-1995          5-22-1995   and accepting Sixteenth Street S.W. as a public
                             street.
88-1995          6-12-1995   Accepting dedication of Austin Estates, Section M,
                             Phase II.
97-1996          7-22-1996   Dedicating Johnson Corners Cemetery for park and
                             recreation purposes.
54-1997          4-14-1997   Approving plat of Austin Villas Phase II and
                             accepting dedication of streets.
189-1998         10-12-1998  Accepting dedication of streets within Glenbreigh
                             Estates.
                             Accepting dedication of streets, easements, parks
215-1998         11-9-1998   and other public areas and improvements within the
                             Barberton Community Foundation Industrial Park.
147-1999         6-28-1999   Accepting dedication of Austin Estates, Section P,
                             Mesa Verde Drive.
                             Accepting dedication of Cordova Drive, Mesquite
26-2000          2-14-2000   Lane and Saguaro Place in Austin Villas, Phase
                             III.
32-2003          3-24-2003   Accepting the dedication of five streets and five
                             alleys in the New Haven - Phase I Area.
                             Accepting the dedication of three streets in
141-2003         10-27-2003  Austin Estates - Section R: Laurel Circle, Mesa
                             Verde Drive and Meadowood Drive.
146-2003         11-10-2003  Accepting the dedication of Sonora Drive in Austin
                             Villas - Phase 4.
48-2005          3-28-2005   Authorizing dedication of land owned by the city
                             along Wooster Road W. and Wooster Road N.
                             Accepting dedication of four streets in the New
87-2006          5-22-2006   Haven Phase 2A allotment; Miller Street, Monroe
                             Square, Lauter Avenue and Bishop Oval.
89-2007          6-11-2007   Accepting dedication of Austin Heights West Phase
                             II.
45-2008          3-24-2008   Accepting dedication of New Haven Circle.
06-2020          3-9-2020    Accepting dedication of all roads in New Haven
                             Phase I, IIA and IIB.
32-2025          4-14-2025   Accepting dedication of a portion of Newell Street
                             and Norton Avenue.
                             Allowing the City of Barberton to dedicate all
160-2025         11-10-2025  roads not previously dedicated in New Haven West
                             and New Haven East (Phase One, Two, Three, and
                             Four).
                            
 
TABLE E: ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./ Date
Res.  Passed Description
No.
B. 3, 6-8-   Land between Young’s Crossing and the crossing near old pump-house of E.R.R.
P. 63 1903   Co., for street purposes.
B. 3, 7-30-  Land for water works purposes.
P. 91 1903
B. 3, 6-13-
P.    1904   Land for straightening High Street.
290
Res.  8-22-
B. 4, 1904   Land to extend W. Tuscarawas Avenue.
P. 46
B. 4, 4-5-
P.    1909   Land adjacent to Water Works Plant.
405
B. 4, 12-12-
P.    1910   Land located corner of Norton Avenue and Cornell Street.
497
Res.  3-3-   Parcel of land in Lot 88, Norton Township, for sewage and garbage disposal
110   1913   purposes.
163   8-13-  Property for storing tools of Street Department.
      1913
174   11-17- Certain land for erecting substation for Municipal Electric Light Plant.
      1913
183   12-22- Certain land for water works purposes.
      1913
315   6-14-  Certain lands in Barberton Realty Co.’s allotment for park purposes.
      1915
319   7-12-  Certain lands in A.A. Moore’s allotment for park purposes.
      1915
337   8-23-  Certain land in A.A. Moore’s Peerless allotment for opening Columbia Avenue.
      1915
338   9-20-  Land with building thereon to be used for public purposes.
      1915
339   10-4-  Certain land in Barberton Land and Improvement Co.’s allotment for park
      1915   purposes.
-     8-7-   Certain land from Tracy allotment for opening Frederick CH-OC.
      1916
476   4-24-  Certain land with building thereon for public purposes.
      1917
485   5-21-  Certain land in New Portage allotment for sewage purposes.
      1917
Res.  8-6-   Certain land for constructing and maintaining main trunk sewer.
514   1917
526   12-1-  Certain land with building thereon for public offices.
      1917
528   12-1-  Land for main trunk sewer purposes.
      1917
677   5-5-   Certain land in Shannon Side allotment from N. Earl.
      1919
802   6-6-   Part of Lots 252 and 253 in Shannon Side allotment.
      1920
800   6-21-  Parcel of land in Norton Township.
      1920
Res.  12-5-  Certain land for park and public playground purposes.
977   1921
1180  9-17-  Land from J.A. Bernard for park and street purposes.
      1923
1204  1-7-   Lots 31 and 32 of Barberton Realty Co.’s allotment.
      1924
1243  4-7-   Purchase of land for reservoir.
      1924
1257  5-19-  Certain land of O.L. Mikset, et al., for reservoir.
      1924
1307  11-18- Land from H.A. Cahow, et al., for construction of reservoir.
      1924
1306  11-19- Land from E. Stuver, et al., for construction of reservoir.
      1924
1327  2-9-   Land from S. Adair, et al., for construction of reservoir.
      1925
1328  2-9-   Land from B. Coon for construction of reservoir.
      1925
1330  2-9-   Land from P. Bohland and E. Bohland for construction of reservoir.
      1925
1331  2-9-   Land from L.M. Brenner and N. Brenner for construction of reservoir.
      1925
1334  2-16-  Land from S.L. Minor, R.E. Minor and A. Minor for construction of reservoir.
      1925
1337  3-2-   Certain land in Barberton allotment for Municipal Electric Light Department.
      1925
1347  5-4-   Land from S. Hetrick for construction of reservoir.
      1925
1348  5-4-   Land from W. Bodosy, et al., for construction of reservoir.
      1925
1456  7-19-  Water works land and pumping station on High Street.
      1926
1545  12-6-  Shook Farm.
      1926
23-   2-20-  Certain land for water works purposes from E.M. Thornton, et al.
1928  1928
134-  8-23-  Certain lands in East Barberton Land Co. for park purposes.
1928  1928
170-  11-5-  Part of Lot 138 in Grandview allotment.
1928  1928
36-   4-28-  Land for park.
1930  1930
Res.  2-18-
11-   1935   Land for sewers.
1935
63-   11-23- Land for sewage disposal plant.
1936  1936
81-   12-29- Land for sewer force main.
1936  1936
33-   2-19-  Land for street purposes from M. Dubosky.
1940  1940
108-  10-7-  From H.R. and I.P. Derhammer for street purposes.
1940  1940
109-  10-7-  From S.M. Baltzly for street purposes.
1940  1940
118-  11-18- From the city to Akron Metropolitan Housing Authority.
1940  1940
66-   12-18- Certain land not needed for municipal purposes.
1944  1944
67-   12-18- Certain land for street purposes.
1944  1944
6-    2-5-   Land in Copley Township to expand Barberton Reservoir.
1945  1945
21-   5-6-   Part of Lot 99 in Palmer allotment for street purposes.
1946  1946
33-   6-2-   Certain land for erection of incinerator.
1947  1947
77-   12-1-  Part of Boulevard Heights allotment.
1947  1947
35-   4-19-  Donating deed to the state for armory.
1949  1949
98-   10-19- Land from E.H. Ryan for sewage pump station.
1953  1953
20-   2-7-   Land of E.R. Stein in Norton Township for water works purposes.
1955  1955
114-  8-1-   Certain land of W.J. and D.E. Kinches for water reservoir storage.
1955  1955
156-  10-3-  Certain land in Lot 18 Suburban Homes allotment for sewer purposes.
1955  1955
168-  10-17- Certain land in Norton Township for park purposes.
1955  1955
175-  11-7-  Certain land of J. and J. Visich for water works purposes.
1955  1955
176-  11-7-  Certain land of E. Sigler for sewer purposes.
1955  1955
177-  11-7-  Certain lands of W. and G.L. Hill for water works purposes.
1955  1955
25-   3-5-   Certain property in Lots 29, 32 and 39 of Copley Township.
1956  1956
41-   4-2-   Certain lands of W. and G.L. Jones for water works purposes.
1956  1956
151-  8-20-  Certain property in Lot 58 to Board of Education.
1956  1956
117-  5-20-  Land for play area.
1957  1957
57-   3-17-  From Montz Chevrolet Co. for improving and widening Wooster Road.
1958  1958
79-   4-7-   Part of Lot 19, Norton Township.
1958  1958
209-  10-6-  Land of Imogene Walk for water works.
1958  1958
27-   1-18-  Land in Norton Township for a park.
1960  1960
32-   2-15-  Exchange of part of northeast quarter of Section 9 of Franklin Township to
1960  1960   Columbia Southern Chemical Corp. for a similar parcel.
12-   1-16-  Land for Pigeon Creek water supply project.
1961  1961
84-   5-7-   Land adjacent to Summit Street water tower for use by Water Department.
1962  1962
175-  12-3-  Part of Lot 43 in Copley Township, from Olson, for expansion of the city
1962  1962   reservoir.
14-   2-11-  Exchange of part of Lot 58 of original Norton Township for parts of Block A in
1963  1963   A.A. Moore’s First Addition to N. Barberton allotment.
Res.  2-11-  Intention to appropriate part of Lot 3, Tract 1, of original Coventry Township
20-   1963   for street purposes.
1963
Res.  2-11-  Intention to appropriate part of Lot 31 of Copley Township for expansion of
21-   1963   Barberton water reservoir.
1963
52-   4-15-  Ha Belle Frank property (part of Lot 31 of Copley Township) for municipal
1963  1963   reservoir purposes.
18-   2-3-   Part of Lots 328, 329 and 330 of Boulevard Heights allotment.
1964  1964
Res.  7-20-  Part of Lots 68 and 69 of original Barberton plat from Burkhardt Consolidated
127-  1964   Corp.
1964
138-  7-20-  Part of Lot 95 of original Norton Township, from Breitenstine, for park
1964  1964   purposes.
201-  11-2-  Lands located at the west end of Auburn Street, for street purposes.
1964  1964
67-   4-5-   Part of Lot 99 of Palmer allotment.
1965  1965
176-  7-17-  0.04135 acre of Lot 40 of original Norton Township.
1967  1967
220-  10-2-  Part of Lot 95 of original Norton Township, for park purposes.
1967  1967
15-   2-5-   Lot 113 of Rose allotment for park purposes.
1968  1968
263-  12-1-  Authorizes purchase of land to be used by Utilities Department.
1969  1969
275-  12-15- Property on northeast corner of Van Buren Avenue and E. Tuscarawas Avenue.
1969  1969
17-   1-18-  0.0613 acre in original Barberton allotment to Board of Education in exchange
1971  1971   for sewer easement.
82-   4-19-  Part of Lot 5, Tract 1, of Coventry Township, west of Waterloo Road, for public
1971  1971   roadway.
112-  6-21-  Part of Lots 86 and 87 of original plat of Barberton for parking facilities.
1971  1971
49-   3-20-  Part of O.L. 6, Middle Tract 14, Coventry Township, for park purposes.
1972  1972
279-  1-15-  Lincoln School from Barberton Board of Education.
1972  1973
210-  7-30-  Acceptance of leased land in connection with the city’s hospital revenue bond
1973  1973   anticipation notes, for off-street parking purposes.
80-   3-4-   Authorizes purchase of Ohio Furniture Building.
1974  1974
118-  4-1-   Authorizes purchase of Farber Building.
1974  1974
120-  4-1-   Authorizes purchase of the Miskin property on Tuscarawas Avenue W.
1974  1974
169-  5-13-  Authorizes purchase of 505 W. Tuscarawas Avenue.
1974  1974
235-  7-8-   4.664 acres between Ohio Canal and Tuscarawas River from W.E. Copeland, for
1974  1974   park purposes.
341-  10-7-  Authorizes purchase of two parcels on Franklin Avenue and Ninth Street from the
1974  1974   Federal Storage Co.
347-  10-7-  Authorizes acceptance of a parcel, containing 5.3046 acres, from Austin
1974  1974   Estates, Inc.
356-  10-7-  Authorizes purchase of property from the Firestone Bank for the Fifth Street
1974  1974   and Robinson Avenue intersection project.
378-  10-28- Authorizes Solicitor to consummate transactions for purchase of three parcels
1974  1974   for the Downtown Redevelopment Program.
384-  11-11- Appropriates four parcels for public roadway.
1974  1974
396-  11-18- Authorizes Solicitor to consummate transactions for purchase of three parcels
1974  1974   for Downtown Redevelopment Program.
398-  11-18- Authorizes purchase of two parcels at Fifth Street S.E. and Robinson Avenue,
1974  1974   from Firestone Tire and Rubber Co. and Firestone Bank.
90-   3-17-  Authorizes purchase of 460 Tuscarawas Avenue from John and Diana Danko for
1975  1975   Downtown Redevelopment Program.
159-  5-12-  Authorizes acceptance of leased facilities in connection with hospital
1975  1975   improvement first mortgage revenue bonds.
190-  6-2-   Accepts parcel on Lockwood Road from Austin Estates, Inc.
1975  1975
191-  6-2-   Appropriates Lots 59 and 60 to eliminate slums.
1975  1975
234-  7-7-   Authorizes Solicitor to consummate transactions for purchase of 59-77 Second
1975  1975   Street N.W.
251-  7-21-  Authorizes advertisements to sell land at Lake Avenue and Van Buren Avenue.
1975  1975
302-  8-25-  Authorizes advertisements to sell land at Lake Avenue and Van Buren Avenue.
1975  1975
415-  11-17- Authorizes sale of land at Lake Avenue and Van Buren Avenue to Sam Holt, Jr.
1975  1975
423-  11-24- Accepts parcel on Lockwood Road from Austin Estates, Inc.
1975  1975
455-  12-15- Authorizes acceptance of leased property in connection with industrial
1975  1975   development revenue bonds.
460-  12-15- Authorizes Solicitor to consummate transactions for purchase of 516-518
1975  1975   Tuscarawas Avenue.
315-  12-6-  Authorizes transfer of four parcels at Fifth Street N.E. and State for State
1976  1976   Street viaduct.
25-   2-7-   Authorizes transfer of option to purchase parcel at Tuscarawas Avenue and
1977  1977   Second Street, to Barberton Centre Investors, Inc.
30-   2-14-  Authorizes contract with Minnig, Inc. for purchase of 544 Wooster Road W.
1977  1977
238-  10-3-  Appropriation of 502 and 504 W. Tuscarawas Avenue to eliminate a blighted area.
1977  1977
239-  10-3-  Appropriation of 500 W. Tuscarawas Avenue to eliminate a blighted area.
1977  1977
249-  10-3-  Appropriation of temporary easement in and to property in Coventry Township,
1977  1977   Lot 16, Tract 15, for highway purposes.
250-  10-3-  Appropriation of temporary easement in and to property in Coventry Township,
1977  1977   Tract 14, for highway purposes.
277-  11-7-  Appropriation of temporary easement and deed in and to property in Lot 10 of
1977  1977   the Ammerman and Davies allotment for highway purposes.
293-  11-7-  Appropriation of 554-560 Wooster Road W. for municipal parking.
1977  1977
322-  12-5-  Appropriation of two temporary easements in Lots 73, 74 and 75 of the D.W.
1977  1977   Snyder allotment for highway purposes.
323-  12-5-  Appropriation of part of Lots 73, 74 and 75 of the D.W. Snyder allotment for
1977  1977   highway purposes.
9-    1-3-   Amends Ord. 322-1977.
1978  1978
10-   1-3-   Amends Ord. 323-1977.
1978  1978
13-   1-3-   Appropriation of 506 W. Tuscarawas Avenue to eliminate a blighted area.
1978  1978
91-   3-20-  Authorizes Director of Law to negotiate for purchase of land in Austin Estates
1978  1978   for park purposes.
105-  4-3-   Authorizes Director of Law to negotiate for purchase of property at 531 W.
1978  1978   Tuscarawas Avenue for the Downtown Redevelopment Project.
142-  5-1-   Appropriation of part of Lot 314 of the Barberton allotment for a municipal
1978  1978   parking lot.
160-  5-15-  Authorizes a contract with Robert Gormley for purchase of land in Austin
1978  1978   Estates for park purposes.
164-  5-15-  Appropriation of part of Lot 347 of the First Addition to Barberton Realty Co.
1978  1978   allotment for highway purposes.
214-  7-31-  Authorizes purchase of Block 9 of the Downtown Redevelopment Project.
1978  1978
238-  9-5-   Authorizes purchase from Donald and Martha Light of property at 506 W.
1978  1978   Tuscarawas Avenue.
268-  9-18-  Authorizes purchase from Dr. Goldberg of property at 495 W. Tuscarawas Avenue.
1978  1978
298-  10-16- Authorizes Director of Law to obtain clear title to small strip of land between
1978  1978   Light and Miskin properties for conveyance of Block 10 in the Downtown
             Redevelopment Project.
52-   3-5-   Authorizes purchase of property at 515 W. Tuscarawas Avenue.
1979  1979
56-   3-5-   Authorizes advertisements to sell Russell Avenue landfill.
1979  1979
68-   3-19-  Accepting parcels at intersection of Wooster Road W. and Second Street N.W. and
1979  1979   the intersection of Tuscarawas Avenue W. and Second Street N.W., for right-of-
             way purposes.
70-   3-19-  Amends Ord. 214-1978.
1979  1979
105-  5-7-   Authorizes offer to purchase of the Weigand Building.
1979  1979
113-  5-29-  Authorizes contract with Weigand family for purchase of the Weigand Building at
1979  1979   571 Tuscarawas Avenue.
151-  7-2-   Authorizes contract with W.G. Taylor for exchange of Lots 74 and 75 in the
1979  1979   Barberton allotment in return for three parcels of land known as 540-544
             Wooster Road W.
160-  7-16-  Authorizes contract with Cassellton Land and Improvement Corp. for purchase of
1979  1979   property at 103-113 Third Street N.W. and 502-516 W. Park Avenue.
214-  9-24-  Accepts parcel at intersection of Fourth Street, Barber Road and Norton Avenue
1979  1979   from Barberton Board of Education.
226-  10-1-  Authorizes contract with Akron & Barberton Belt Line Railroad Co. for purchase
1979  1979   of Block 17 of the Downtown Redevelopment Project.
294-  12-26- Appropriation of land and an easement in part of Original Lot 58, formerly
1979  1979   Norton Township for highway purposes.
95-   4-21-  Authorizes contract with George Asad for purchase of property at 499, 501 and
1980  1980   503 W. Tuscarawas Avenue, and with Mrs. Riemenschneider for property at 507 W.
             Tuscarawas Avenue.
135-  6-16-  Appropriation of 513 W. Tuscarawas Avenue to eliminate a blighted area.
1980  1980
240-  10-27- Authorizes contract with Virginia Henley for purchase of 497 W. Tuscarawas
1980  1980   Avenue in the Downtown Redevelopment Area.
274-  12-22- Authorizes contract with Dr. Richard Sickler for purchase of property at 110-
1980  1980   114 Second Street N.W.
11-   1-26-  Authorizes Director of Law to proceed with acquisition of Salvation Army
1981  1981   property at 104 Second Street.
240-  12-28- Authorizes option agreement with Bernard Construction Co. for option on Block
1981  1981   10 in the Downtown Redevelopment Area.
35-   2-22-  Authorizes Director of Law to negotiate acquisition of property located at 531
1982  1982   W. Tuscarawas Avenue as part of the Downtown Redevelopment Program.
94-   5-10-  Authorizes Director of Law to negotiate acquisition of property at 113-115
1982  1982   Second Street.
142-  6-14-  Authorizes Director of Law to proceed with appropriation of 104 Second Street.
1982  1982
218-  9-27-  Authorizes transfer of deed to certain land at intersection of Franklin Avenue
1982  1982   and Eighth Street N.E., to Richard A. and Carolyn P. Brake in exchange for
             comparably sized parcel to be deeded to the city.
93-   6-13-  Authorizes assignment and quit claim of city’s interests in NCS mortgages to
1983  1983   Neighborhood Conservation Services of Barberton, Inc.
111-  6-27-  Authorizes Director of Law to negotiate purchase of the PPG ball diamond
1983  1983   property on Wooster Road W. and Lake Dorothy and the recreation area at Lake
             Dorothy.
215-  12-10- Authorizes purchase of six and one-half acres contiguous to the city-owned dump
1984  1984   area.
216-  12-10- Authorizes purchase agreement with George and Mike Sungy for six and one-half
1984  1984   acres contiguous to city- owned dump area.
218-  12-10- Authorizes purchase agreement with Schifman estate for two parcels in vicinity
1984  1984   of Huston Street.
221-  12-10- Authorizes purchase of two lots near the fire station.
1984  1984
222-  12-10- Authorizes purchase agreement with Marshall Dry Goods Co. for two lots near the
1984  1984   fire station.
223-  12-10- Authorizes deed to small parcel behind Marshall’s Department Store.
1984  1984
94-   5-20-  Authorizes purchase agreement with the Salvation Army.
1985  1985
247-  11-25- Authorizes Director of Law to negotiate sale or lease with option to purchase
1985  1985   of 531 W. Tuscarawas Avenue.
203-  9-10-  Authorizes purchase option agreement with Neighborhood Conservation Services
1986  1986   for Lots 26, 27, 28, 29 and 30 in Snyderside allotment.
312-  12-22- Accepts donation of certain real estate and buildings from Babcock & Wilcox Co.
1986  1986
316-  12-22- Authorizes deed to land south of Snyder Avenue to Chris M. Camp in exchange for
1986  1986   nine sewer easements.
220-  9-28-  Authorizes purchase agreement with Neighborhood Conservation Services for Lots
1987  1987   26, 27, 28, 29 and 30 in Snyderside allotment.
290-  1-25-  Authorizes quit claim deed for west 39.58 feet of Lots 26 and 27 of Shannonside
1987  1988   allotment to David Shue in exchange for sanitary sewer easement W-85.
302-  12-21- Authorizes sale of 520 Wooster Road W.
1987  1987
16-   1-25-  Authorizes purchase agreement with Neighborhood Conservation Services for Lots
1988  1988   26, 27, 28, 29 and 30 in Snyderside allotment.
55-   3-28-  Authorizes purchase from the Barberton Board of Education of Lots 1-8 and 21-30
1988  1988   in the Barberton Gardens allotment.
36-   2-13-  Authorizes purchase of Lake Theater Building and Lots 355 and 356.
1989  1989
76-   4-24-  Authorizes purchase of Sohio gas station property, Lots 362-367 in Alexander
1989  1989   Square allotment.
139-  7-10-  Authorizes purchase of Block 7 in the Downtown Redevelopment Project.
1989  1989
205-  10-23- Authorizes agreement with McDonald’s Corp. for purchase of Block 10.
1989  1989
218-  10-23- Authorizes quit claim deed for 680 E. State Street to Denny Martin.
1989  1989
226-  11-13- Authorizes purchase of the Lake Theater complex.
1989  1989
229-  11-13- Authorizes agreement with Neighborhood Conservation Services for purchase of
1989  1989   five city lots.
270-  12-18- Authorizes purchase of Block 7 in the Downtown Redevelopment Project.
1989  1989
75-   4-9-   Authorizes purchase of Block 7 in the Downtown Redevelopment Project.
1990  1990
97-   5-14-  Authorizes sale of Block 10 to the McDonald’s Corp.
1990  1990
130-  7-16-  Authorizes purchase of Block 7 in the Downtown Redevelopment Project.
1990  1990
151-  9-10-  Authorizes sales agreement with Ederer and Associates for purchase of Block 7.
1990  1990
221-  12-17- Authorizes purchase of the Marshall Dry Goods Co.’s parking lot.
1990  1990
161-  10-14- Authorizes negotiations to sell Building #40 of the B. & W. Industrial Complex.
1991  1991
195-  12-9-  Authorizes mutual release of contract between city and Alan Ederer for the sale
1991  1991   and purchase of Block 7.
196-  12-9-  Authorizes purchase of Stuver property from B. & W.
1991  1991
3-    1-13-  Authorizes sale of 21 Fourth Street, a.k.a. the Diamond Match Building, to
1992  1992   Magnum Commercial Realty.
56-   4-27-  Authorizes purchase agreement with the William Annat Co. for a parking lot on
1992  1992   the corner of Wooster Road and Fifth Street.
77-   5-26-  Authorizes option agreement with Western Reserve Corp. for the purchase of
1992  1992   Block 7 in the Downtown Redevelopment Project.
16-   2-8-   Accepts property at 136 Second Street to satisfy a judgment against Reeves.
1993  1993
42-   3-22-  Accepts property at 140 Second Street to satisfy a judgment against R. and D.
1993  1993   Crater.
78-   6-28-  Authorizes sales agreement with Gardner Pie Co. for Ford Avenue extension.
1993  1993
86-   7-19-  Authorizes sale of Lake Theater to Alexander Square Associates, Inc.
1993  1993
99-   6-28-  Authorizes sales agreement with Davis Printing Co. for Ford Avenue extension.
1993  1993
126-  7-26-  Authorizes conveyance of land for private redevelopment with Cameron
1993  1993   Development Group, Inc., for construction of new housing facilities on Block 7.
129-  8-16-  Authorizes purchase agreement with T.M. Dodson and R. Hohman for 72-72 1/
1993  1993   2 Fifth Street N.W.
145-  9-27-  Authorizes an exchange agreement with C. Camp for properties located on Snyder
1993  1993   Avenue.
152-  10-11- Contract for sale of land for private redevelopment with Neidert Fabricating,
1993  1993   Inc.
182-  12-6-  Accepting title to Park Theater by gift from Wm. Annat Co.
1993  1993
45-   3-28-  Authorizes sale of 3.4112 acres of land to B. & R. Properties, Inc., for
1994  1994   private redevelopment.
130-  7-25-  Repeals Ord. 126-1993.
1994  1994
49-   4-10-  Authorizes transfer of the B. & W. Complex Building to the Barberton Community
1995  1995   Development Corp.
83-   6-12-  Authorizes conveyance of a two-foot strip of land to Dr. J.P. Kennedy.
1995  1995
100-  6-26-  Authorizes exchange of quit claim deeds with Austin Village Development, Inc.,
1995  1995   to establish southern entrances to Anna Dean Park.
103-  7-10-  Accepts property at 134 Second Street to satisfy a judgment against A. Dean and
1995  1995   Joan Winter.
137-  7-22-  Authorizes option agreement with YMCA for purchase of downtown YMCA building.
1996  1996
4-    1-13-  Authorizes agreement with JADA Corp. for sale of 0.1263 acre.
1997  1997
108-  6-23-  Authorizes agreement with J. Flohr for sale of a vacant lot at the northwest
1997  1997   corner of Camp Street and Coventry Road.
195-  11-24- Appropriates real estate in connection with the Wooster Road/Erie Street Bridge
1997  1997   Project.
15-   2-9-   Authorizes option agreements with various property owners adjacent to
1998  1998   McCafferty Park for possible construction of a sports complex.
64-   4-13-  Authorizes agreement with G.J. and LB. Safron for purchase of 1.57 acres on
1998  1998   Snyder Avenue.
66-   4-27-  Accepts title to the Marshall’s Building from the Barberton Community
1998  1998   Development Corp.
184-  9-28-  Authorizes 60-day option agreement with P. and S. Himelrigh for purchase of
1998  1998   certain property.
92-   4-26-  Authorizes transfer of deed to Kmart to Pendleton Magic, LLC.
1999  1999
67-   4-12-  Authorizes agreement with the Barberton Board of Education to sell back to the
1999  1999   Board the land located behind the Natatorium which was purchased by the city
             pursuant to Ord. 55-1988.
220-  9-27-  Authorizes one-year purchase option agreement with the Coral Co. for Block 7.
1999  1999
268-  12-13- Authorizes purchase agreement with T. Eberhardt, owner of Al’s Market, for sale
1999  1999   of Pastime Theater.
66-   3-27-  Authorizes agreement with PPG Industries, Inc., for purchase of land located
2000  2000   east of Fourteenth Street N.W., between Hopocan and Wooster Road W.
86-   4-24-  Authorizes purchase of property located at 72 Sixth Street N.W.
2000  2000
107-  6-12-  Authorizes agreement for Hudson Properties, Inc., to purchase Marshall’s
2000  2000   Department Store located at 561 West Tuscarawas Avenue and 100 Fourth Street.
123-  6-26-  Authorizes sale of property located at 72 Sixth Street N.W., at the corner of
2000  2000   Wooster Road W. and Sixth Street, to Pyramid Delivery Systems, Inc.
142-  7-10-  Authorizes purchase of the Erie-Lackawana Station and adjacent property located
2000  2000   between Fourth and Fifth Streets N.W., from the Akron Barberton Cluster
             Railway.
173-  10-9-  Authorizes extension of purchase option agreement with the Coral Co., and the
2000  2000   amendment of terms.
19-   2-12-  Authorizes purchase of property located at 547 Lincoln.
2001  2001
60-   3-26-  Authorizes extension of a purchase option agreement with the Coral Co.,
2001  2001   regarding Block 7.
112-  5-29-  Authorizes purchase of the vacant lot at 144 Second Street N.W.
2001  2001
130-  6-25-  Authorizes purchase of 36 Wunderlich Avenue.
2001  2001
165-  9-10-  Authorizes appropriation of real estate at 297 Thirty- first Street S.W.
2001  2001
167-  9-10-  Authorizes purchase of 158 Snyder Avenue.
2001  2001
220-  11-13- Authorizes sale of 138 Seventh Street N.W.
2001  2001
224-  11-13- Authorizes sale of Fourth Street Depot.
2001  2001
258-  12-17- Authorizes purchase of 171 Nineteenth Street N.W.
2001  2001
18-   2-11-  Authorizes sale of 547 Lincoln Avenue.
2002  2002
30-   2-25-  Authorizes purchase of 484 Fourth Street S.W.
2002  2002
31-   2-25-  Authorizes purchase of 407 Wunderlich Avenue.
2002  2002
124-  7-22-  Authorizes trade of the former Depot property and the property at 171
2002  2002   Nineteenth Street N.W., for the former A-1 Car Care property.
126-  7-22-  Authorizes purchase of 5451 South Cleveland-Massillon Road, Norton.
2002  2002
30-   3-27-  Authorizes purchase of property at 77 Mitchell Street from the Department of
2003  2003   Housing and Urban Development.
102-  7-28-  Authorizes purchase of property at 282 Wunderlich Avenue, through project
2003  2003   impact.
103-  7-28-  Authorizes purchase and razing of the property at 307 Wunderlich Avenue.
2003  2003
126-  10-27- Authorizes purchase of the O.C. Barber Heating House property from the
2003  2003   Barberton Historical Society.
144-  11-10- Authorizes sale of eight acres of Tuscora Park to Barberton Citizens Hospital.
2003  2003
159-  11-24- Authorizes sale of the O.C. Barber Heating House property to the Barberton
2003  2003   Historical Society.
160-  11-24- Authorizes purchase of property at 284 Wunderlich Avenue.
2003  2003
7-    1-26-  Authorizes purchase of property at 295 Wunderlich Avenue.
2004  2004
26-   2-23-  Authorizes purchase of property on Eastern Road.
2004  2004
27-   2-23-  Authorizes purchase of property known as the Old Barberton High School, the
2004  2004   Industrial Arts Building and two parking lots.
28-   2-23-  Authorizes purchase of property at 221 N. Third Street.
2004  2004
29-   2-23-  Authorizes purchase of property at 225 N. Third Street.
2004  2004
69-   4-26-  Authorizes purchase of property at 503 W. Lake Avenue.
2004  2004
77-   5-10-  Authorizes sale of property on Eastern Road.
2004  2004
Res.  10-11-
158-  2004   Intending to appropriate real estate for the Robinson Avenue Bridge Project.
2004
180-  11-8-  Authorizes purchase of property at 566 Brady Avenue.
2004  2004
202-  12-20- Authorizes purchase of property at 440 W. Hopocan Avenue.
2004  2004
24-   2-28-  Authorizes purchase of property at 276 Wunderlich Avenue.
2005  2005
35-   3-14-  Authorizes purchase of the O.C. Barber Heating House parking lot property from
2005  2005   the Barberton Community Foundation.
47-   3-28-  Authorizes sale of the O.C. Barber Heating House parking lot property to the
2005  2005   Barberton Community Foundation.
81-   6-13-  Authorizes purchase of property 362 Wunderlich Avenue.
2005  2005
111-  7-25-  Authorizes execution of a real estate sales agreement for the Apostolic
2005  2005   Pentecostal Church in Jesus Christ, to purchase the vacant lots located at 370
             Elson Avenue.
143-  9-26-  Authorizes purchase of property 294 Wunderlich Avenue.
2005  2005
151-  10-10- Authorizes purchase of approximately 40 acres of property known as Russell
2005  2005   Avenue landfill.
158-  10-24- Authorizes purchase of properties at 270 and 274 Wunderlich Avenue.
2005  2005
173-  11-14- Declaring the city’s intent to appropriate real estate for the Robinson Avenue
2005  2005   Bridge Project.
182-  11-28- Authorizes purchase of property at 507 W. Hopocan Avenue.
2005  2005
194-  12-12- Authorizes purchase of property at 368 Newell Street (Stadium Grill).
2005  2005
14-   2-13-  Authorizes sale of 50 Snyder Avenue (Pole Barn).
2006  2006
35-   3-13-  Authorizes purchase of 298 Wunderlich Avenue.
2006  2006
75-   5-8-   Authorizes purchase of 358 Newell Street.
2006  2006
114-  7-10-  Authorizes purchase of properties on Second Street.
2006  2006
152-  9-11-  Authorizes purchase of 297 Third Street.
2006  2006
153-  9-11-  Authorizes purchase of 503 W. Hopocan Avenue.
2006  2006
154-  9-11-  Authorizes purchase of 332 Wunderlich Avenue.
2006  2006
182-  10-9-  Authorizes purchase of 242 Third Street N.W.
2006  2006
183-  10-9-  Authorizes purchase of 305 Wunderlich Avenue.
2006  2006
231-  12-11- Authorizes purchase of properties - 356 Newell Street and the vacant parcel on
2006  2006   corner of Newell Street and Van Street.
237-  12-18- Authorizes donation of property to BCDC - 496 Fourth Street N.W.
2006  2006
24-   2-26-  Authorizes the purchase of property at 275-277 Third Street N.W.
2007  2007
35-   3-26-  Authorizes the sale of parcel #01.02082 on Coventry Road.
2007  2007
111-  7-9-   Amending Ord. 35-2007, sale of city property.
2007  2007
143-  9-24-  Authorizes the purchase of properties located at 83 and 103 E. State Street.
2007  2007
169-  11-13- Authorizes sale of eight parcels of city property located on Wunderlich and
2007  2007   Hopocan Avenues.
29-   2-25-  Authorize the purchase of 87 and 87-1/2 E. State Street.
2008  2008
53-   4-14-  Authorizes the purchase of 99 E. State Street.
2008  2008
98-   6-9-   Amending Ord. 29-2008 by increasing the amount of the original purchase
2008  2008   agreement.
214-  12-8-  Authorizes a quitclaim deed for the Barberton School District to take ownership
2008  2008   of the property known as the Barberton Community Fitness Center/Natatorium for
             $1.
34-   3-9-   Authorizes a quitclaim deed for the Barberton City School District to take
2009  2009   ownership of parcel #0102100, located on the corner of Fuller Street and Third
             Street, NW (adjacent to the Norton Homes Complex) for $1.
35-   3-9-   Authorizes purchase of the property at 682 W. Lake Avenue for demolition.
2009  2009
56-   4-13-  Authorizes purchase of the property at 190 Wooster Road N., parcel #01.11116,
2009  2009   for demolition.
67-   5-11-  Authorizes purchase of the property at 530 W. Hopocan Avenue.
2009  2009
92-   6-8-   Authorizes a contract with Ohio Fidelity Title Company to purchase the property
2009  2009   at 611 W. Hopocan Avenue.
98-   6-22-  Authorizes an agreement to purchase the property at 878 W. Hopocan Avenue,
2009  2009   using CDBG funds.
99-   6-22-  Authorizes an agreement to purchase the property at 299 Fourth Street N.W.,
2009  2009   using CDBG funds.
100-  6-22-  Authorizes the Mayor to execute a quitclaim deed for Neighborhood Development
2009  2009   Services (NDS) to take ownership of 123 Seventh Street N.W., parcel #01.12543,
             for $1.
             Authorizes the Mayor to secure ownership of the Washington Square Apartment
120-  7-13-  Complex, with the intent to rehab and transfer the complex to the Akron
2009  2009   Metropolitan Housing Association (AMHA) at fair market value, as part of the
             Norton Homes Relocation Agreement.
121-  7-13-  Authorizes an agreement to purchase the property at 43/45 Brown Street.
2009  2009
128-  7-13-  Authorizing purchase of the properties at 317/319 Wunderlich Avenue and 321
2009  2009   Wunderlich Avenue.
129-  7-27-  Authorizes an agreement to purchase the property at 55 Twenty-first Street
2009  2009   N.W., using County NSP funds.
             Authorizes an agreement to purchase the property at 281 Fourteenth Street N.W.,
             using County NSP and/or CDBG funds. Determining to change the boundary line
141-  10-12- separating the City of Barberton and the City of Norton by mutual agreement of
2009  2009   the City of Barberton and the City of Norton by transferring certain property
             currently located in the City of Norton and described on Exhibit A attached to
             Ord. 141-2009, to the City of Barberton by mutual agreement.
148-  9-14-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute a quit claim deed for Habitat for Humanity to
2009  2009   take ownership of the property located on one parcel (two lots) of the Old West
             Side Fire Station on Twenty-fourth Street N.W. for $1.
151-  9-14-  Authorizing an agreement to purchase the property at 637 W. Hopocan Avenue
2009  2009   (Hardman’s), using State NSP funds.
152-  9-14-  Authorizes an agreement to purchase the property at 430/432 Fourth Street N.W.,
2009  2009   using CDBG funds.
176-  10-12- Authorizes a contract to accept the property at 255 Huron Street as a donation
2009  2009   for future development, in exchange for the payment of back taxes, penalties
             and interest, using CDBG funds.
177-  10-12- Authorizes a contract to accept the property at 554 W. Hopocan Avenue, as a
2009  2009   donation, in exchange for payment of 2007 back taxes and penalties, using CDBG
             or State NSP funds.
205-  11-9-  Authorizes an agreement to purchase the property at 1306 Auburn Avenue for
2009  2009   demolition, using CDBG funds.
240-  12-21- Authorizes an agreement to purchase the vacant lot at 317 Sixth Street N.W.,
2009  2009   for $1, plus all closing costs, using CDBG funds.
248-  12-21- Authorizing an agreement to sell the Washington Square Apartments, located at
2009  2009   420-440 Van Buren Avenue, to Neighborhood Development Services (NDS).
61-   5-10-  Authorizing an agreement to purchase the property at 527 W. Hopocan Avenue,
2010  2010   using State NSP funds.
122-  9-13-  Authorizing an agreement to purchase the property at 203 Eighth Street N.W.,
2010  2010   using CDBG funds.
138-  9-27-  Authorizing an agreement to purchase the property at 31 Sixteenth Street N.W.,
2010  2010   using CDBG funds.
142-  9-27-  Authorizing the Mayor to donate the property at 1306 Auburn Avenue to Habitat
2010  2010   for Humanity of Summit County.
143-  9-27-  Authorizing the Mayor to donate the property at 281 Fourteenth Street N.W. to
2010  2010   Habitat for Humanity of Summit County.
152-  10-11- Authorizing an agreement to purchase the vacant lot at 922 Raymond, using CDBG
2010  2010   funds.
153-  10-11- Authorizing the Mayor to execute a quit claim deed for Habitat for Humanity to
2010  2010   take ownership of the property located at 922 Raymond, for $1.
167-  10-25- Authorizing an agreement to purchase the property at 69 Fifteenth Street N.W.,
2010  2010   using CDBG funds.
184-  12-13- Authorizing an agreement to purchase the property at 194 Wooster Road N., using
2010  2010   CDBG funds.
185-  12-13- Authorizing an agreement to purchase the property at 702 W. Paige Avenue, using
2010  2010   CDBG funds.
17-   2-28-  Authorizing an agreement to purchase the property at 190 Fifteenth Street N.W.,
2011  2011   using CDBG funds.
52-   5-9-   Authorizing an agreement to purchase the property at 284 Fourteenth Street
2011  2011   N.W., using CDBG funds.
57-   5-9-   Authorizing a quit claim deed for Summit County to take ownership of 0.0959
2011  2011   acre located on the east side of Van Buren Avenue, south of the Tuscarawas
             River, known as parcel 2WD.
64-   5-23-  Authorizing an agreement to purchase eight parcels of the former Oakdale School
2011  2011   property from the Barberton Board of Education; amended by Ord. 88-2011.
65-   5-23-  Authorizing a quit claim deed for Habitat for Humanity to take ownership of the
2011  2011   property located at 43 Brown Street.
77-   6-13-  Authorizing a quit claim deed for Summit County MRDD to take ownership of the
2011  2011   property, parcel #01.08714, located at Third Street N.W. and Hopocan Avenue to
             construct a park honoring veterans on the property.
88-   6-13-  Amending Ord. 64-2011 to waive one-half the water and sanitary sewer fees.
2011  2011
120-  7-25-  Authorizing a memorandum of understanding with Forrest City Barberton, LLC, to
2011  2011   allow for the sale of two lots in Phase 2B of the New Haven Development.
124-  9-12-  Authorizing a quit claim deed for Summit Housing Development Corporation to
2011  2011   take ownership of the property, parcel #01.08714, located at Third Street N.W.
             and Hopocan Avenue to construct a park honoring veterans on the property.
153-  10-24- Authorizing the purchase from the Adkison Family the building at 898 Robinson
2011  2011   Avenue with approximately one acre of land in an amount not to exceed $90,000.
170-  11-14- Authorizing a quit claim deed for the Barberton Land Improvement Company (BLIC)
2011  2011   to take ownership of the four parcels formerly known as Russell Avenue
             Landfill, for $1.
193-  12-19- Authorizing a one-year option to purchase agreement for the real estate located
2011  2011   at 440 Hopocan Avenue, parcel #0106537 to the Community Pregnancy Center, for
             $4,300.
185-  12-19- Authorizing a lease purchase agreement between the city and the United States
2011  2011   Postal Service, to lease the parking lot located on the southwest corner of
             Second Street and Wooster Road W. for up to three years for $1 per year.
20-   2-13-  Authorizing an agreement to purchase the property at 1360 Wooster Road West,
2012  2012   parcel #01.02151, for $1, plus closing costs, for demolition.
37-   3-12-  Authorizing an agreement to purchase the property at 359 Bell Street (parcel
2012  2012   #01.08733), for $8,500, plus closing costs.
72-   4-23-  Authorizing a quit claim deed for the Barberton Historical Society to take
2012  2012   ownership of two vacant parcels, #01.11116 and #01.06649, located on Wooster
             Road North, to assist in the National (Maloney) House restoration project.
86-   5-29-  Authorizing an agreement to purchase the property at 339 Van Street (Parcel
2012  2012   #01.02701) for $1, plus closing costs.
204-  12-10- Authorizing the purchase of two vacant properties 75 Twenty-first Street N.W.
2012  2012   and 79 Twenty- first Street N.W.
207-  12-10- Authorizing an agreement to purchase two vacant parcels #01.03413 and
2012  2012   #01.03414, located on the southeast corner of Stanley and George Streets.
40-   1-14-  Appropriating $26,432.65 from the unappropriated item of the Sewer Fund to the
2013  2013   Sewer Fund Capital Budget, to be used to purchase two properties, 75 and 79
             Twenty-first Street.
18-   2-11-  Authorizing an agreement to purchase the property at 997 W. Tuscarawas Avenue
2013  2013   for $1, using CDBG funds.
19-   2-11-  Authorizing an agreement to purchase the property at 364 Thirty-first Street,
2013  2013   SW (parcel #01.12701) for $1, using CDBG funds.
27-   2-25-  Authorizing an agreement to sell the property located at 588 W. Tuscarawas
2013  2013   Avenue, also known as the Lake Theater, to Neighborhood Development Services
             for the sum of $545,000.
Res.  7-8-   Authorizing a settlement agreement for the Bauer’s Hill property issue by
115-  2013   purchasing an access lane.
2013
Res.  1-13-  Appropriating certain interests in real property necessary for certain
2-    2014   improvements to the Thirty-first Street Project.
2014
114-  9-8-   Authorizing a purchase agreement with the Magical Theater Company for 565 West
2014  2014   Tuscarawas Avenue, also known as the Park Theater, in the amount of $1.
109-  7-27-  Authorizing the Mayor to sell properties that have been placed into the City
2015  2015   Land Bank to qualified buyers in accordance with the City Land Bank Program.
129-  9-28-  Authorizing the city to place four parcels (#01.10379, #01.05231, #01.15836 and
2015  2015   #01.03686) into the City of Barberton Land Bank Program.
169-  11-23- Authorizing the Mayor to execute an agreement to sell the property known as
2015  2015   Nola Avenue Extension to David and Carol Wolfe, for the sum of $5,300, plus
             closing costs.
170-  11-23- Authorizing the Mayor to execute an agreement to purchase the property at 101
2015  2015   East Tuscarawas Avenue, the former Burger King Building, for nor more than
             $50,000.
16-   3-28-  Authorizing the city to place parcel #01.03717 into the City of Barberton Land
2016  2016   Bank Program.
17-   3-28-  Authorizing the city to place two parcels, located at 318 Frank Avenue and 307
2016  2016   College Street, into the Summit County Land Bank Program.
55-   6-13-  Authorizing the city to dispose of two city-owned properties, #01.13019 and
2016  2016   #01.02472, to the Barberton YMCA.
69-   7-11-  Authorizing the Mayor to sell the city-owned properties #01.15947, #01.15948,
2016  2016   #74.00259, #74.00260, #74.00261, #74.00262 and #74.00263 to Elson Pointe OH,
             LLC for $1.
109-  10-24- Authorizing the city to place 679 W. Paige Avenue and 31 Tenth Street S.W. into
2016  2016   the Summit County Land Bank Program.
121-  11-14- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a real estate purchase agreement with
2016  2016   Brookside Land Company.
123-  11-14- Authorizing the Mayor to execute a donation agreement with ODOT for the city-
2016  2016   owned parcel #0102457.
155-  12-19- Amending Ord. 109-2015.
2016  2016
73-   6-26-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute a real estate sales agreement to sell city-
2017  2017   owned properties #01.05406 and #01.07859 to the Mother A.M. Smith Community
             Center to the price of $1, plus transfer/closing costs.
99-   9-11-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement for the purchase of
2017  2017   approximately 1.65 acres situated in the city, parcel #0109008 from PPG
             Industries, Inc., in the amount of $8,500.
107-  9-25-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute a donation agreement with ODOT for the city-
2017  2017   owned parcels #0111439 and #0115836 in order to assist with the I-76
             Interchange Project.
Res.  12-11-
156-  2017   Appropriating the parcels of real property known as 425 W. Hopocan Avenue.
2017
43-   4-9-   Purchasing approximately three and one-half acres, from the BCDC, in the amount
2018  2018   of $100,000, plus closing costs for parcel #01.15103 and $1 for parcel
             #01.15673 (888 Wooster Road W.).
61-   6-25-  Purchasing the property at 425 West Hopocan Avenue, which includes parcels
2018  2018   #0111886 and #0105385.
91-   9-9-   Creating a tax increment financing district.
2019  2019
92-   9-9-   Purchasing property (186 and 188 Second Street S.W.).
2019  2019
99-   9-9-   Disposal by Police Chief of 26 vehicles.
2019  2019
120-  10-28- Disposal by Police Chief of 21 vehicles.
2019  2019
133-  11-25- Disposal of eight vehicles and miscellaneous equipment.
2019  2019
136-  12-9-  Disposal by Police Chief of 32 vehicles.
2019  2019
09-   2-10-  Disposal by Police Chief of 27 vehicles.
2020  2020
138-  11-16- Conveying parcel #0101927 to Christian Healthcare Ministries, Inc. via
2020  2020   quitclaim deed.
56-   5-24-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute an agreement to purchase the property at 114
2021  2021   14th Street NW, under the hazard mitigation grant program in the amount of
             $57,500.
7-    1-24-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract to accept the vacant lot at 236
2022  2022   14th Street NW, as a donation, and to be included into Barberton’s Land Bank
             Lots.
8-    1-24-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into contract to accept the vacant lot at 71 W.
2022  2022   Huston Avenue, as a donation, and to be included into Barberton’s Land Bank.
57-   4-25-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute a real estate purchase agreement for the
2022  2022   property located at 635 Norton Avenue, Parcel #01.06960, #01.06961, #01.06962,
             and #01.06963.
61-   5-9-   Authorizing the Mayor, or his designee, to execute an agreement to purchase the
2022  2022   property at 157 15th Street NW, under the hazard mitigation grant program in
             the amount of $51,243.75.
63-   5-9-   Authorizing the Mayor, or his designee, to execute an agreement to purchase the
2022  2022   property at 165 Arthur Street, under the hazard mitigation grant program in the
             amount of $64,500.00.
64-   5-9-   Authorizing the Mayor, or his designee, to execute an agreement to purchase the
2022  2022   property at 177 Arthur Street, under the hazard mitigation grant program in the
             amount of $62,500.00.
97-   7-11-  Authorizing the Mayor, or his designee, to execute an agreement to purchase 107
2022  2022   5th Street NW, the Barberton Masonic Temple.
             Authorizing the Mayor, or his designee, to enter into contract to accept the
99-   7-11-  vacant lot at 67 21st Street NW, Parcel 01.09794, as a donation, and to be
2022  2022   included into Barberton’s Land Bank Program for a future neighborhood
             revitalization project.
173-  12-12- Amending Ordinance No. 91-2019 to remove certain parcels from an existing tax
2022  2022   increment financing exemption provided for in said ordinance.
174-  12-12- Amending Ordinance No. 173-2022 to remove certain parcels from an existing tax
2022  2022   increment financing exemption provided for in said ordinance.
74-   5-22-  Rescinding Ordinance No. 155-2016 and adopting the Project Impact Policy.
2023  2023
75-   5-22-  Amending Ordinance No. 109-2015 (sale of Land Bank properties) to sell
2023  2023   properties that have been placed into the City Land Bank in accordance with the
             City’s Project Impact Policy.
76-   9-9-   Authorizing the city to make a formal offer and to purchase two properties
2024  2024   along Wooster Road North, 290 Wooster Road North and 302 Wooster Road North.
1-    1-13-  Allowing the city to accept the vacant lot at 70 15th Street Northwest from
2025  2025   Michael Sebe, the owner, as a donation.
61-   5-12-  Allowing the city to accept three parcels of land donated from Barberton City
2025  2025   Schools located within Newton Park.
             Sale of certain real property consisting of 0.0666 acres of land and
78-   6-23-  improvements thereon along West Tuscarawas Avenue and identified as Permanent
2025  2025   Parcel Numbers 01.05664 and 01.05666 in the Summit County Records, for purchase
             price of $1.00.
155-  10-27- Allowing the city to donate Parcel ID 0114009 to Summit County for the assessed
2025  2025   amount/value of $700.00.
            
 
TABLE F: LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./ Date
Res.  Passed Description
No.
Res.  4-7-   Part of Lot 2, Tract 15, of Coventry Township, for burying garbage and
113   1913   waste matters.
390   5-8-   Land from W. Whorley for purpose of burying night soil.
      1916
Res.  3-7-
27-   1932   To city, from M.O. Barber for garden purposes.
1932
46-   6-2-   City building for municipal purposes.
1941  1941
22-   4-5-   With Pittsburgh Plate Glass Co., for pistol range.
1951  1951
147-  10-18- Certain property in Lots 83 and 93 of Norton Township.
1954  1954
87-   5-6-   To city, from Marshall Dry Goods Co. and Park Theater Co. for use of
1957  1957   parking lot.
246-  11-18- With Ohio Department of Public Works for canal land lease.
1957  1957
39-   2-16-  For rental of triangular parcel north of Tuscarawas Avenue Viaduct and
1959  1959   adjacent to Wooster Road.
48-   3-2-   Lyric Theater property.
1959  1959
49-   3-2-   With Akron & Barberton Belt Line Railroad for certain lands in south
1959  1959   Barberton to be used by the city for dumping.
15-   1-23-  With State Department of Public Works for right to lay water main under
1961  1961   and across Ohio Canal.
103-  5-1-   Part of Lot 6, Tract 14, in Coventry Township.
1961  1961
82-   5-7-   With N.F. Genet Excavating Co., for lease of land on S. Van Buren Avenue
1962  1962   near Russell Avenue dump.
107-  9-16-  With Babcock & Wilcox Co. for off-street parking facilities.
1963  1963
105-  5-20-  With Ohio Department of Public Works, for sewer and water lines over and
1968  1968   under Ohio and Erie Canal property.
285-  12-29- With Park Theater Amusement Co. and Marshall Dry Goods Co., for off-street
1969  1969   parking purposes.
58-   3-15-  With Board of Trustees of Barberton Area Community Center Inc., for land
1971  1971   and faculties known as the Natatorium.
210-  7-30-  Authorizes lease of property by the city, in connection with hospital
1973  1973   revenue bond anticipation notes, for off-street parking.
276-  8-12-  Authorizes lease to Roy L. McKinney of certain property for parking
1974  1974   purposes.
159-  5-12-  Authorizes lease of property in connection with hospital improvement first
1975  1975   mortgage revenue bonds.
172-  5-19-  Authorizes five-year lease of 11008 Hametown Road, with Michael L. Plake.
1975  1975
286-  7-28-  Authorizes five-year lease, with renewal option, of 11008 Hametown Road,
1975  1975   with Michael L. Plake.
312-  8-25-  Authorizes lease to Barberton Church of God, for parking.
1975  1975
320-  8-25-  Authorizes lease to Roy L. McKinney, for parking.
1975  1975
455-  12-15- Authorizes lease in connection with industrial development revenue bonds.
1975  1975
236-  10-4-  Authorizes lease with State Director of Transportation, for area beneath
1976  1976   proposed State Street Viaduct, for parking.
195-  6-26-  With Tony Crookston for part of premises at 480 Fifth Street N.E., for
1978  1978   temporary fire station.
206-  7-3-   Authorizes lease renewal with the Akron & Barberton Belt Line Railroad Co.
1978  1978   for two parcels used in connection with the city dump.
101-  5-7-   Authorizes agreement with Franklin Township Trustees, for use of Lime Lake
1979  1979   No. 6.
235-  10-1-  Authorizes lease agreements with tenants of property purchased by the city
1979  1979   in Downtown Redevelopment Area.
48-   3-3-   Authorizes lease with Comeron Development, Inc., for property at the
1980  1980   southeast corner of the intersection of Wooster Road W. and Second Street
             for parking.
49-   3-3-   Authorizes lease with the First National Bank for property at the
1980  1980   southwest corner of Wooster Road W. and Second Street for parking.
204-  9-22-  Authorizes lease to Roy L. McKinney of 658 Coventry Road and 663 Wooster
1980  1980   Road N. for parking purposes.
185-  7-26-  Authorizes gas and oil lease with Clinton Oil Co.
1982  1982
66-   4-11-  Authorizes lease of property at 658-662 Wooster Road, north to Roy L.
1983  1983   McKinney and/or Joseph Harrison for parking purposes for two years.
179-  10-24- Authorizes three-year lease with Barberton Area Recycle Center
1983  1983   Association.
7-    2-13-  Authorizes lease with Tru-Bore Machine Co. for property at corner of Camp
1984  1984   Street and Coventry Road for parking purposes.
27-   2-27-  Authorizes lease with Barberton Area Recycle Center for 15 Wolf Street.
1984  1984
177-  10-22- Authorizes sub-leases for Barberton Industrial Incubator.
1984  1984
121-  7-22-  Authorizes lease of the Sickler Building with Barberton Labor Council.
1985  1985
146-  7-22-  Authorizes lease with Resource Energy Development, Inc., for drilling a
1985  1985   well on Russell Avenue landfill.
174-  9-9-   Authorizes lease with Barberton City School District Board of Education
1985  1985   for parking at the Community Center.
175-  9-9-   Authorizes five-year lease for former Fred Ray Farm with Gerald Miller.
1985  1985
205-  10-14- Authorizes air space agreement with Barberton Red Cross.
1985  1985
56-   2-24-  Authorizes lease of 658-662 Wooster Road N. to Joe Harrison for parking
1986  1986   purposes for two years.
182-  7-28-  Authorizes lease with Ohio Edison Co. for property on Fairmont Avenue.
1986  1986
189-  7-28-  Authorizes lease with Barberton Auto Club for vacant lot at intersection
1986  1986   of Van Buren and Tuscarawas Avenue.
226-  9-29-  Authorizes lease with Barberton Area Recycle Center Association for 15
1986  1986   Wolf Street.
88-   3-23-  Authorizes lease with Akron & Barberton Belt Line Railroad Co. for city
1987  1987   property adjacent to railroad property.
55-   3-28-  Authorizes lease with Barberton Board of Education for Lots 1-8 and 21-30
1988  1988   in Barberton Gardens allotment.
124-  6-27-  Authorizes lease with American Slovene Corp. for rooms 3, 4 and 9 in the
1988  1988   West Theater Arcade.
161-  9-12-  Authorizes lease with Bernard Police Pistol Range, Inc.
1988  1988
187-  10-10- Authorizes lease with Schreiner Oil and Gas, Inc., for drilling wells on
1988  1988   sewage treatment plant property.
19-   1-23-  Authorizes lease with American Slovene Corp. for rooms 3, 4 and 9 in the
1989  1989   West Theater Arcade.
238-  11-27- Authorizes lease with Glenn and Jane Lemley for 15.5 acres of city
1989  1989   property which abuts 2026 Wadsworth Road and fronts Summit Road.
4-    1-16-  Authorizes lease with Rudy Dunkler for 2032 S. Hometown Road and 4130
1990  1990   Hometown Road.
143-  9-10-  Authorizes lease with Adjutant General of the State of Ohio for use of a
1990  1990   portion of the Ohio National Guard Armory for fire ground training.
14-   1-27-  Authorizes termination of lease agreement with the BCDC for the Diamond
1992  1992   Match Building.
58-   4-27-  Authorizes a lease renewal with PPG Industries for the Wooster Road
1992  1992   incubator facility.
167-  12-14- Authorizes lease agreement with J. and D. Scarpino and J. & J.
1992  1992   Electronics, with the option of the Scarpinos to purchase Building No. 41
             at the BCDC B. & W. Industrial Complex.
72-   5-24-  Authorizes revised lease agreement with Akron Cellular Telephone Co. for
1993  1993   property located at the corner of Fifth Street S.E. and Austin Drive.
135-  9-13-  Authorizes lease agreement with Consolidated Rail Corp. for the premises
1993  1993   and tracks located from Fifth Street to east of Third Street.
76-   5-9-   Authorizes lease agreement with G. Miller for use of the Rogues Hollow
1994  1994   property.
197-  12-19- Authorizes lease agreement with Marketec Advertising, Inc., for office
1994  1994   space for the Finance Department.
198-  12-19- Authorizes lease agreement with B. & C. Industries, for the use of the
1994  1994   Frase Avenue pump station.
179-  11-27- Authorizes lease agreement with Barberton Citizens Hospital.
1995  1995
201-  12-18- Authorizes lease agreement with Monogram Development, Ltd., for park land
1995  1995   at Johnsons Corners for parking purposes.
29-   2-26-  Authorizes an agreement with P & S Ambulance, Inc., for lease of the West
1996  1996   Side Fire Station.
113-  7-22-  Authorizes lease agreement with J.R. and C.S. Baun, for general public
1996  1996   parking at 600 W. Tuscarawas Avenue (Barberton Tire Service).
114-  7-22-  Authorizes lease agreement with Pasta Bella Corp., for restaurant
1996  1996   operation at the Lake Cinema 8 Theatre.
149-  9-9-   Authorizes lease agreement with Regal Cinemas Corp., for management of
1996  1996   Lake Cinema 8 Theatre.
204-  12-8-  Authorizes lease agreement with Celebrities Restaurant, Inc. for
1997  1997   restaurant operation at the Lake Cinema 8, for five years.
214-  3-9-   Authorizes lease agreement with AirTouch Cellular for the use of the
1997  1998   Summit Street Water Tower, for the installation of a cellular tower.
65-   4-13-  Authorizes lease agreement with J. and R. Pfeister, for vacant property
1998  1998   adjacent to their home, at the East Side Water Tower, for one year.
74-   4-27-  Authorizes lease agreement with M. Bender, for five parcels, consisting of
1998  1998   approximately 11 acres, located near the Barberton Reservoir, for one
             year.
94-   5-26-  Authorizes lease agreement with the Barberton Community Development Corp.,
1998  1998   for the use of the B & W Ballfield for park and recreational purposes, for
             one year.
150-  7-27-  Authorizes lease agreement with Magic Oven Restaurant, Inc., for
1998  1998   restaurant operation at the Lake Cinema 8, for one year.
30-   2-14-  Authorizes lease agreement with Canfora Development Ltd., for office space
2000  2000   for the Finance Department, for five yrs.
5-    1-22-  Authorizes agreement with the Ohio Department of Natural Resources, for
2001  2001   lease of the Towpath property for recreational purposes.
221-  12-10- Authorizes agreement with Chippewa Township to lease vacant property
2001  2001   located on the north side of Hametown Road for soccer fields.
162-  12-15- Authorizes agreement with three one-year renewal options with American
2003  2003   Medical Response to lease the property at 211 Twenty-fourth Street.
24-   2-23-  Authorizes agreement with American Tower Corporation to lease the site of
2004  2004   the existing Verizon building site at the Summit Street standpipe site.
2-    1-10-  Authorizes a two-year agreement with Premier Therapy to provide an out-
2005  2005   patient therapy clinic at the Barberton Community Fitness Center.
17-   2-14-  Authorizes five-year agreement with Canfora Development Limited, for the
2005  2005   lease of approximately 3,835 square feet of office space for the Finance
             Department.
159-  11-28- Authorizes agreement between the City and Profit Track Ltd., for the Lake
2005  2005   Cinema 8 Building.
172-  11-14- Authorizes five-year agreement with the State of Ohio to lease the
2005  2005   Barberton Armory.
67-   4-24-  Lease purchase agreement with Fifth Third Bank, for the financing of the
2006  2006   city phone system and Elgin Street Sweeper for the city.
131-  7-24-  Ground lease and cooperative use and occupancy agreement Lake Anna
2006  2006   Community Center.
150-  9-11-  Lease agreement with the mosquito abatement district of the property known
2006  2006   as the Old Parks Garage.
121-  7-23-  Reduction of rent stated in lease agreement with MAD concerning Old Parks
2007  2007   Garage property.
122-  7-23-  Lease agreement with Clearwire US LLC for construction of broadband tower.
2007  2007
129-  7-14-  Five-year lease agreement with T.J. Eberhardt, to lease the basement space
2008  2008   of 561 W. Tuscarawas Avenue to provide storage space for the Clerk of
             Courts.
             Authorizing the Mayor, together with the Barberton Municipal Court, to
143-  7-28-  enter into a three-year joint lease agreement, with two one-year lease
2008  2008   renewal options, with T.J. Eberhardt, to provide storage space for the
             Clerk of Courts in the basement level at 561 W. Tuscarawas Avenue.
220-  11-24- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a lease agreement with AT&T to lease
2008  2008   space at the North End Water Tower for a maximum of 25 years.
46-   3-23-  Authorizing a ground lease, with an option to purchase, with the Barberton
2009  2009   City School District Board of Education, for the property located at 529
             Brady Avenue, formerly known as “A-1 Car Care”, for three years.
113-  9-13-  Authorizing a three- year lease agreement with the Summit County Combined
2010  2010   General Health District for the lease of 571 W. Tuscarawas Avenue, the
             Weigand Building.
26-   2-25-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a memorandum of agreement to amend the
2013  2013   lease with the Magical Theatre Company, for property located at 565 W.
             Tuscarawas Avenue, also known as the “Park Theater”.
168-  12-15- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a one-year lease agreement with
2014  2014   Canfora Development Corporation for the lease of office space for the
             Finance Department located at 104 Third Street N.W.
30-   2-23-  Authorizing a six-month lease agreement with Neighborhood Development
2015  2015   Services (NDS), for the Weigand Building.
119-  9-14-  Approving a ground lease agreement between the city and Towerco 2013 LLC
2015  2015   for placement of a cellular communications tower.
95-   10-24- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a lease agreement with Summa Health
2016  2016   Systems, for a section of Tuscora Park for hospital parking.
110-  10-24- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a six-month lease agreement with
2016  2016   Summit Art Space, for the Weigand Building.
16-   2-13-  Repealing Ord. 95-2016 that authorized the Mayor to enter into a lease
2017  2017   agreement with Summa Health Systems, for a section of Tuscora Park for
             hospital parking.
43-   4-10-  Authorizing the Mayor to amend the ground lease agreement between the city
2017  2017   and New Cingular Wireless PCS, LLC, for the continued use of the city-
             owned parcel as a cellular communications tower site.
92-   7-24-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a five-year lease agreement with
2017  2017   Canfora Development Limited, for the lease of office space for the Finance
             Department at 104 Third Street N.W.
158-  11-27- Authorizing the city to lease/purchase four parcels that make up 635
2017  2017   Norton Avenue from the BCDC as well as accept parcel #01.16732 (Fifteenth
             Street N.W.) from BCDC.
33-   3-12-  Authorizing the execution and delivery of a master lease agreement with
2018  2018   Kansas State Bank.
49-   4-22-  Authorizing the Mayor to sell parcel #01.16732 (Fifteenth Street N.W.).
2019  2019
51-   5-13-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute a transfer of property of parcel
2019  2019   #46.00561.
66-   5-23-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into five one-year lease agreements with
2022  2022   Canfora Development Limited for the lease of office space for the Finance
             Department, located at 104 3rd Street NW.
             Authorizing the city to enter into a 15 year lease with the State of Ohio
83-   6-13-  through the Department of Natural Resources for a canal land lease through
2022  2022   the Ohio and Erie Canal System situated in the city and being a 50 foot
             wide strip of land for the occupancy of a 24 inch water main.
             Authorizing the Director of Finance to enter into a three-year lease
154-  11-14- purchase agreement with Huntington Public Capital Corporation, Huntington
2022  2022   National Bank, to finance a 2022 Nissan Rouge in the amount of $22,035 for
             use by the Planning Department using CDBG funds.
31-   3-13-  Authorizing the Director of Finance to execute and deliver a lease-
2023  2023   purchase agreement with KS State Bank.
             Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a lease agreement with Historic
62-   7-22-  Herald-Powell LLC for the properties known as 459-467 West Tuscarawas
2024  2024   Avenue and 94 Wooster Road North commonly known as the Cox-Powell-Herald
             Buildings.
            
 
TABLE G: GRADE LEVELS AND CHANGE OF STREET NAME
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
B. 1, P. 245  8-31-1896   Tuscarawas Avenue.
B. 1, P. 246  11-23-1896  Baird Avenue.
B. 1, P. 248  12-21-1896  Third Street.
B. 1, P. 256  3-29-1897   First Street.
B. 2, P. 8    1-29-1900   Wooster Avenue.
B. 2, P. 27   9-24-1900   Second Street.
B. 2, P. 50   3-18-1901   Tuscarawas Avenue.
B. 2, P. 53   3-25-1901   Fifth Street.
B. 2, P. 104  6-24-1901   Sixth Street.
B. 2, P. 225  5-5-1902    Third Street.
B. 2, P. 252  8-18-1902   Lake Avenue.
B. 3, P. 35   4-27-1903   Park Avenue.
B. 3, P. 39   5-18-1903   Newell Street.
B. 3, P. 40   5-18-1903   Brady Avenue.
B. 3, P. 41   5-18-1903   Castle Street.
B. 3, P. 42   5-18-1903   Third Street.
B. 3, P. 43   5-18-1903   State Street.
B. 3, P. 44   5-18-1903   Seventh Street.
B. 3, P. 46   5-18-1903   Fourth Street.
B. 3, P. 48   5-18-1903   Paige Avenue.
B. 3, P. 62   6-8-1903    Wunderlich Avenue.
B. 3, P. 67   6-15-1903   Ford Avenue.
B. 3, P. 80   7-20-1903   Hopocan Avenue.
B. 3, P. 101  8-17-1903   Ninth Street.
B. 3, P. 237  4-18-1904   Eighth Street.
B. 3, P. 243  5-2-1904    Betz Street.
B. 3, P. 244  5-2-1904    Melvin Street.
B. 3, P. 245  5-2-1904    Center Street.
B. 3, P. 246  5-2-1904    Mulberry Street.
B. 3, P. 247  5-2-1904    Newell Street.
B. 3, P. 248  5-2-1904    Rose Street.
B. 3, P. 249  5-2-1904    Moore Street.
B. 3, P. 253  5-9-1904    Chisnell Street.
B. 3, P. 256  5-9-1904    Coogans Lane.
B. 4, P. 16   8-3-1904    Mulberry Street.
B. 4, P. 61   12-27-1904  Newell Street.
B. 4, P. 94   3-6-1905    Swigart Street.
B. 4, P. 108  4-10-1905   Cornell Street.
B. 4, P. 109  4-10-1905   Range Street.
B. 4, P. 112  4-24-1905   Creedmore Avenue.
B. 4, P. 113  5-1-1905    Wooster Road.
B. 4, P. 115  5-15-1905   Norman Avenue.
B. 4, P. 124  6-19-1905   Cornell Street.
B. 4, P. 143  10-2-1905   Amends Ord. passed 5-18-1903.
B. 4, P. 183  4-2-1906    Holmes Avenue.
B. 4, P. 189  6-4-1906    Part of Cornell Street.
B. 4, P. 193  6-4-1906    High Street.
B. 4, P. 195  6-11-1906   Brown Street.
B. 4, P. 192  6-19-1906   Part of Wooster Road.
B. 4, P. 208  8-27-1906   Center Street.
B. 4, P. 209  8-27-1906   Part of Huston Street.
B. 4, P. 210  8-27-1906   Part of Range Street.
B. 4, P. 215  10-22-1906  Baird Avenue.
B. 4, P. 242  2-4-1907    Fifth Street.
B. 4, P. 243  2-4-1907    Fifth Avenue.
B. 4, P. 241  2-11-1907   Bolivar Road.
B. 4, P. 250  4-1-1907    Alley between Second and Third Streets.
B. 4, P. 254  4-15-1907   Part of Melvin Street.
B. 4, P. 255  4-15-1907   Part of Chisnell Street.
B. 4, P. 276  6-10-1907   Alley between Park Avenue and Tuscarawas Avenue.
B. 4, P. 337  3-30-1908   Part of Sylvester Street.
B. 4, P. 366  7-20-1908   State Road to Norton Avenue.
B. 4, P. 458  6-27-1910   Part of Cornell Street.
B. 4, P. 465  7-25-1910   Parts of Rose Street.
B. 4, P. 470  8-22-1910   Parts of Moore Street.
B. 4, P. 476  8-22-1910   Parts of Moore Street.
B. 4, P. 483  12-3-1910   Part of Moore Street.
B. 5, P. 68   9-25-1911   Part of Wooster Road.
27            4-1-1912    Part of Van Street.
46            6-3-1912    Extension of High Street to High Street.
47            6-3-1912    Old Akron and Wooster Road to Wooster Road.
48            6-3-1912    Old Springfield Road to Springfield Road.
76            12-2-1912   Part of High Street.
175           11-17-1913  Parts of Mulberry Street.
275           2-15-1915   Parts of Wooster Road.
280           3-1-1915    Alley between First and Second Streets.
288           3-29-1915   Part of Norton Avenue.
469           4-16-1917   Part of Lakeview Avenue.
470           4-16-1917   Part of Westview Avenue.
471           4-16-1917   Part of Northview Avenue.
489           5-28-1917   Part of Summit Street.
713           10-6-1919   Part of W. Moreland Avenue to Way Street.
751           2-9-1920    Part of Summit Street.
834           12-20-1920  Part of Tuscarawas Avenue.
835           12-20-1920  Part of Van Buren Avenue.
1023          4-3-1922    Alley between Lake and Hopocan Avenues and Seventh
                          and Third Streets.
1034          5-1-1922    Part of Hopocan Avenue.
1036          5-15-1922   Part of Tuscarawas Avenue.
1040          6-5-1922    Part of Baird Avenue.
1050          6-26-1922   Part of Park Avenue.
1051          6-26-1922   Alley between Tuscarawas and Park Avenues.
1054          6-26-1922   Part of Ford Avenue.
1056          7-3-1922    Part of Robinson Avenue.
1057          7-3-1922    Etling Avenue.
1063          7-24-1922   Part of Wooster Road.
1072          9-5-1922    Cassel Avenue.
1245          4-7-1924    Part of Keller Street.
1492          9-13-1926   Alley between High and Swigart Streets.
54A-1928      5-7-1928    Certain streets.
71-1928       5-21-1928   Certain streets.
107-1928      6-18-1928   Certain streets.
108-1928      6-18-1928   Oakdale Street.
118-1928      7-2-1928    Certain streets.
153-1928      10-15-1928  Norton Avenue to Coventry Road.
13-1932       3-7-1932    Poe Avenue.
14-1932       3-7-1932    Twenty-seventh Street.
15-1932       3-7-1932    Twenty-eighth Street.
16-1932       3-7-1932    Thirty-first Street.
17-1932       3-7-1932    Twenty-sixth Street.
18-1932       3-7-1932    Twenty-ninth Street.
19-1932       3-7-1932    Thirtieth Street.
20-1932       3-7-1932    Liberty Avenue.
3-1936        1-20-1936   Fernwood Street.
34-1936       7-6-1936    Patterson Street to Glenn Street.
60-1940       5-20-1940   Mabel Avenue to Haven Avenue.
73-1940       6-17-1940   Robinson Alley to Ashland Court.
21-1943       4-19-1943   Part of Graceland Avenue.
22-1943       4-19-1943   Part of Glenn Street.
23-1943       4-19-1943   Part of Summit Avenue.
25-1943       5-3-1943    Twenty-fifth Street.
26-1943       5-3-1943    Orchard Court.
27-1943       5-3-1943    Bark Drive.
28-1943       5-3-1943    Meadow Court.
29-1943       5-3-1943    Ettle Drive.
30-1943       5-3-1943    Poplar Street.
31-1943       5-3-1943    Henigen Avenue.
32-1943       5-3-1943    Conrad Street.
33-1943       5-3-1943    Gale Drive.
34-1943       5-3-1943    Waltz Drive.
35-1943       5-3-1943    Thirteenth Street.
36-1943       5-3-1943    Douglas Street.
37-1943       5-3-1943    Twenty-ninth Street.
38-1943       5-3-1943    Auburn Avenue.
39-1943       5-3-1943    Bellview Avenue.
46-1943       6-7-1943    Twenty-seventh Street.
47-1943       6-7-1943    Benton Street.
48-1943       6-7-1943    Prospect Street.
38-1946       8-5-1946    Third Street.
68-1948       9-7-1948    Stratford Street to Noble Street.
7-1949        2-7-1949    Wuchter Avenue.
9-1949        2-7-1949    Noble Street.
10-1949       2-7-1949    Prospect Street.
229-1957      10-21-1957  Irish Alley to Irish Lane.
113-1958      6-16-1958   Springfield Road to Waterloo Road W.
159-1958      7-21-1958   Powell Court to Powell Place.
165-1958      7-21-1958   Kungle Road (from Haynes Avenue S. to corporation
                          line) to Thirty-first Street S.W.
11-1961       1-16-1961   Part of Franks Avenue (between Robinson and Snyder
                          Avenues) to Second Street S.E.
10-1964       2-3-1964    Oak Court to Goodrich Avenue.
336-1976      12-21-1976  Street between Thirty-first Street S.W. and south
                          corporation limit named Cleveland-Massillon Road.
170-1992      11-9-1992   Mansion Court to Mansion Circle.
168-1993      11-8-1993   Shenandoah Circle to Dogwood Lane.
169-1993      11-8-1993   Anna Dean Lane to Shenandoah Boulevard.
172-1996      10-14-1996  Red Bud Court to Lilac Place.
133-2008      7-14-2008   Changing the name of Monroe Alley to Krska Place.
                          Correcting and changing the name of Wolf Avenue, the
134-2008      7-14-2008   service street leading to the two water garage
                          buildings, to Water Street SW.
                         
 
TABLE H: ANNEXATION AND DETACHMENT OF TERRITORY
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
B. 4, P. 79   1-30-1905   Annexation of certain property.
B. 4, P. 123  6-19-1905   Annexation of certain Summit County land adjacent to
                          the city.
B. 4, P. 462  7-18-1910   Certain land situated in Coventry and Norton
                          Townships.
B. 5, P. 5    2-13-1911   Certain land situated in Coventry and Norton
                          Townships.
443           1-10-1917   Certain land in Coventry Township.
522           8-27-1917   Land situated in Norton Township.
535           11-5-1917   Certain land in Coventry and Norton Townships.
584           4-1-1918    Land in Norton Township.
623           9-4-1918    Land in Coventry and Norton Townships.
670           7-28-1919   Certain land.
160-1928      11-19-1928  Land in Van Buren Garden allotment.
182-1928      2-18-1929   Certain land including unincorporated Village of
                          Johnson Corners.
5-1931        1-19-1931   Certain land.
132-1939      12-16-1939  Certain land in Norton Township.
95-1940       8-19-1940   Part of lots in Coventry Township.
5-1943        1-18-1943   Part of Lots 15, 16 and 17, Tract 15, of Coventry
                          Township.
78-1943       9-7-1943    Part of Lots 15, 16 and 17, Tract 15, of Coventry
                          Township.
11-1947       3-3-1947    Land in Coventry Township.
102-1954      8-2-1954    Accepting application for annexation of certain
                          territory in Norton Township.
13-1956       2-6-1956    Accepting application for annexation of certain
                          territory in Coventry Township.
176-1957      9-16-1957   Annex land of Logan Fletcher, et al., with Norton
                          Township.
177-1957      8-19-1957   Annex land of M.P. Lauer, et al., with Coventry
                          Township.
46-1958       3-3-1958    Land in Lot 2, Tract 15 of Coventry Township.
34-1961       2-20-1961   Land on west side of Romig Road.
91-1961       4-17-1961   Land on west side of Romig Road.
95-1974       3-18-1974   McCafferty Park from Norton to the city.
                          Lots 150 through 155 in the Homewood Ranch allotment
5-1979        1-2-1979    and Lots 179 and 180 in the First Addition to the
                          Homewood Ranch allotment.
227-1980      10-13-1980  Two parcels in Lot 4, Middle Tract 14, Coventry
                          Township.
20-1982       2-8-1982    Part of Lot 4, Middle Tract 14, Coventry Township.
114-1989      6-12-1989   235.19 acres in Coventry Township.
155-1990      9-10-1990   159.09 acres in Coventry Township.
20-1997       2-10-1997   499.5366 acres in Franklin Township.
72-1998       4-27-1998   53.6706 acres in Coventry Township.
                          Authorizes adjustment of boundaries between the City
174-1999      9-27-1999   of Norton and the City of Barberton to result in the
                          annexation of property owned by J.E. Lasko, et al.,
                          to the city.
201-1999      10-11-1999  169.91 acres in Coventry Township.
174-2000      10-9-2000   6.4279 acres in Franklin Township.
82-2005       6-13-2005   1.549 acres in Coventry Township.
 
TABLE I: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./ Date
Res.  Passed Description
No.
94-   8-19-  Commercial District to Industrial District.
1940  1940
16-   2-17-  Residential Distract to Commercial District.
1941  1941
71-   8-16-  Creating additional district.
1943  1943
62-   11-16- Creating additional districts.
1946  1946
50-   9-2-   Commercial District to B Residential District.
1947  1947
7-    2-2-   Creating additional districts.
1953  1953
49-   5-17-  Certain property in Lots 15 and 16 from Class A Residential to Class C
1954  1954   Commercial and certain property in Lots 15 and 16 from Class A Residential to
             Class I Industrial.
75-   6-21-  Certain property in Lot 5 from Class B Residential to Class C Commercial.
1954  1954
76-   6-21-  Certain property in Lot 4 from Class A Residential to Class I Industrial.
1954  1954
108-  8-2-   Certain property in Lots 290 and 291 from Class A Residential to Class C
1954  1954   Commercial.
54-   4-4-   Certain property at 617 W. Lake Avenue from Class A Residential to Class B
1955  1955   Residential.
80-   5-16-  Lots 8 and 9 in Gault allotment from Class A Residential to Class C Commercial.
1955  1955
93-   6-20-  Certain property at 332 Wooster Road from Class A Residential to Class C
1955  1955   Commercial.
176-  9-4-   Certain property in Lot 3, Richland Acres from Class A Residential to Class C
1956  1956   Commercial.
177-  9-4-   Certain property in Lots 117, 118, 149, 150 and 151 from Class A Residential to
1956  1956   Class C Commercial.
205-  10-15- Classifying certain lots as Class A Residential.
1956  1956
20-   2-4-   Certain property in Lots 61, 62 and 63 from Class A Residential to Class C
1957  1957   Commercial.
24-   2-4-   Classifying certain property as Class A Residential.
1957  1957
32-   3-4-   Certain property in Lot 57 of Norton Township from Class A Residential to Class
1957  1957   C Commercial.
80-   - -    Certain property.
1957  1957
203-  9-16-  Parts of Lots 2, 4, 5 and 84 of Richland Acres from Class A Residential to Class
57    1957   C Commercial.
263-  12-16- Parcel adjacent to Van Buren Avenue from Class A Residential to Class C
1957  1957   Commercial; parcel adjacent to Robinson Avenue from Class A Residential to Class
             I Industrial.
45-   4-21-  Property in Staire allotment from Class A Residential to Class B Multiple
1958  1958   Dwelling.
150-  7-7-   Property in Van Buren Gardens allotment from Class A Residential to Class B
1958  1958   Multiple Dwelling.
178-  9-2-   Part of Lot 75 from Class A Residential to Class C Commercial.
1958  1958
179-  9-2-   Lots 973, 974 and 975 from Class A Residential to Class C Commercial.
1958  1958
130-  7-6-   Part of Lots 10 and 11 in Grandview allotment from Class A Residential to Class
1959  1959   C Commercial.
136-  7-20-  Lots 127 and 128 from Class A Residential to Class C Commercial.
1959  1959
43-   3-7-   Property at southwest corner of Snyder Avenue and Fifth Street from Class A
1960  1960   Residential to Class C Commercial.
80-   5-2-   Lots 973, 974, 975 from Class A Residential to Class C Commercial.
1960  1960
226-  12-5-  Lots 11, 12, 14, 15, 17 and 18 of Young allotment from Residence R2-F to General
1960  1960   Business.
227-  12-5-  Lots 18, 20, 22 and 24 of Betts allotment from Residential R2-F to General
1960  1960   Business.
10-   1-16-  Lots 42 through 51 in Young allotment from R1-50 to Residential R2-F.
1961  1961
87-   4-17-  Part of Lot 75 in Norton Township from Office Building to General Business.
1961  1961
108-  6-19-  Lots 104 and 105 in Shaw allotment from R1-40 to General Business; Lots 106
1961  1961   through 111 in Shaw allotment from R2-F to General Business.
125-  7-17-  Lots 24, 25, 28 and 29 on First Street from R2-F to General Business.
1961  1961
126-  7-17-  Lots 287 through 289 and 291 through 296 from R1-50 General Business to Public
1961  1961   Facilities.
131-  7-3-   Lots 86 and 87 in Barberton Gardens allotment from R1-60 to R2-F.
1961  1961
132-  7-3-   Part of Lot 6, Tract 14, in Coventry Township, from Public Facilities to General
1961  1961   Industrial.
139-  9-5-   Property on northwest corner of Shannon Avenue and Thirty-first Street from R1-
1961  1961   60 to Local Business.
163-  9-5-   Part of Lot 10, Tract 15, of Coventry Township, from R1-75 to General
1961  1961   Residential.
186-  11-6-  Parts of Blocks B and K in Moore’s addition from R1-60 to R2-F.
1961  1961
62-   4-2-   Lot 1 in Columbia Lake allotment from R2-F to Local Business.
1962  1962
85-   5-7-   Lots 56 and 77 in Peerless allotment from R2-F to Business Parking.
1962  1962
100-  6-4-   All lots and parcels in Boulevard Heights allotment, Second Addition, R1-40.
1962  1962
             Lots 1 through 4 fronting on Wooster Road W., between Twenty-seventh Street and
101-  6-4-   the Pittsburgh Plate Glass Co., Columbia Chemical Div., Railroad and Lots 5
1962  1962   through 9 fronting on Twenty-seventh Street, and running north from the rear
             lines of Lots 1 through 4 in Krancz allotment, from R2-F to Local Business.
114-  6-18-  All of Lot 17 and part of Lot 16 of the Pittsburgh Valve and Fittings allotment,
1962  1962   from Multi-Family Residential to General Business.
155-  9-17-  West part of Lot 31, New Portage allotment, from General Industrial to R2-F.
1962  1962
103-  9-16-  Lot 152 from R2-F to Business Parking.
1963  1963
159-  12-16- Part of Lot 77 from Residential to General Business.
1963  1963
160-  12-16- Part of Lot 77 from Residential to General Business.
1963  1963
13-   1-20-  Eleven parcels fronting on Coventry Road lying south of the north line of Keller
1964  1964   Street and extending to Norton Avenue to General Business.
107-  7-6-   Lots 73 through 78 in the Snyder allotment from Local Business to General
1964  1964   Service.
111-  7-6-   Part of Lot 96 of Norton Township from R1-75 to Local Business.
1964  1964
166-  9-8-   Lots 1142 through 1148 and 585 through 590 in Barberton Subdivision B, from
1964  1964   General Service to General Business.
194-  11-2-  Lots 10 and 11 of the Gault allotment 2, Tract 15, and Lot 1 in Moore’s
1964  1964   reallotment, from HI to Local Business.
21-   2-1-   Part of Lot 76 of original Norton Township from R1-40 (Single Family) to R2-F
1965  1965   (Two Family).
23-   3-15-  Lots 71 through 75 of the Lawson Subdivision, from R1-60 (Single Family) to
1965  1965   General Residential.
27-   2-15-  Lot 123 of Eastern Heights allotment and a 25-foot strip adjoining such lot,
1965  1965   from R1-40 to R2-F.
35-   3-1-   Lots 18 and 19 of the Pittsburgh Valve and Fittings Co. allotment, from R2-F
1965  1965   (Two Family) to General Service and from Residential to General Business.
37-   3-1-   Lots 119 through 123 and Lot 125 of Orchard View allotment from R2-F (Two
1965  1965   Family) to General Residential.
43-   3-15-  Part of original Lot 17, Tract 15, formerly Coventry Township, from Multi-Family
1965  1965   to Planned General Business.
52-   3-15-  Two parcels, including Lots 1 through 13 in the Fifth Street allotment, from R1-
1965  1965   60 to R2-F.
118-  6-21-  Lot 58 of Peerless allotment, from R1-40 (Single Family) to Business Parking.
1965  1965
187-  9-7-   Part of Lot 15, Tract 15, of original Coventry Township, from R1-60 (Single
1965  1965   Family) to R2-F (Two Family).
195-  9-20-  Part of Lot 85, formerly Norton Township, from R1-50 (Single Family) to R2-F
1965  1965   (Two Family).
196-  9-20-  Lots 97 and 98 of Rose allotment, from R1-50 (Single Family) to R2-F (Two
1965  1965   Family).
19-   1-17-  Part of original Lot 76, Norton Township, from R1-50 to R2-F.
1966  1966
20-   1-17-  Part of Lot 77 in Norton Township from R2-F to General Business.
1966  1966
62-   4-4-   Lots 3 and 4 of Snyder Heights allotment from R1-50 to R1-40.
1966  1966
80-   5-2-   Lots 101 through 104 of Seigwarth allotment from R1-50 to R2-F.
1966  1966
82-   5-2-   Part of Lot 60, Norton Township, from General Residential to Business Parking.
1966  1966
90-   5-31-  Part of Lot 11, Tract 15, of original Coventry Township from R1-50 to R2-F.
1966  1966
97-   5-31-  All of Lots 971 and 972 and part of Lots 973 through 975 of the Pittsburgh Valve
1966  1966   and Fittings allotment from R2-F to Local Business.
117-  6-20-  Part of Block A of A.A. Moore’s Addition to North Barberton allotment, from R1-
1966  1966   60 to R1-50.
25-   2-6-   All of Lots 56, 57, 77 and part of Lot 76 of the Peerless allotment, from R2-
1967  1967   F and Business Parking to Office Building Classification.
42-   3-6-   Part of Lot 11, Tract 15, of original Coventry Township, from R1-50 (Single
1967  1967   Family) to R2-F (Two Family).
43-   4-3-   Lots 1 through 9 of Pfieffer allotment, and Lots 53 through 55, 57, 58 and 64
1967  1967   through 67 of Van Hyning allotment, and Lots A and B of Parker allotment from
             R2-F (Two Family) to RG (General Residential).
22-   2-5-   Lots 11 and 12 of Ammerman-Davis allotment from R1-40 to General Service.
1968  1968
142-  9-16-  Lots 26 through 39 of Barber Knolls allotment from R2-F to RMF.
1968  1968
193-  10-21- Lot 16 of Fredericks allotment (also known as “39 Twenty-third Street”) from R2-
1968  1968   F to General Residential.
12-   1-20-  Lots 124 through 126 of old Lot 69 from R2-F to Business Parking.
1969  1969
16-   2-3-   7.59 acres south of Robinson Avenue from Public Facilities to R1-75, at request
1969  1969   of DeMund Homes, Inc.
17-   2-3-   26.73 acres bordering on Fifth Street S.E. and Austin Drive from R1-75 to RMF,
1969  1969   at request of DeMund Homes, Inc.
18-   2-3-   13.72 acres north of Lockwood Road from R1-75 to Public Facilities, at request
1969  1969   of DeMund Homes, Inc.
19-   2-3-   11.48 acres bordering on Fifth Street S.E. and Lockwood Road from R1-75 to
1969  1969   Public Facilities, at request of DeMund Homes, Inc.
40-   3-3-   40.59 acres north of Austin Drive from R1-75 to RMF, at request of DeMund Homes,
1969  1969   Inc.
99-   5-5-   Lots 209 through 211 of Easter Heights allotment from R1-40 to General
1969  1969   Residential.
100-  7-7-   Lots 191 through 193 of Columbia Heights allotment from R1-40 to R2-F.
1969  1969
168-  7-14-  Lots 1 through 4 of E. Barberton allotment from R2-F to R1-50.
1969  1969
279-  12-15- Lot 163 of Hudson Heights allotment from R1-40 to RMF.
1969  1969
72-   4-6-   The south seven and one-half of Lot 19 and north 30 feet of Lot 20 of Pittsburgh
1970  1970   Valve & Fittings Co.’s allotment from R2-F to BG.
104-  6-1-   Lots 87, 88, 89 and 90 of Barberside allotment from R1-40 to General Business.
1970  1970
199-  7-27-  Lots 86 through 91 and Lots 115 through 118 of Orchardview allotment from R1-40
1970  1970   and R2-F to RG.
348-  12-7-  Lot 164 of Hudson Heights No. 2 allotment from R1-40 to R2-F.
1970  1970
359-  12-21- Lots 15 and 16, Tract 15, of original Coventry Township, from R1-75 and R1-60 to
1970  1970   RG.
150-  7-12-  Lot 137 and part of Lot 136 of Rose allotment from R1-50 to R2-F.
1971  1971
151-  7-6-   Part of Lots 1 through 7 of O.L. 6, Middle Tract 14 of Coventry Township, from
1971  1971   R1-40 and RMF to Public Facilities.
237-  12-20- Lots 75 and 76 in Siegwarth allotment from R1-50 to R2-F.
1971  1971
240-  11-15- 18.0044 acres of Tract 14, formerly Coventry Township, bordering Lockwood Road,
1971  1971   from R1-75 to RMF.
270-  12-20- Part of northeast corner of Lot 65 from R1-60 to General Residential.
1971  1971
103-  6-12-  Part of Lot 1016 of E. Barberton allotment, Second Addition, from RMF to Public
1972  1972   Facilities.
240-  11-6-  Lots 151 and 152 of E. Barberton Land Co. allotment from R2-F to RMF.
1972  1972
259-  12-4-  Lot 7 of New Portage allotment from R2-F to General Business.
1972  1972
70-   4-16-  Part of Lot 15, Tract 15 of original Coventry Township, from R1-60 to RMF.
1973  1973
104-  5-21-  Lots 134 and 135 of Lawson Subdivision from R1-75 to RG.
1973  1973
109-  6-5-   Adopting a new zoning map of the city.
1972  1972
166-  7-30-  Two parcels in Tract 14, Original Coventry Township, from R1-75 to RMF.
1973  1973
258-  9-26-  Parts of Lot 60, Norton Township, from RG and BP to Office Building District.
1973  1973
3-    1-21-  Lots 136 and 137 of the Lawson Subdivision, Unrecorded, from R1-75 to RG.
1974  1974
4-    1-21-  Lots 139 through 143 of the Lawson Subdivision, unrecorded, from R1-60 to RG.
1974  1974
29-   1-21-  Part of Lot 16, Tract 15, Coventry Township, from R1-60 to General Business.
1974  1974
69-   3-4-   Lots 207 (Pramik), 208 (Killoran), 209 (Pavkov), 210 (Zema) and 215 (Farr), from
1974  1974   R1-75 to RG.
70-   3-4-   Part of Original Lot 76, formerly Norton Township, from R2F and General Service
1974  1974   to RMF.
174-  5-20-  Part of Original Lot 76, Norton Township, from General Service to RG.
1974  1974
184-  6-3-   Part of Lot 16, Tract 15, Coventry Township, from R1-60 to RG.
1974  1974
200-  6-17-  Lots 3 and 4 of Hudson Heights No. 1 allotment, from R1-40 to RMF.
1974  1974
219-  7-1-   Lots 14 through 27 of the Columbia Lakes allotment, from R2F to RMF.
1974  1974
429-  1-6-   Lots 10 and 11 in New Portage allotment, from R2F to General Industrial
1974  1975   Classification.
430-  12-16- Sublots 16 through 20 of Shenandoah Highlands, Section “A”, from RMF to R1-75.
1974  1974
22-   3-3-   Part of Lots 15 and 16 of Lawson Subdivision from R1-75 to General Residential
1975  1975   Classification.
23-   2-3-   Part of Lot 65 of Norton Township, from R1-60 to General Residential.
1975  1975
258-  7-21-  Part of Lot 16 of Lawson Subdivision, from R1-60 to R2F.
1975  1975
342-  9-15-  3.1035 acres in Tract 14, from R1-75 to PF.
1975  1975
343-  9-15-  2.9268 acres in Tract 14, from RMF to R1-75.
1975  1975
72-   4-5-   452 Fourth Street N.W., from R2F to General Business.
1976  1976
136-  6-21-  Three parcels in the city, from R1-40 to General Industrial.
1976  1976
311-  12-6-  Lots 153 to 155 of Barberton allotment, from R1-40 to General Business.
1976  1976
327-  12-20- Lot 4 of Galehouse Landis allotment, from R2F to General Service.
1976  1976
95-   5-16-  Part of Original Lot 76, from RMF to B-G.
1977  1977
96-   5-16-  Part of Original Lot 76, from RMF to B-G.
1977  1977
296-  11-7-  Part of Lot 60, Norton Township, Lot 78, Subdivision 2, Pittsburgh Valve and
1977  1977   Fittings Co. allotment; and a parcel near Norton Avenue and Cornell Street, from
             RG and BP to BO.
37-   2-20-  Part of Lots 26 and 27, Shannonside allotment, from BL to BG.
1978  1978
113-  4-17-  Part of Original Lots 17 and 18, Tract 15, and part of Tract 14, formerly
1978  1978   Coventry Township, from R1-75 to PF.
114-  5-15-  Part of Lot 17, Tract 15, and part of Tract 14, formerly Coventry Township, from
1978  1978   PF and R1-75 to RMF.
115-  5-15-  Part of Lot 17, Tract 15, formerly Coventry Township, from RMF to BG.
1978  1978
330-  11-20- Part of Lot 69, formerly Norton Township, from IG to IS.
1978  1978
331-  11-20- Part of Lot 6, Tract 14, formerly Coventry Township, from IS to IG.
1978  1978
22-   2-5-   Part of O.L. 96, formerly Norton Township, from Single-Family and BL to RG.
1979  1979
159-  7-16-  Lots 92, 104 and 105, Hudson Heights No. 2 allotment, from GS to R2F.
1979  1979
188-  8-27-  Part of Lot 76, formerly Norton Township, from BL and RMF to BG.
1979  1979
211-  9-17-  Lots 150 through 155 in the Homewood Ranch allotment, and Lots 179 and 180 in
1979  1979   the First Addition to the Homewood Ranch allotment, classified R1-60.
253-  11-5-  Part of Lot 19, Tract 15, formerly Coventry Township, from R1-75 to PF.
1979  1979
15-   1-21-  Lots 1, 2 and 3 of the Barber Park allotment, from R1-50 to BO.
1980  1980
65-   3-17-  Part of Lot 15, Tract 15, Coventry Township, from R1-75 to PBO.
1980  1980
20-   3-23-  Part of Lot 4, Middle Tract 14, Coventry Township, from Single-Family
1981  1981   Residential to RMF.
64-   5-24-  Part of Lot 15, Tract 15, formerly Coventry Township, from R1-75 to BG.
1982  1982
65-   - -    Lots 160, 161, 162 and 164 in Columbia Heights allotment No. 2, from R1-40 to
1982  1982   RG.
213-  9-27-  Part of Sublot 219 of Lawson Subdivision, from RG to PBO.
1982  1982
140-  7-22-  66 Fourteenth Street N.W., from R2F to GB, and 79 to 83 Fifteenth Street N.W.,
1985  1985   from R2F to BP.
142-  7-22-  Eight lots adjoining Pleasant View Health Care Center, from R1-60 and GB to GR.
1985  1985
172-  2-10-  Lots 401 and 402 and part of Lot 403 of Barberton allotment, from GB to GS.
1985  1986
211-  10-28- 111 E. Tuscarawas Avenue, from GB to GI.
1985  1985
226-  1-27-  Southeast corner of Robinson Avenue and First Street S.E., from R1-60 to GB.
1985  1986
227-  1-27-  Southeast corner of Robinson Avenue and First Street S.E., from R1-60 to PGB.
1985  1986
283-  12-23- 101 E. Robinson Avenue, from BO to GS.
1985  1985
89-   4-14-  Lots 334, 336, 338, 340, 342 and 344 of N. Barberton allotment, from R1-40 to
1986  1986   RMF.
48-   2-10-  Property on Shannon Avenue, from R1-60 to GB.
1986  1986
130-  7-28-  300 Fifth Street S.E., from R1-75 to LB.
1986  1986
281-  11-24- 290 Sixth Street, N.W., from R2F to GR.
1986  1986
282-  12-1-  233 and 237 First Street N., from RMF to GB.
1986  1986
23-   1-26-  South side of Lamberton Avenue between First Street S.E. and Frank Avenue, from
1987  1987   SF to R2F.
108-  4-13-  232 Grace Avenue, from R1-60 to R1-50.
1987  1987
137-  6-15-  Property at Wooster Road W. and Eighteenth Street S.W., from R2F to GB.
1987  1987
187-  8-31-  346 Third Street N.W., from R2F to BP.
1987  1987
253-  11-9-  210-212 Second Street, from GB to BP.
1987  1987
15-   2-22-  Old Washington School property, from PF to LB.
1988  1988
164-  9-12-  112 Seventeenth Street N.W., from R1-40 to BP.
1988  1988
223-  12-12- 15 Twenty-fifth Street S.W. and 16 Twenty-fifth Street S.W., from R2F to GB.
1988  1988
191-  9-25-  Property located at Wooster Road N. at the Erie R.R. overpass, from R2F to BP.
1989  1989
7-    1-16-  249 - Thirty-first Street N.W., from R1-40 to GR.
1990  1990
76-   4-9-   South portion of Block 10, from BP to GP.
1990  1990
82-   4-23-  Lots 12 and 15 of the Galehouse Steele allotment, from R1-40 to LB.
1990  1990
107-  6-24-  Property at the corner of Fifth Street N.E. and Taft Avenue, from LB to GS.
1991  1991
117-  9-9-   Lots 999, 1000 and 1001 on Lake Avenue, and Lots 1026, 1027, 1028, 1029 and 1030
1991  1991   on Paige Avenue, from R1-50 to BP.
118-  9-9-   Property on the east side of Fifth Street N.E., between Paige and Lake Avenues,
1991  1991   from RMF to OB.
186-  12-23- 3.26 acres on Second Street S.W., from R1-60 to GR.
1991  1991
187-  12-9-  381 Snyder Avenue, from R1-60 to GR.
1991  1991
81-   6-8-   64-68 W. State Street, from Single-Family Residential to BL.
1992  1992
113-  7-27-  21.85 acres at the northeast corner of Norton Avenue and Clark Hill Road, from
1992  1992   R1-50 to IG.
19-   3-22-  23.47 acres on Austin Drive, from RG and PBO to Planned Residential District.
1993  1993
23-   2-14-  206 Norton Avenue, from RMF to BP.
1994  1994
26-   2-28-  262 and 276 Thirty- first Street N.W. (Moose Lodge #759), from R1-75 to RG.
1994  1994
47-   3-28-  21 Brown Street, from R2F to BP; and 36 Brown Street, from R2F to IG.
1994  1994
112-  7-25-  83 E. State Street, from R1-50 to GS.
1994  1994
132-  7-22-  1.478 acres in the Columbia Lake allotment, owned by PPG Industries, from LC to
1996  1996   II.
75-   4-28-  499.5366 acres annexed by Ord. 20-1997, zoned AE.
1997  1997
98-   6-9-   1291 Wooster Road N., owned by Forrest Motors of Ohio, Inc., from C-3 to C-4.
1997  1997
149-  9-8-   Property located at the corner of E. Tuscarawas Avenue and Third Street N.E.
1997  1997   (the Babbin property), from RS-50 to RT-40.
237-  11-22- Authorizing the creation of a Traditional Neighborhood Overlay (TNO) District
1999  1999   and a Derivative Architecture Overlay (DAO) District and Land Conservation (LC)
             underlying zoning for the Annexation Master Plan area.
238-  11-22- 643 Holmes Avenue, from RT-40 to I-2.
1999  1999
41-   4-9-   53.6706 acres of property on State Street, annexed by Ord. 72-1998, from AE to
2001  2001   RS-100
48-   4-23-  290 Ninth Street N.E., from RS-40 to O-1.
2001  2001
163-  9-10-  528 East Lake Avenue, 534 East Lake Avenue and 538 East Lake Avenue, from RS-50
2001  2001   to O-2.
231-  12-10- 103 E. State Street, from RS-40 to I-1.
2001  2001
34-   3-11-  Van Hyning Neighborhood, from RT-40 to RS-40.
2002  2002
35-   3-11-  1193 Wooster Road N., from C-3 to C-4.
2002  2002
130-  10-14- 1.059 acres on the northeast corner of East State Street, from RS-100 to O-1.
2002  2002
69-   5-27-  759 Wooster Road N. (Z1-2003), from RM-18 to C-3.
2003  2003
70-   5-27-  373 Wooster Road N. (Z2-2003), from RT-4 to C-3.
2003  2003
63-   4-12-  Parcel #0116056 on Eastern Road, from LC to M.
2004  2004
108-  6-28-  Eight acres of Tuscora Parkland from RS-50 to O-2.
2004  2004
186-  11-22- 82 through 92 Fifth Street S.E., from O-2 to C-2.
2004  2004
16-   2-14-  Removal of three Transitional Overlay Districts from the City Zoning Map,
2005  2005   located in the north end of the city, to revert to their base zoning of RS-40.
103-  7-25-  164 Sixth Street N.W., from RM-30 to O-1.
2005  2005
131-  9-12-  55, 59 and 63 Hiram from C-3 to RS-40 in order to convert the properties back to
2005  2005   a residential zoning.
150-  10-10- 72 Fifth Street from O-2 to C-2 for the construction of a restaurant.
2005  2005
161-  10-24- 336 and 340 Snyder Avenue from RS-40 to RT-40 in order to convert the structure
2005  2005   into two units.
162-  12-12- 156 Sixth Street N.W., from RM-30 to O-1 for law offices.
2005  2005
195-  12-12- Certain parcels located at 1135 Wooster Road N., owned by Cuyahoga Landmark,
2005  2005   Inc., from C-3 to C-4.
53-   4-10-  Rezoning of three parcels known as Russell Avenue Landfill from RS-40 to I-1.
2006  2006
83-   5-22-  Annexed property on Lockwood Road, parcel #74-00269 from AE to RS-70.
2006  2006
145-  9-11-  Various parcels located on Fourth Street N.W., from RT-40 to C-3.
2006  2006
196-  10-23- Ten parcels to C-3 which are located in the W. Hopocan Avenue area where the New
2006  2006   Lake Anna Community Center (YMCA) Facility and parking areas will be located.
205-  11-13- 584 S. Van Buren Avenue, from RS-40 to I-1.
2006  2006
3-    1-8-   Rezoning parcels #01.13914 and #46.07980, vacant parcels owned by the Akron
2007  2007   Barberton Cluster Railway Company, from RS-40 to I-1.
110-  7-9-   Rezoning of parcel on Barber Road, from RS-50 to C-4.
2007  2007
117-  7-23-  Rezoning certain parcels on Fourth Street N.W., from I-1 and RT-40 to C-3.
2007  2007
118-  7-23-  Rezoning 670 Wooster Road N., from RM-18 to C-3.
2007  2007
119-  7-23-  Rezoning 459 Fourth Street N.W., from RT-40 to O-1.
2007  2007
120-  7-23-  Rezoning of 440 Fourth Street N.W., from RT-40 to O-1.
2007  2007
133-  9-10-  Rezoning of two parcels at 469 W. Lake Avenue: parcel #01.09320 from RM-30 to CD
2007  2007   and parcel #01.10258 from C-3 to CD.
167-  11-13- Rezoning eight parcels located on W. Hopocan Avenue, Wunderlich Avenue and Third
2007  2007   Street N.W. from RT40 to C3.
95-   6-9-   Rezoning 164 Sixth Street, NW from O-1 to RS40.
2008  2008
169-  9-22-  Rezoning 392 E State Street, parcel #01.06304, from RS40 to O-1.
2008  2008
23-   2-9-   Rezoning 546 Snyder Avenue, parcel #01.11935, from C-1 to C-2.
2009  2009
43-   3-23-  Rezoning 527 W. Lake Avenue, parcel #01.12849, from RM30 to O1.
2009  2009
140-  9-14-  Rezoning various Thirtieth Street N.W., parcels from C2 to RS40.
2009  2009
209-  11-23- Rezoning of 420-440 S. Van Buren Avenue (Washington Square Apartments), from RS-
2009  2009   40 to RM-18.
154-  10-11- Rezoning various parcels on Wooster Road N., parcels #01.02479, #01.14379,
2010  2010   #01.02478 and #01.10569, from RM-18 to C-3.
12-   2-14-  Rezoning of 771 and 779 Wooster Road N., parcel #01.14378, from RM-18 to C-3.
2011  2011
22-   3-14-  Rezoning of 2070 W. Turkeyfoot Lake Road, parcels #7400218 and #7400217, from AE
2011  2011   to I-1, and the creation of a BPO for the development of the Lakeside Innovative
             Business Park.
78-   6-13-  Authorizing a change of use for the Fuller Street and Fourth Street N.W.
2011  2011   intersection, to be closed to thru traffic and open to emergency traffic only,
             due to anticipated traffic conditions at the New Middle School.
118-  7-9-   Authorizing the rezoning of Heritage Place Apartments, 39-41 Thirtieth Street,
2012  2012   from C-2 to RM-18.
60-   4-22-  Authorizing the rezoning of 125 Thirty-first Street N.W., from C2 (Neighborhood
2013  2013   Commercial) to RM-18 (Residential Multi-Family).
43-   5-11-  Authorizing the rezoning of parcels #01.16732 and #01.16733, from mixed zoning
2015  2015   to RS40 (Residential Single Family) and I2 (Medium Industrial) to I1 (Light
             Industrial).
158-  11-9-  Authorizing the rezoning of 438 Fifth Street N.E., parcels #01.05628, #01.05629,
2015  2015   #01.05630 and #01.05631, from RS50 (Residential Single Family) to C1
             (Convenience Commercial).
25-   4-25-  Authorizing the rezoning of 1058 Wooster Road W., from C2 (Neighborhood
2016  2016   Commercial) to RM18 (Residential Multi-Family).
118-  11-14- Authorizing the rezoning of 112 Snyder Avenue, from RS-40 (Residential Single
2016  2016   Family) to I1 (Light Industrial).
62-   7-10-  Authorizing the rezoning of parcel 01.16090 from AE (Agriculture & Estate
2017  2017   District) to RS-50 (Residential Single Family) and parcel #01.16060 from AE
             (Agriculture & Estate District) to C3 (Community Center Commercial).
110-  11-12- Authorizing the rezoning of 185 Third Street NW from RM30 (Residential Multi
2019  2019   Family) to CD (Commercial Downtown).
128-  12-9-  Authorizing the rezoning of 540 Wooster Road North from RM18 (Residential Multi
2019  2019   Family) to C2 (Neighborhood Commercial District).
107-  9-28-  Authorizing the rezoning of parcels 01.13729, 01.3727, 01.00555, and 01.01927
2020  2020   also known as 800 Wooster Road North from RS40, Residential Single Family to C3,
             Community Center Commercial.
01-   2-8-   Authorizing the rezoning of parcel 01.13686, a 4.04-acre parcel on Austin Drive,
2021  2021   from C3, Community Center Commercial to RA-16, Single Family Attached.
68-   7-12-  Authorizing the rezoning of parcel 01.16060, an 11.26-acre parcel at the
2021  2021   southwest corner of Eastern Road and Fairland Road, from C3, Communtiy Center
             Commercial to RS-50, Single-Family Detached.
69-   7-12-  Authorizing the rezoning of parcels 01.06960, 01.06961 and 01.06963, a 4.33-acre
2021  2021   parcel at 635 Norton Avenue from C3, Community Center Commercial to I2, Medium
             Industrial.
             Authorizing the rezoning of various parcels on Norton Avenue, Parcels 01.15727,
99-   10-11- 01.13934, 01.13935, 01.02305, to be rezoned from C3 (Community Center
2021  2021   Commercial) to I2 (Medium Industrial) and parcel 01.11042 be rezoned from RT-40
             (Two Family) to I2 (Medium Industrial.)
44-   5-9-   Rezoning 105 W. State Street (Parcel #01.16769) from RS40 (Single-Family
2022  2022   Detached) to C3 (Community Center Commercial).
88-   7-25-  Rezoning 2070 W. Turkeyfoot Lake Road (Parcels 74.00278 and 74.00217) from I1
2022  2022   (Light Industry) to RM18 (Residential Multi-Family).
94-   7-28-  Designating 100.5 acres in and around downtown Barberton, Ohio as the "Downtown
2025  2025   Barberton Community Entertainment District" pursuant to R.C. § 4301.80.
            
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Ohio Revised Code
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO OHIO REVISED CODE
ORC Section Code Section
ORC Section                     Code Section
1.02                            202.02
1.05                            202.02
1.14                            202.03
1.15                            202.03
1.23                            202.05
1.42                            202.03
1.43                            202.03
1.44                            202.02
1.45                            202.03
1.50                            202.06
1.55                            202.05
1.57                            202.04
1.58                            202.04
1.59                            202.02
128.01(A)                       606.31
128.96(F) - (H)                 606.31
128.99(A), (B)                  606.31
701.01                          202.02
901.51                          642.06
901.99(A)                       642.06
925.62                          618.06
925.99(B)                       618.06
951.02                          618.01
955.011(B)                      618.12
955.10                          618.095
955.21                          618.08
955.24                          618.09
955.25                          618.10
955.39                          618.11
955.43(A), (B)                  618.12
955.43(C)                       618.12
955.54                          618.23
955.99(B)                       618.095,
                                618.10
955.99(C)                       618.11
955.99(D)                       618.12
955.99(E)                       618.08
955.99(O)                       618.23
959.01                          618.02
959.02                          618.03
959.03                          618.04
959.13                          618.05
959.131                         618.05
959.15                          618.07
959.21                          618.25
959.99(B)                       618.03
959.99(C)                       618.04
959.99(C), (I)                  618.07
959.99(D)                       618.05
959.99(E)                       618.05
959.99(E)(2)                    618.02
959.99(E)(7)                    618.25
971.03(B)                       660.17
1349.17                         642.155
1349.99                         642.155
2307.44                         636.20
2901.01                         606.01
2901.02                         606.03
2901.03                         606.04
2901.04                         606.05
2901.05                         606.25
2901.09                         606.32
2901.11                         606.055
2901.13                         606.06
2901.21                         606.07
2901.22                         606.02
2901.23                         606.08
2901.24                         606.09
2903.05                         636.01 
2903.06                         333.08
2903.09                         636.001 
2903.10                         636.23
2903.13                         636.02
2903.14                         636.03
2903.16                         636.23
2903.21                         636.04
2903.211                        636.045
2903.22                         636.05
2903.31                         636.20
2903.311(B),(C)                 636.20
2905.03                         636.06
2905.12                         636.08
2907.01                         666.01
2907.04                         666.02
2907.06                         666.03
2907.08                         666.05
2907.09                         666.04
2907.10                         666.06
2907.23                         666.07
2907.231                        666.07
2907.24(A), (C)(1), (D), (E)    666.08
2907.241                        666.085
2907.25                         666.09
2907.26                         666.10
2907.31                         666.11
2907.311                        666.115
2907.33                         666.13
2907.35                         666.14
2907.36                         666.15
2907.37                         666.16
2907.38                         666.18
2907.39                         666.19
2907.40                         666.20
2909.01                         642.01
2909.03                         642.09
2909.06                         642.10
2909.07                         642.11
2909.09                         642.10
2909.11(B) - (D)                642.31
2909.31                         606.30
2911.21                         642.12
2911.211                        642.125
2911.23                         642.12
2911.32                         642.13
2913.01                         642.01
2913.02                         642.02
2913.03                         642.04
2913.04                         642.05
2913.07                         642.36
2913.11                         642.14
2913.21                         642.15
2913.31(B), (C)(2)              642.145
2913.32                         642.146
2913.33                         642.16
2913.40                         642.35
2913.401                        642.35
2913.41                         642.17
2913.42                         642.18
2913.43                         642.19
2913.44                         642.20
2913.441                        606.27
2913.45                         642.21
2913.47                         642.08
2913.48                         642.34
2913.51                         642.22
2913.61(B) - (E)                642.30
2913.71                         642.03
2913.72                         642.03
2915.01                         630.01
2915.02(A) - (G), (K)           630.02
2915.03                         630.03
2915.04                         630.04
2915.05                         630.05
2915.06                         630.14
2915.09                         630.06
2915.091                        630.10
2915.092                        630.11
2915.093                        630.12
2915.094                        630.13
2915.10                         630.07
2915.11                         630.08
2915.12                         630.09
2915.13                         630.12
2915.14                         630.15
2917.01                         648.14
2917.03                         648.01
2917.031                        648.01
2917.04                         648.02
2917.05                         648.03
2917.11                         648.04
2917.12                         648.06
2917.13                         648.07
2917.14                         648.15
2917.21                         636.14
2917.31                         648.08
2917.32                         648.09
2917.40                         636.19
2917.41                         642.33
2919.18                         636.24
2919.21                         636.10
2919.22(A) - (E), (H)           634.01
2919.23                         634.02
2919.24                         634.03
2919.25                         636.18
2919.27                         636.045
2921.01                         606.01
2921.13                         606.10
2921.14                         606.105
2921.21                         606.11
2921.22                         606.12
2921.23                         606.13
2921.29                         606.30
2921.31                         606.15
2921.32                         606.15
2921.321                        618.21
2921.33                         606.15
2921.331(A) - (C), (E), (F)     606.16
2921.36                         612.09
2921.42                         606.17
2921.43                         606.18
2921.44                         606.19
2921.45                         606.20
2921.51                         606.26
2921.52(A) - (D)                606.29
2923.02                         606.21
2923.03                         606.22
2923.11                         672.01;
                                672.12
2923.12                         672.02
2923.122(C) - (G)               672.18
2923.1211(B), (C)               672.19
2923.1212                       672.19
2923.126                        672.19
2923.131                        672.025
2923.15                         672.03
2923.16                         672.04
2923.18                         672.07
2923.19                         672.08
2923.20                         672.09
2923.201                        672.20
2923.211                        672.105
2923.24                         672.17
2925.01                         624.01
2925.03(A) - (C)                624.02
2925.04(A), (B), (C)(5), (G)    624.025
2925.11(A) - (C)(2)             624.03
2925.11(C)(7) - (E), (I)        624.03
2925.12                         624.04
2925.13(A) - (C), (F)           624.05
2925.14                         624.14
2925.141                        624.14
2925.31                         624.07
2925.33                         624.076
2925.36(A) - (C)                624.08
2925.37(A), (G)                 624.16
2925.50                         624.11
2925.51                         624.10
2925.511                        624.10
2925.55                         624.15
2925.56                         624.15
2925.57                         624.15
2925.58                         624.15
2925.62                         624.20
2925.32(B)(4), (D)(2), (F), (G) 624.073
2927.02                         634.06
2927.021                        634.06
2927.022                        634.06
2927.023                        634.06
2927.024                        634.06
2927.03                         636.22
2927.11                         642.23
2927.12                         636.21
2927.15                         636.25
2927.17                         666.21
2929.21                         698.02
2929.22                         698.03
2929.23                         666.99
2929.24                         698.02
2929.25                         698.02
2929.26                         698.02
2929.27                         698.02
2929.28                         698.02
2929.31                         698.04
2929.41                         698.05
2935.041                        606.23
2935.36(E)                      698.01
2981.07                         642.28
2981.11                         606.24
2981.12                         606.24
2981.13(A)                      606.24
3701.81                         660.02
3701.82                         660.01
3701.99(B)                      660.01
3701.99(C)                      660.02
3715.05                         624.15
3715.06                         624.15
3716.11                         636.15
3716.99(C)                      636.15
3719.01                         624.01
3719.011                        624.01
3719.013                        624.01
3719.08(A), (E)                 624.13
3719.172(A), (B)                624.09
3719.19                         624.11
3719.99(C)                      624.13
3719.99(E)                      624.09
3743.01                         672.12
3743.45                         672.12
3743.54                         672.12
3743.60(E) - (L)                672.12
3743.61(E) - (J)                672.12
3743.63                         672.12
3743.64                         672.12
3743.65(A) - (E), (G), (H)      672.12
3743.66                         672.12
3743.68(B)                      672.12
3743.80                         672.12
3743.99(C), (D), (F) - (H)      672.12
3767.13                         660.04
3767.29                         660.06
3767.99(B)                      660.06
3781.11(B)                      1404.06
3781.55                         666.04
4301.01                         612.01
4301.22                         612.03;
                                612.10
4301.244                        612.01
4301.62                         612.07
4301.63                         612.02
4301.631                        612.10
4301.633                        612.02
4301.634                        612.02
4301.637                        612.06
4301.64                         612.04
4301.65                         612.11
4301.69                         612.02
4301.70                         612.06
4301.99(A)                      612.06
4301.99(B)                      612.04;
                                612.10
4301.99(C)                      612.02
4301.99(D)                      612.02
4301.99(D), (H)                 612.03
4301.99(E)                      612.02;
                                612.10
4301.99(F)                      612.02
4301.99(I)                      612.02
4301.99(J)                      612.11
4303.25                         612.05
4303.202(D)(2)                  612.08
4303.208(C)                     612.08
4303.99(D)                      612.08
4501.01(LL)                     301.065
4501.01(TT)                     371.12
4503.11(A)                      335.09
4503.11(D)                      335.09
4503.111(A), (C)                335.09
4503.111(B)                     335.09
4503.12(A)                      335.09
4503.12(D)                      335.09
4503.21(A), (B)                 335.09
4503.21(C)                      335.09
4505.18                         335.08
4506.01                         341.01
4506.011                        341.02
4506.04(A), (B)                 341.03
4506.04(C)                      341.03
4506.10(A), (E)                 341.04
4506.12(J)                      341.03
4506.12(I)                      341.03
4506.15                         341.05
4506.19                         341.06
4506.20                         341.07
4506.23                         341.08
4507.02(A)(1)                   335.01
4507.02(A)(2)                   335.02
4507.03                         335.01
4507.04                         335.01
4507.05(F), (I)                 335.03
4507.071(B) - (J)               335.035
4507.30                         335.04
4507.35                         335.06
4507.99                         335.02
4509.102                        606.10
                                335.071;
4510.04                         335.073;
                                335.074,
                                335.075
4510.05                         303.99;
                                698.07
4510.11                         335.071
4510.111                        335.071
4510.12                         335.072
4510.14                         335.073
4510.16                         335.074
4510.21                         335.075
4510.037(J)                     335.071
4510.44                         333.011
4511.01                         301.495
4511.01(A)                      301.51
4511.01(B)                      301.20
4511.01(C)                      301.19
4511.01(D)                      301.11
4511.01(E)                      301.27
4511.01(F)                      301.35
4511.01(G)                      301.04
4511.01(H)                      301.195
4511.01(I)                      301.07
4511.01(J)                      301.02
4511.01(K)                      301.49
4511.01(L)                      301.05
4511.01(M)                      301.48
4511.01(N)                      301.36
4511.01(O)                      301.24
4511.01(P)                      301.28
4511.01(Q)                      301.30
4511.01(T)                      301.12
4511.01(U)                      301.14
4511.01(V)                      301.16
4511.01(W)                      301.23
4511.01(X)                      301.22
4511.01(Y)                      301.10
4511.01(Z)                      301.25
4511.01(BB)                     301.42
4511.01(CC)                     301.08
4511.01(DD)                     301.26
4511.01(EE)                     301.33
4511.01(FF)                     301.37
4511.01(GG)                     301.165
4511.01(HH)                     301.42
4511.01(II)                     301.375
4511.01(JJ)                     301.38
4511.01(KK)                     301.17
4511.01(LL)                     301.09
4511.01(MM)                     301.34
4511.01(NN)                     301.06
4511.01(OO)                     301.31
4511.01(QQ)                     301.46
4511.01(PP)                     301.50
4511.01(RR)                     301.47
4511.01(SS)                     301.29
4511.01(TT)                     301.45
4511.01(UU)                     301.32
4511.01(VV)                     301.335
4511.01(WW)                     301.155
4511.01(XX)                     301.03
4511.01(YY)                     301.15
4511.01(ZZ)                     301.13
4511.01(AAA)                    301.44
4511.01(BBB)                    301.41
4511.01(CCC)                    301.42
4511.01(DDD)                    301.315
4511.01(EEE)                    301.197
4511.01(FFF)                    301.067
4511.01(GGG)                    301.205
4511.01(HHH)                    301.207
4511.01(III)                    301.255
4511.01(JJJ)                    301.325
4511.01(KKK)                    301.035
4511.01(LLL)                    301.167
4511.01(MMM)                    301.165
4511.01(NNN)                    301.185
4511.01(OOO)                    301.257
4511.01(PPP)                    301.365
4511.01(QQQ)                    301.163
4511.01(RRR)                    301.52
4511.01(WWW)                    301.183
4511.03                         331.20
4511.031                        313.11
4511.04                         303.04
4511.041                        303.035
4511.042                        303.035
4511.05                         303.05
4511.051                        303.06
4511.12(A)                      313.01
4511.12(B)                      313.01
4511.121(A)-(C), (E)            313.01
4511.121(D)                     313.01
4511.13                         313.03
4511.131                        313.04
4511.132                        331.165
4511.14                         313.05
4511.16                         313.07
4511.17                         313.08
4511.18                         313.10
4511.181                        333.01
4511.19(A) - (F)                333.01
4511.19(G) - (M)                333.01
4511.191(A)                     333.01
4511.191(D)                     333.01
4511.192                        333.01
4511.194                        333.01
4511.20                         333.02
4511.201                        333.02
4511.202                        331.34
4511.203                        335.05
4511.205                        331.46
4511.21(A) - (F)                333.03
4511.21(G)                      333.03
4511.21(P)                      333.03
4511.21(O)                      333.03
4511.211(A) - (E)               333.035
4511.211(F)                     333.035
4511.213                        331.215
4511.214                        333.09
4511.215                        333.09
4511.216                        333.09
4511.22                         333.04
4511.23                         333.05
4511.24                         333.06
4511.25                         331.01
4511.251                        333.07
4511.26                         331.02
4511.27                         331.03
4511.28                         331.04
4511.29                         331.05
4511.30                         331.06
4511.31                         331.07
4511.32                         331.30
4511.33                         331.08
4511.34                         331.09
4511.35                         331.31
4511.36                         331.10
4511.37                         331.12
4511.38                         331.13
4511.39                         331.14
4511.40                         331.15
4511.41                         331.16
4511.42                         331.17
4511.43                         331.18
4511.431                        331.22
4511.432(A) - (C), (E)          331.235
4511.432(D)                     331.235
4511.44                         331.22
4511.441                        371.07
4511.45                         331.21
4511.451                        331.24
4511.452                        371.08
4511.454                        331.21
4511.46                         371.01
4511.47                         371.02
4511.48                         371.03
4511.481                        371.09
4511.49                         371.04
4511.491                        371.11
4511.50                         371.05
4511.51                         371.06
4511.511                        371.10
4511.512                        371.12
4511.513                        371.13
4511.514                        371.14
4511.52                         373.01
4511.521                        373.18
4511.522                        373.19
4511.53                         373.02
4511.54                         373.03
4511.55                         373.04
4511.56                         373.05
4511.60                         331.29
4511.61                         331.41
4511.62                         331.39
4511.63                         331.40
4511.64                         331.41
4511.65                         313.02
4511.66                         351.12
4511.661                        351.07
4511.67                         351.01
4511.70                         331.25;
                                351.08
4511.701                        331.35
4511.71(A)                      331.26
4511.71(B)                      331.26
4511.711                        331.37
4511.712                        331.33
4511.713(A), (B)                331.42
4511.714(A), (B)                331.26
4511.714(C)                     331.26
4511.714(D)                     331.26
4511.72(A)                      331.27
4511.72(B)                      331.27
4511.73                         331.28
4511.74(C)                      311.01
4511.75                         331.38
4511.79                         341.09
4511.80                         341.10
4511.81(A) - (H), (K), (L)      337.28
4511.82(A), (B), (D)            331.43
4511.82(C)                      331.43
4511.84                         331.44
4511.85                         339.13
4511.99                         303.99
4511.991                        303.99
4513.02(A), (H)                 337.01
4513.021                        337.015
4513.03                         337.02
4513.04                         337.03
4513.05                         337.04
4513.06                         337.05
4513.07                         337.06
4513.071                        337.24
4513.08                         337.07
4513.09                         337.08
4513.10                         337.09
4513.11                         337.10
4513.111                        337.10
4513.112                        337.10
4513.113                        337.10
4513.114                        337.10
4513.115                        337.10
4513.12                         337.11
4513.13                         337.12
4513.14                         337.13
4513.15                         337.14
4513.16                         337.15
4513.17                         337.16
4513.171                        337.165
4513.18                         337.26
4513.182                        337.27
4513.19                         337.17
4513.20                         337.18
4513.21                         337.19
4513.22                         337.20
4513.23                         337.21
4513.24                         337.22
4513.241(C) - (J)               337.225
4513.241(K)                     337.225
4513.29                         339.06
4513.30                         337.23
4513.31                         339.08
4513.32                         339.07
4513.33                         339.12
4513.34                         339.01
4513.361                        303.12
4513.61                         303.09
4513.64                         303.09
4513.66                         335.15
4513.68                         335.15
                                337.09;
                                337.18;
                                337.225;
                                337.23;
4513.99                         337.26;
                                337.27;
                                339.01;
                                339.07;
                                339.08
4519.01                         375.01
4519.02                         375.08
4519.20(A), (B)                 375.02
4519.20(C)                      375.02
4519.40                         375.03
4519.401                        333.09
4519.41                         375.04
4519.44                         375.05
4519.46                         375.06
4519.48                         375.07
4519.66                         375.09
4549.02                         335.12
4549.021                        335.13
4549.03                         335.14
4549.05                         303.03
4549.08                         335.11
4549.081(B)                     313.01
4549.081(C)                     313.01
4549.11(A)                      335.09
4549.11(B)                      335.09
4549.12(A)                      335.09
4549.12(B)                      335.09
4549.20                         337.30
4729.01                         624.01
4933.18                         642.29
4933.19                         642.29
5301.61                         642.24
5301.99                         642.24
5577.05                         339.03
5577.06                         339.03
5577.11                         339.05
5577.15                         339.07
5577.99(C)                      339.03
5577.99(E)                      339.05
5589.08                         339.10
5589.081                        339.11
5589.99(B)                      339.11
                                
`
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section 2020 Code Section
Prior Code Section 2020 Code Section
202.01             202.01
202.02             202.02
202.03             202.03
202.04             202.04
202.05             202.05
202.06             202.06
202.07             202.07
202.99             202.99
204.01             204.01
204.02             204.02
206.01             206.01
206.02             206.02
206.03             206.03
206.04             206.04
206.05             206.05
206.06             206.06
206.07             206.07
208.01             208.01
208.02             208.02
208.03             208.03
208.04             208.04
208.05             208.05
208.06             208.06
210.01             210.01
210.02             210.02
210.03             210.03
211.01             212.01
212.01             214.01
212.02             214.02
212.03             214.03
220.01             220.01
220.02             220.02
222.01             222.01
232.01             232.01
234.01             234.01
234.02             234.02
234.03             234.03
234.04             234.04
234.05             234.05
234.06             234.06
234.07             234.07
234.08             234.08
234.09             234.09
234.10             234.10
234.11             234.11
234.12             234.12
234.13             234.13
234.14             234.14
234.15             234.15
234.16             234.16
234.17             234.17
236.01             236.01
236.02             236.02
236.03             236.03
238.01             238.01
238.02             238.02
238.03             238.03
238.04             238.04
238.05             238.05
238.06             238.06
240.02             240.01
240.03             240.02
240.04             240.03
240.05             240.04
240.06             240.05
242.01             242.01
246.01             246.01
246.02             246.02
248.01             248.01
252.01             252.01
252.02             252.02
252.03             252.03
252.04             252.04
252.05             252.05
252.06             252.06
252.07             252.07
252.08             252.08
252.09             252.09
252.10             252.10
252.11             252.11
252.12             252.12
252.13             252.13
252.14             252.14
252.15             252.15
253.01             253.01
254.01             254.01
254.02             254.02
254.03             254.03
254.04             254.04
254.05             254.05
254.06             254.06
254.07             254.07
254.08             254.08
254.085            254.09
254.09             254.10
254.10             254.11
254.11             254.12
254.12             254.13
254.14             254.14
254.15             254.15
256.01             256.01
264.01             264.01
266.01             266.01
266.02             266.02
266.03             266.03
266.04             266.04
276.01             274.01
276.02             274.02
276.03             274.03
276.04             274.04
276.05             274.05
277.01             276.01
277.02             276.02
277.03             276.03
277.04             276.04
285.01             280.01
287.01             282.01
288.01             284.01
289.01             286.01
289.02             286.02
290.01             298.01
290.02             298.02
290.03             298.03
290.04             298.04
804.01             804.01
804.02             804.02
804.99             804.99 
808.01             808.01
808.02             808.02
808.03             808.03
808.99             808.99
812.01             812.01
812.02             812.02
812.03             812.03
812.04             812.04
812.99             812.99
816.01             816.01
816.02             816.02
816.03             816.03
816.99             816.99
820.01             820.01
820.02             820.02
820.03             820.03
820.04             820.04
820.05             820.05
820.06             820.06
820.07             820.07
820.99             820.99
822.01             822.01
822.02             822.02
822.03             822.03
822.04             822.04
822.05             822.05
822.06             822.06
822.07             822.07
822.08             822.08
822.09             822.09
822.10             822.10
822.11             822.11
822.12             822.12
822.13             822.13
822.14             822.14
822.15             822.15
822.16             822.16
824.01             824.01
824.02             824.02
824.03             824.03
824.04             824.04
824.05             824.05
824.99             824.99
828.01             828.01
828.99             828.99
830.01             830.01
830.02             830.02
830.99             830.99 
832.01             832.01
832.02             832.02
832.03             832.03
832.04             832.04
832.05             832.05
832.06             832.06 
832.99             832.99
834.01             834.01
834.02             834.02
834.99             834.99
836.01             836.01
836.02             836.02
836.03             836.03
836.04             836.04
836.05             836.05
836.06             836.06
836.07             836.07
836.08             836.08
842.01             840.01
844.01             844.01
844.02             844.02
844.03             844.03
844.04             844.04
844.05             844.05
844.06             844.06
844.07             844.07
844.08             844.08
844.09             844.09
844.10             844.10
844.11             844.11
844.99             844.99 
848.01             848.01
848.99             848.99
852.01             852.01
852.02             852.02
852.03             852.03
852.04             852.04
852.05             852.05
852.06             852.06
852.07             852.07
852.08             852.08
852.09             852.09
852.10             852.10
852.99             852.99
860.01             860.01
860.02             860.02
860.03             860.03
860.04             860.04
860.05             860.05
860.06             860.06
860.07             860.07
860.08             860.08
860.09             860.09
860.10             860.10
860.11             860.11
860.12             860.12
860.99             860.99
862.01             862.01
862.99             862.99
864.01             862.99
864.02             864.02
864.03             864.03
864.04             864.04
864.05             864.05
864.06             864.06
864.07             864.07
864.08             864.08
864.09             864.09
864.10             864.10
864.11             864.11
864.12             864.12
864.13             864.13
864.99             864.99
866.01             866.01
866.02             866.02
866.03             866.03
866.04             866.04
866.05             866.05
866.06             866.06
866.07             866.07
866.08             866.08
866.09             866.09
866.10             866.10
866.11             866.11
866.12             866.12
866.13             866.13
866.14             866.14
866.99             866.99
868.01             868.01
868.02             868.02
868.03             868.03
868.99             868.99
870.01             870.01
870.02             870.02
870.99             870.99
872.01             872.01
872.02             872.02
872.03             872.03
872.04             872.04
872.05             872.05
872.06             872.06
872.07             872.07
872.08             872.08
872.09             872.09
872.99             872.99
874.01             874.01
874.02             874.02
874.03             874.03
874.04             874.04
874.05             874.05
874.06             874.06
874.99             874.99
876.01             876.01
876.02             876.02
880.011            880.01
880.012            880.01
880.013            880.01
880.014            880.01
880.02             880.02
880.03             880.03
880.041            880.04
880.042            880.04
880.043            880.04
880.051            880.05
880.052            880.05
880.053            880.05
880.061            880.06
880.062            880.06
880.063            880.06
880.064            880.06
880.065            880.06
880.07             880.07
880.081            880.08
880.082            880.08
880.083            880.08
880.084            880.08
880.085            880.08
880.091            880.09
880.092            880.09
880.093            880.09
880.094            880.09
880.095            880.09
880.096            880.09
880.10             880.10
880.11             880.11
880.12             880.12
880.131            880.13
880.132            880.13
880.133            880.13
880.134            880.13
880.14             880.14
880.15             880.15
880.16             880.16
880.17             880.17
880.18             880.18
880.19             880.19
880.20             880.20
880.201            880.20
880.202            880.20
880.97             880.21
880.98             880.22
880.99             880.99
881.01             884.01
881.02             884.02
881.03             884.03
881.04             884.04
881.05             884.05
881.06             884.06
1020.01            1020.01
1020.02            1020.02
1020.03            1020.03
1020.04            1020.04
1020.05            1020.05
1020.06            1020.06
1020.07            1020.07
1020.08            1020.08
1020.09            1020.09
1020.10            1020.10
1020.11            1020.11
1020.12            1020.12
1020.13            1020.13
1020.14            1020.14
1020.15            1020.15
1020.16            1020.16
1020.17            1020.17
1020.99            1020.99
1024.01            1024.01
1024.02            1024.02
1024.03            1024.03
1024.04            1024.04
1028.01            1028.01
1028.02            1028.02
1028.03            1028.03
1028.04            1028.04
1028.05            1028.05
1028.06            1028.06
1028.07            1028.07
1028.99            1028.99 
1032.01            1032.01
1032.02            1032.02
1032.03            1032.03
1032.04            1032.04
1032.99            1032.99
1040.02            1040.01
1040.03            1040.02
1040.04            1040.03
1040.05            1040.04
1040.06            1040.05
1040.07            1040.06
1040.08            1040.07
1040.09            1040.08
1040.10            1040.09
1040.11            1040.10
1040.12            1040.11
1040.13            1040.12
1040.99            1040.99
1044.02            1044.01
1044.04            1044.02
1044.05            1044.03
1054.01            1054.01
1054.02            1054.02
1054.04            1054.04
1054.05            1054.05
1054.06            1054.06
1054.07            1054.07
1054.08            1054.08
1054.09            1054.09
1054.10            1054.10
1054.11            1054.11
1054.12            1054.12
1054.13            1054.13
1054.14            1054.14
1054.15            1054.15
1054.16            1054.16
1054.17            1054.17
1054.18            1054.18
1054.19            1054.19
1054.20            1054.20
1054.21            1054.21
1054.22            1054.22
1054.23            1054.23
1054.24            1054.24
1054.25            1054.25
1054.26            1054.26
1054.27            1054.27
1054.28            1054.28
1054.29            1054.29
1054.30            1054.30
1054.31            1054.31
1054.32            1054.32
1054.33            1054.33
1054.34            1054.34
1054.35            1054.35
1054.99            1054.99
1056.01            1056.01
1056.02            1056.02
1056.03            1056.03
1056.04            1056.04
1056.05            1056.05
1056.06            1056.06
1056.07            1056.07
1056.08            1056.08
1056.09            1056.09
1056.10            1056.10
1056.11            1056.11
1056.12            1056.12
1056.13            1056.13
1056.14            1056.14
1056.15            1056.15
1056.16            1056.16
1056.17            1056.17
1056.18            1056.18
1056.19            1056.19
1056.20            1056.20
1056.21            1056.21
1058.01            1058.01
1058.02            1058.02
1060.01            1060.01
1060.02            1060.02
1060.03            1060.03
1060.04            1060.04
1060.05            1060.05
1060.06            1060.06
1060.07            1060.07
1060.08            1060.08
1060.99            1060.99
1062.01            1062.01
1062.02            1062.02
1062.03            1062.03
1068.01            1068.01
1068.02            1068.02
1068.025           1068.03
1068.03            1068.04
1068.04            1068.05
1068.05            1068.06
1068.06            1068.07
1068.07            1068.08
1068.08            1068.09
1068.99            1068.99
1072.01            1072.01
1072.02            1072.02
1072.03            1072.03
1072.04            1072.04
1072.05            1072.05
1072.06            1072.06
1072.07            1072.07
1072.08            1072.08
1072.09            1072.09
1072.10            1072.10
1072.99            1072.99
1074.01            1074.01
1074.02            1074.02 
1074.03            1074.03
1074.04            1074.04
1074.05            1074.05
1074.06            1074.06
1074.07            1074.07
1074.08            1074.08
1074.09            1074.09
1074.10            1074.10
1074.11            1074.11
1074.12            1074.12
1074.13            1074.13
1074.14            1074.14
1074.15            1074.15
1074.16            1074.16
1074.17            1074.17
1074.18            1074.18
1074.19            1074.19
1074.20            1074.20
1074.21            1074.21
1074.22            1074.22
1074.23            1074.23
1074.99            1074.99
1402.01            1402.01
1402.02            1402.02
1402.03            1402.03
1402.04            1402.04
1402.05            1402.05
1402.99            1402.99
1406.01            1404.01
1406.02            1404.02
1406.03            1404.03
1406.04            1404.04
1406.05            1404.05
1406.06            1404.06
1406.99            1404.99
1408.01            1406.01
1408.02            1406.02
1408.04            1406.03
1408.99            1406.99
1422.01            1422.01
1422.02            1422.02
1422.03            1422.03
1422.04            1422.04
1422.05            1422.05
1422.06            1422.06
1422.07            1422.07
1422.09            1422.08
1422.11            1422.09
1422.13            1422.10
1422.14            1422.11
1422.15            1422.12
1422.16            1422.13
1422.17            1422.14
1422.175           1422.15
1422.18            1422.16
1422.99            1422.99
1424.01            1424.01
1424.02            1424.02
1424.03            1424.03
1426.01            1426.01
1426.02            1426.02
1426.05            1426.03
1426.99            1426.99
1428.01            1428.01
1428.02            1428.02
1430.01            1430.01
1430.02            1430.02
1430.03            1430.03
1430.04            1430.04
1430.05            1430.05
1430.06            1430.06
1430.07            1430.07
1430.08            1430.08
1430.09            1430.09
1430.10            1430.10
1430.99            1430.99
1442.01            1442.01
1442.02            1442.02
1442.03            1442.03
1442.04            1442.04
1444.01            1444.01
1444.02            1444.02
1444.03            1444.03
1444.04            1444.04
1444.05            1444.05
1444.06            1444.06
1444.07            1444.07
1444.08            1444.08
1444.09            1444.09
1444.10            1444.10
1444.11            1444.11
1444.12            1444.12
1444.13            1444.13
1444.14            1444.14
1444.15            1444.15
1444.16            1444.16
1444.17            1444.17
1444.18            1444.18
1444.19            1444.19
1444.99            1444.99
1446.01            1446.01
1446.02            1446.02
1450.01            1448.01
1450.99            1448.99
1452.01            1450.01
1454.01            1452.01
1456.01            1454.01
1456.01            1454.02
1456.03            1454.03
1456.04            1454.04
1456.05            1454.05
1456.06            1454.06
1456.07            1454.07
1456.08            1454.08
1456.09            1454.09
1456.10            1454.10
1462.01            1462.01
1462.02            1462.02
1462.03            1462.03
1462.04            1462.04
1462.05            1462.05
1462.06            1462.06
1463.01            1464.01
1463.99            1464.99
1493.01            1476.01
1493.02            1476.02
1493.03            1476.03
1493.04            1476.04
1493.05            1476.05
1493.06            1476.06
1493.07            1476.07
1493.08            1476.08
1493.09            1476.09
1493.99            1476.99
1495.01            1478.01
1495.02            1478.02
1495.03            1478.03
1495.04            1478.04
1495.99            1478.99
1604.02            1604.01
1604.021           1604.02
1604.025           1604.03
1604.03            1604.04
1604.04            1604.05
1604.05            1604.06
1604.06            1604.07
1604.07            1604.08
1604.08            1604.09
1604.09            1604.10
1604.10            1604.11
1604.11            1604.12
1604.12            1604.13
1604.13            1604.14
1604.14            1604.15
1604.15            1604.16
1604.16            1604.17
1604.17            1604.18
1604.99            1604.99
1606.01            1606.01
1606.02            1606.02
1606.032           1606.03
1606.33            1606.04
1606.034           1606.05
1608.01            1608.01
1608.99            1608.99
1610.01            1610.01
1610.02            1610.02
1610.03            1610.03
1610.04            1610.04
1610.05            1610.05
1610.06            1610.06
1610.07            1610.07
1610.99            1610.99
1614.01            1612.01
1614.02            1612.02
1614.03            1612.03
1614.99            1612.99
                   
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No.    Date Passed Code Section
B. 3, P. 30 3-16-1903   TSO Table B
B. 3, P. 34 4-27-1903   TSO Table D
B. 4, P. 46 8-22-1904   TSO Table E
110         3-3-1913    TSO Table E
113         4-7-1913    TSO Table F
147         6-26-1913   TSO Table B
514         8-6-1917    TSO Table E
977         12-5-1921   TSO Table E
1092        12-4-1922   TSO Table D
1303        11-17-1924  TSO Table B
25-1928     3-5-1928    TSO Table D
75-1929     4-15-1929   TSO Table D
94-1929     5-6-1929    TSO Table D
146-1929    7-29-1929   TSO Table D
184-1929    10-7-1929   TSO Table D
185-1929    10-7-1929   TSO Table D
31-1930     4-7-1930    TSO Table B
27-1932     3-7-1932    TSO Table F
R-54-1933   12-18-1933  TSO Table A
11-1935     2-18-1935   TSO Table E
69-1935     11-18-1935  TSO Table B
R-74-1935   12-16-1935  TSO Table A
20-1963     2-11-1963   TSO Table E
21-1963     2-11-1963   TSO Table E
127         7-20-1964   TSO Table D
127-1964    7-20-1964   TSO Table E
205         11-16-1964  TSO Table D
408-1975    11-3-1975   204.02
59-1980     3-17-1980   266.04
186-1981    10-26-1981  240.01
256-1985    12-9-1985   TSO Table A
189-1991    12-23-1991  TSO Table A
202-1997    12-8-1997   220.02
158-2004    10-11-2004  TSO Table E
64-2006     4-24-2006   256.01
158-2012    9-24-2012   276.03
215-2012    12-17-2012  276.03
74-2013     5-13-2013   254.13
115-2013    7-8-2013    TSO Table E
2-2014      1-13-2014   TSO Table E
156-2017    12-11-2017  TSO Table E
138-2019    12-9-2019   TSO Table A
02-2020     2-10-2020   TSO Table A
04-2020     1-27-2020   TSO Table A
51-2020     4-27-2020   TSO Table A
88-2021     6-28-2021   TSO Table A
172-2022    12-12-2022  TSO Table A
181-2022    12-19-2022  TSO Table A
182-2022    12-19-2022  TSO Table A
5-2023      2-13-2023   TSO Table A
40-2023     3-27-2023   TSO Table A
50-2023     4-10-2023   TSO Table A
76-2023     5-22-2023   TSO Table A
80-2023     6-12-2023   TSO Table A
82-2023     6-12-2023   TSO Table A
3-2025      1-13-2025   TSO Table A
41-2025     4-14-2025   TSO Table A
68-2025     5-27-2025   TSO Table A
                       
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.     Date Passed Code Section
B. 1, P. 22  3-20-1893   TSO Table A
B. 1, P. 43  2-6-1894    TSO Table A
B. 1, P. 45  2-12-1894   TSO Table C
B. 1, P. 46  2-12-1894   TSO Table D
18           9-4-1894    TSO Table A
B. 1, P. 190 5-20-1895   TSO Table A
B. 1, P. 186 5-24-1895   TSO Table A
B. 1, P. 218 10-22-1895  TSO Table A
-            4-13-1896   TSO Table A
B. 1, P. 245 8-31-1896   TSO Table G
B. 1, P. 246 11-23-1896  TSO Table G
B. 1, P. 248 12-21-1896  TSO Table G
B. 1, P. 256 3-29-1897   TSO Table G
B. 1, P. 280 10-12-1898  TSO Table A
B. 1, P. 281 4-10-1899   TSO Table C
B. 1, P. 285 8-21-1899   TSO Table C
B. 2, P. 5   1-9-1900    TSO Table A
B. 2, P. 8   1-29-1900   TSO Table G
B. 2, P. 27  9-24-1900   TSO Table G
B. 2, P. 29  10-1-1900   TSO Table C
B. 2, P. 50  3-18-1901   TSO Table G
B. 2, P. 53  3-25-1901   TSO Table G
B. 2, P. 104 6-24-1901   TSO Table G
B. 2, P. 203 1-20-1902   TSO Table C
B. 3, P. 214 3-24-1902   TSO Table A
B. 2, P. 225 5-5-1902    TSO Table G
B. 2, P. 243 7-14-1902   TSO Table C
B. 2, P. 249 8-18-1902   TSO Table A
B. 2, P. 252 8-18-1902   TSO Table G
B. 2, P. 256 8-30-1902   TSO Table B
B. 2, P. 278 11-3-1902   TSO Table B
B. 3, P. 24  3-9-1903    TSO Table A
B. 3, P. 35  4-27-1903   TSO Table G
B. 3, P. 39  5-18-1903   TSO Table G
B. 3, P. 40  5-18-1903   TSO Table G
B. 3, P. 41  5-18-1903   TSO Table G
B. 3, P. 42  5-18-1903   TSO Table G
B. 3, P. 43  5-18-1903   TSO Table G
B. 3, P. 44  5-18-1903   TSO Table G
B. 3, P. 46  5-18-1903   TSO Table G
B. 3, P. 48  5-18-1903   TSO Table G
B. 3, P. 62  6-8-1903    TSO Table G
B. 3, P. 63  6-8-1903    TSO Table E
B. 3, P. 67  6-15-1903   TSO Table G
B. 3, P. 77  7-13-1903   TSO Table B
B. 3, P. 80  7-20-1903   TSO Table G
B. 3, P. 91  7-30-1903   TSO Table E
B. 3, P. 102 8-17-1903   TSO Table B
B. 3, P. 101 8-17-1903   TSO Table G
B. 3, P. 129 11-2-1903   TSO Table D
B. 3, P. 133 11-16-1903  TSO Table B
B. 3, P. 139 11-30-1903  TSO Table A
B. 3, P. 158 1-18-1904   TSO Table B
B. 3, P. 206 3-7-1904    TSO Table C
B. 3, P. 237 4-18-1904   TSO Table G
B. 3, P. 243 5-2-1904    TSO Table G
B. 3, P. 244 5-2-1904    TSO Table G
B. 3, P. 245 5-2-1904    TSO Table G
B. 3, P. 246 5-2-1904    TSO Table G
B. 3, P. 247 5-2-1904    TSO Table G
B. 3, P. 248 5-2-1904    TSO Table G
B. 3, P. 249 5-2-1904    TSO Table G
B. 3, P. 253 5-9-1904    TSO Table G
B. 3, P. 256 5-9-1904    TSO Table G
B. 3, P. 270 5-24-1904   TSO Table A
B. 3, P. 290 6-13-1904   TSO Table E
B. 4, P. 16  8-3-1904    TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 38  8-22-1904   TSO Table A
B. 4, P. 61  12-27-1904  TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 67  1-9-1905    TSO Table C
B. 4, P. 71  1-16-1905   TSO Table A
B. 4, P. 79  1-30-1905   TSO Table H
B. 4, P. 94  3-6-1905    TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 108 4-10-1905   TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 109 4-10-1905   TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 112 4-24-1905   TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 113 5-1-1905    TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 115 5-15-1905   TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 124 6-19-1905   TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 123 6-19-1905   TSO Table H
B. 4, P. 140 8-28-1905   TSO Table C
B. 4, P. 143 10-2-1905   TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 147 10-16-1905  TSO Table B
B. 4, P. 154 12-11-1905  TSO Table C
B. 4, P. 183 4-2-1906    TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 188 4-30-1906   TSO Table A
B. 4, P. 189 6-4-1906    TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 193 6-4-1906    TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 195 6-11-1906   TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 192 6-19-1906   TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 208 8-27-1906   TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 209 8-27-1906   TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 210 8-27-1906   TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 215 10-22-1906  TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 226 11-12-1906  TSO Table B
B. 4, P. 228 11-12-1906  TSO Table B
B. 4, P. 243 2-4-1907    TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 242 2-4-1907    TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 241 2-11-1907   TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 250 4-1-1907    TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 254 4-15-1907   TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 255 4-15-1907   TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 263 4-29-1907   TSO Table C
B. 4, P. 276 6-10-1907   TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 335 3-23-1908   TSO Table C
B. 4, P. 336 3-23-1908   TSO Table C
B. 4, P. 337 3-30-1908   TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 349 5-25-1908   TSO Table C
B. 4, P. 366 7-20-1908   TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 405 4-5-1909    TSO Table E
B. 4, P. 425 5-17-1909   TSO Table C
B. 4, P. 458 6-27-1910   TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 462 7-18-1910   TSO Table H
B. 4, P. 465 7-25-1910   TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 470 8-22-1910   TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 476 8-22-1910   TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 483 12-3-1910   TSO Table G
B. 4, P. 497 12-12-1910  TSO Table E
B. 5, P. 5   2-13-1911   TSO Table H
B. 5, P. 19  4-17-1911   TSO Table A
B. 5, P. 36  6-5-1911    TSO Table A
B. 5, P. 68  9-25-1911   TSO Table G
B. 5, P. 76  11-13-1911  TSO Table B
27           4-1-1912    TSO Table G
46           6-3-1912    TSO Table G
47           6-3-1912    TSO Table G
48           6-3-1912    TSO Table G
58           8-5-1912    TSO Table A
76           12-2-1912   TSO Table G
100          2-3-1913    TSO Table C
141          6-17-1913   TSO Table B
143          6-26-1913   TSO Table B
144          6-26-1913   TSO Table B
146          6-26-1913   TSO Table B
148          6-26-1913   TSO Table B
163          8-13-1913   TSO Table E
174          11-17-1913  TSO Table E
175          11-17-1913  TSO Table G
183          12-22-1913  TSO Table E
275          2-15-1915   TSO Table G
280          3-1-1915    TSO Table G
288          3-29-1915   TSO Table G
300          5-3-1915    TSO Table B
310          6-7-1915    TSO Table D
315          6-14-1915   TSO Table E
319          7-12-1915   TSO Table E
326          8-9-1915    TSO Table D
337          8-23-1915   TSO Table E
338          9-20-1915   TSO Table E
339          10-4-1915   TSO Table E
340          10-11-1915  TSO Table C
341          10-18-1915  TSO Table D
346          10-18-1915  TSO Table D
347          11-1-1915   TSO Table D
349          11-1-1915   TSO Table D
382          4-17-1916   TSO Table C
390          5-8-1916    TSO Table F
395          6-7-1916    TSO Table B
-            8-7-1916    TSO Table E
421          9-6-1916    TSO Table C
423          10-2-1916   TSO Table D
428          10-23-1916  TSO Table A
443          1-10-1917   TSO Table H
469          4-16-1917   TSO Table G
470          4-16-1917   TSO Table G
471          4-16-1917   TSO Table G
476          4-24-1917   TSO Table E
485          5-21-1917   TSO Table E
489          5-28-1917   TSO Table G
522          8-27-1917   TSO Table H
521          11-5-1917   TSO Table C
535          11-5-1917   TSO Table H
526          12-1-1917   TSO Table E
528          12-1-1917   TSO Table E
529          12-1-1917   TSO Table C
537          12-10-1917  TSO Table D
554          12-17-1917  TSO Table C
538          12-27-1917  TSO Table D
583          4-1-1918    TSO Table C
584          4-1-1918    TSO Table H
85-2018      7-25-1918   844.02
623          9-4-1918    TSO Table H
677          5-5-1919    TSO Table E
670          7-28-1919   TSO Table H
713          10-6-1919   TSO Table C,
                         G
751          2-9-1920    TSO Table G
802          6-6-1920    TSO Table E
800          6-21-1920   TSO Table E
834          12-20-1920  TSO Table G
835          12-20-1920  TSO Table G
1006         2-20-1922   TSO Table B
1023         4-3-1922    TSO Table G
1029         4-14-1922   TSO Table B
1034         5-1-1922    TSO Table G
1036         5-15-1922   TSO Table G
1040         6-5-1922    TSO Table G
1050         6-26-1922   TSO Table G
1051         6-26-1922   TSO Table G
1054         6-26-1922   TSO Table G
1038         7-3-1922    TSO Table C
1056         7-3-1922    TSO Table G
1057         7-3-1922    TSO Table G
1063         7-24-1922   TSO Table G
1069         9-5-1922    TSO Table C
1072         9-5-1922    TSO Table G
1076         10- 2-1922  TSO Table B
1093         12-4-1922   TSO Table C
1098         1-15-1923   TSO Table B
1180         9-17-1923   TSO Table E
1204         1-7-1924    TSO Table E
1243         4-7-1924    TSO Table E
1245         4-7-1924    TSO Table G
1257         5-19-1924   TSO Table E
1261         6-10-1924   TSO Table A
1307         11-18-1924  TSO Table E
1306         11-19-1924  TSO Table E
1327         2-9-1925    TSO Table E
1328         2-9-1925    TSO Table E
1330         2-9-1925    TSO Table E
1331         2-9-1925    TSO Table E
1334         2-16-1925   TSO Table E
1337         3-2-1925    TSO Table E
1347         5-4-1925    TSO Table E
1348         5-4-1925    TSO Table E
1441         6-7-1926    TSO Table D
1442         6-7-1926    TSO Table D
1443         6-7-1926    TSO Table D
1456         7-19-1926   TSO Table E
1475         8-2-1926    TSO Table A
1489         8-25-1926   TSO Table A
1492         9-13-1926   TSO Table G
1544         12-6-1926   TSO Table D
1545         12-6-1926   TSO Table E
1548         12-6-1926   TSO Table D
1547         1-17-1927   TSO Table A
62-1927      5-23-1927   TSO Table D
87-1927      7-18-1927   TSO Table A
91-1927      8-2-1927    TSO Table A
108-1927     11-21-1927  TSO Table A
23-1928      2-20-1928   TSO Table E
54A-1928     5-7-1928    TSO Table G
71-1928      5-21-1928   TSO Table G
97-1928      6-4-1928    TSO Table B
107-1928     6-18-1928   TSO Table G
108-1928     6-18-1928   TSO Table G
118-1928     7-2-1928    TSO Table G
134-1928     8-23-1928   TSO Table E
153-1928     10-15-1928  TSO Table G
170-1928     11-5-1928   TSO Table E
160-1928     11-19-1928  TSO Table H
168-1928     11-26-1928  TSO Table A
181-1928     11-26-1928  TSO Table D
183-1928     12-17-1928  TSO Table A
182-1928     2-18-1929   TSO Table H
156-1929     8-19-1929   TSO Table D
161-1929     8-30-1929   TSO Table D
169-1929     9-16-1929   TSO Table D
36-1930      4-28-1930   TSO Table E
5-1931       1-19-1931   TSO Table H
13-1932      3-7-1932    TSO Table G
14-1932      3-7-1932    TSO Table G
15-1932      3-7-1932    TSO Table G
16-1932      3-7-1932    TSO Table G
17-1932      3-7-1932    TSO Table G
18-1932      3-7-1932    TSO Table G
19-1932      3-7-1932    TSO Table G
20-1932      3-7-1932    TSO Table G
56-1932      6-20-1932   TSO Table B
11-1933      4-3-1933    TSO Table A
39-1933      10-2-1933   804.01;
                         804.02
36-1934      6-18-1934   TSO Table A
10-1935      1-11-1935   TSO Table A
14-1935      2-18-1935   TSO Table A
61-1935      12-16-1935  TSO Table C
3-1936       1-20-1936   TSO Table G
12-1936      3-16-1936   TSO Table C
10-1936      4-6-1936    TSO Table A
31-1936      6-1-1936    TSO Table B
32-1936      7-6-1936    TSO Table A
34-1936      7-6-1936    TSO Table G
49-1936      9-9-1936    TSO Table B
63-1936      11-23-1936  TSO Table B,
                         E
72-1936      12-21-1936  TSO Table B
74-1936      12-21-1936  TSO Table B
78-1936      12-28-1936  TSO Table B
80-1936      12-28-1936  TSO Table B
81-1936      12-29-1936  TSO Table B,
                         E
3-1937       2-15-1937   1072.07
5-1937       2-15-1937   TSO Table B
9-1937       2-15-1937   TSO Table B
37-1937      5-17-1937   TSO Table C
38-1937      5-17-1937   TSO Table D
46-1937      8-16-1937   660.13;
                         660.14
21-1938      3-7-1938    TSO Table B
53-1938      6-6-1938    828.01
64-1938      8-15-1938   TSO Table D
67-1938      8-15-1938   373.16
85-1939      4-24-1939   TSO Table A
96-1939      5-15-1939   TSO Table D
132-1939     12-16-1939  TSO Table H
21-1940      2-19-1940   TSO Table A
33-1940      2-19-1940   TSO Table E
60-1940      5-20-1940   TSO Table G
49-1940      6-17-1940   TSO Table A
73-1940      6-17-1940   TSO Table G
90-1940      7-24-1940   TSO Table B
94-1940      8-19-1940   TSO Table I
95-1940      8-19-1940   TSO Table H
108-1940     10-7-1940   TSO Table E
109-1940     10-7-1940   TSO Table E
118-1940     11-18-1940  TSO Table E
119-1940     11-18-1940  TSO Table C
16-1941      2-17-1941   TSO Table I
18-1941      2-17-1941   TSO Table A
46-1941      6-2-1941    TSO Table F
50-1941      6-2-1941    TSO Table A
65-1941      6-7-1941    254.02
34-1942      4-6-1942    TSO Table B
37-1942      4-6-1942    TSO Table A
3-1943       1-18-1943   TSO Table A
4-1943       1-18-1943   TSO Table A
5-1943       1-18-1943   TSO Table H
21-1943      4-19-1943   TSO Table G
22-1943      4-19-1943   TSO Table G
23-1943      4-19-1943   TSO Table G
25-1943      5-3-1943    TSO Table G
26-1943      5-3-1943    TSO Table G
27-1943      5-3-1943    TSO Table G
28-1943      5-3-1943    TSO Table G
29-1943      5-3-1943    TSO Table G
30-1943      5-3-1943    TSO Table G
31-1943      5-3-1943    TSO Table G
32-1943      5-3-1943    TSO Table G
33-1943      5-3-1943    TSO Table G
34-1943      5-3-1943    TSO Table G
35-1943      5-3-1943    TSO Table G
36-1943      5-3-1943    TSO Table G
37-1943      5-3-1943    TSO Table G
38-1943      5-3-1943    TSO Table G
39-1943      5-3-1943    TSO Table G
46-1943      6-7-1943    TSO Table G
47-1943      6-7-1943    TSO Table G
48-1943      6-7-1943    TSO Table G
71-1943      8-16-1943   TSO Table I
78-1943      9-7-1943    TSO Table H
4-1944       2-7-1944    TSO Table A
17-1944      3-20-1944   668.04
23-1944      5-15-1944   TSO Table A
30-1944      6-19-1944   TSO Table A
66-1944      12-18-1944  TSO Table E
67-1944      12-18-1944  TSO Table E
6-1945       2-5-1945    TSO Table E
11-1945      3-5-1945    1072.01;
                         1072.06
20-1945      6-18-1945   TSO Table A
21-1946      5-6-1946    TSO Table E
38-1946      8-5-1946    TSO Table G
42-1946      8-19-1946   TSO Table A
40-1946      9-3-1946    TSO Table B
62-1946      11-16-1946  TSO Table I
8-1947       2-17-1947   353.07
9-1947       2-17-1947   TSO Table C
11-1947      3-3-1947    TSO Table H
16-1947      4-7-1947    TSO Table B
33-1947      6-2-1947    TSO Table E
41-1947      7-7-1947    236.03
50-1947      9-2-1947    TSO Table I
77-1947      12-1-1947   TSO Table E
83-1947      12-15-1947  TSO Table C
29-1948      4-8-1948    TSO Table A
68-1948      9-7-1948    TSO Table G
7-1949       2-7-1949    TSO Table G
9-1949       2-7-1949    TSO Table G
10-1949      2-7-1949    TSO Table G
35-1949      4-19-1949   TSO Table E
30-1949      5-2-1949    TSO Table D
                         301.245;
23-1950      4-3-1950    301.455;
                         301.475
35-1950      5-22-1950   TSO Table A
47-1950      7-3-1950    TSO Table C
94-1950      12-18-1950  TSO Table D
12-1951      2-19-1951   TSO Table B
22-1951      4-5-1951    TSO Table F
50-1951      7-2-1951    TSO Table A
22-1952      3-3-1952    1040.02;
                         1040.04
28-1952      3-17-1952   TSO Table B
49-1952      6-16-1952   TSO Table D
98-1952      12-15-1952  TSO Table A
7-1953       2-2-1953    TSO Table I
18-1953      3-16-1953   TSO Table C
62-1953      7-6-1953    TSO Table A
98-1953      10-19-1953  TSO Table E
99-1953      10-19-1953  TSO Table B
6-1954       2-1-1954    TSO Table B
                         816.01;
26-1954      3-15-1954   816.02;
                         816.99
39-1954      5-3-1954    TSO Table B
49-1954      5-17-1954   TSO Table I
75-1954      6-21-1954   TSO Table I
76-1954      6-21-1954   TSO Table I
58-1954      7-6-1954    860.01—
                         860.12
102-1954     8-2-1954    TSO Table D,
                         TSO Table H
108-1954     8-2-1954    TSO Table I
117-1954     8-16-1954   TSO Table A
122-1954     9-7-1954    236.01
140-1954     10-4-1954   1040.06
147-1954     10-18-1954  TSO Table F
20-1955      2-7-1955    TSO Table E
                         1020.02;
38-1955      4-4-1955    1020.04—
                         1020.15
54-1955      4-4-1955    TSO Table I
80-1955      5-16-1955   TSO Table I
93-1955      6-20-1955   TSO Table I
94-1955      6-20-1955   TSO Table A
114-1955     8-1-1955    TSO Table E
118-1955     8-1-1955    TSO Table D
122-1955     8-1-1955    TSO Table B
130-1955     8-15-1955   832.01—
                         832.06
139-1955     9-6-1955    634.04
156-1955     10-3-1955   TSO Table E
168-1955     10-17-1955  TSO Table E
175-1955     11-7-1955   TSO Table E
176-1955     11-7-1955   TSO Table E
177-1955     11-7-1955   TSO Table E
13-1956      2-6-1956    TSO Table D,
                         TSO Table H
14-1956      2-6-1956    359.01—
                         359.05
25-1956      3-5-1956    TSO Table E
29-1956      4-2-1956    TSO Table D
41-1956      4-2-1956    TSO Table E
141-1956     8-6-1956    TSO Table B
146-1956     8-20-1956   TSO Table A
151-1956     8-20-1956   TSO Table E
176-1956     9-4-1956    TSO Table I
177-1956     9-4-1956    TSO Table I
205-1956     10-15-1956  TSO Table I
20-1957      2-4-1957    TSO Table I
22-1957      2-4-1957    TSO Table C
24-1957      2-4-1957    TSO Table I
32-1957      3-4-1957    TSO Table I
80-1957      - -1957     TSO Table I
87-1957      5-6-1957    TSO Table F
91-1957      5-6-1957    TSO Table B
117-1957     5-20-1957   TSO Table E
112-1957     6-17-1957   TSO Table C
157-1957     7-15-1957   TSO Table A
177-1957     8-19-1957   TSO Table H
176-1957     9-16-1957   TSO Table H
203-57       9-16-1957   TSO Table I
229-1957     10-21-1957  TSO Table G
230-1957     10-21-1957  TSO Table C
237-1957     11-4-1957   TSO Table D
246-1957     11-18-1957  TSO Table F
                         202.07;
                         204.01;
                         331.41;
                         337.26;
                         339.02;
                         351.05;
                         353.01—
                         353.06;
                         353.08;
                         353.09;
                         373.10;
                         373.17;
                         618.04;
                         618.14;
                         618.15;
                         642.26;
                         656.01—
                         656.07;
                         660.04;
                         660.05;
                         660.16—
                         660.19;
                         668.02;
261-1957     12-2-1957   668.03;
                         668.05;
                         668.06—
                         668.08;
                         672.14;
                         804.99;
                         808.01—
                         808.03;
                         808.99;
                         812.01;
                         812.02;
                         812.04;
                         812.99;
                         824.99;
                         828.99;
                         832.99;
                         852.01—
                         852.10;
                         852.99;
                         860.99;
                         1020.99;
                         1028.99;
                         1032.99;
                         1040.99;
                         1072.99
263-1957     12-16-1957  TSO Table I
273-1957     12-16-1957  TSO Table D
278-1957     12-16-1957  TSO Table D
46-1958      3-3-1958    TSO Table H
57-1958      3-17-1958   TSO Table E
79-1958      4-7-1958    TSO Table E
45-1958      4-21-1958   TSO Table I
47-1958      4-21-1958   TSO Table C
97-1958      4-21-1958   TSO Table D
109-1958     5-17-1958   TSO Table A
113-1958     6-16-1958   TSO Table G
150-1958     7-7-1958    TSO Table I
159-1958     7-21-1958   TSO Table G
160-1958     7-21-1958   TSO Table C
165-1958     7-21-1958   TSO Table G
178-1958     9-2-1958    TSO Table I
179-1958     9-2-1958    TSO Table I
203-1958     9-15-1958   TSO Table D
202-1958     10-6-1958   TSO Table B
209-1958     10-6-1958   TSO Table E
207-1958     10-20-1958  660.03
39-1959      2-16-1959   TSO Table F
48-1959      3-2-1959    TSO Table F
49-1959      3-2-1959    TSO Table F
10-1959      4-6-1959    TSO Table C
130-1959     7-6-1959    TSO Table I
136-1959     7-20-1959   TSO Table I
216-1959     12-7-1959   TSO Table D
5-1960       1-18-1960   TSO Table A
27-1960      1-18-1960   TSO Table E
32-1960      2-15-1960   TSO Table E
43-1960      3-7-1960    TSO Table I
80-1960      5-2-1960    TSO Table I
111-1960     6-6-1960    TSO Table C
120-1960     6-13-1960   TSO Table A
140-1960     6-20-1960   TSO Table C
168-1960     8-8-1960    TSO Table B
171-1960     8-8-1960    TSO Table D
204-1960     10-17-1960  TSO Table C
213-1960     11-14-1960  TSO Table A
226-1960     12-5-1960   TSO Table I
227-1960     12-5-1960   TSO Table I
10-1961      1-16-1961   TSO Table I
11-1961      1-16-1961   TSO Table G
12-1961      1-16-1961   TSO Table E
15-1961      1-23-1961   TSO Table F
34-1961      2-20-1961   TSO Table H
87-1961      4-17-1961   TSO Table I
91-1961      4-17-1961   TSO Table H
103-1961     5-1-1961    TSO Table F
108-1961     6-19-1961   TSO Table I
131-1961     7-3-1961    TSO Table I
132-1961     7-3-1961    TSO Table I
125-1961     7-17-1961   TSO Table I
126-1961     7-17-1961   TSO Table I
145-1961     7-31-1961   TSO Table B
139-1961     9-5-1961    TSO Table I
163-1961     9-5-1961    TSO Table I
                         820.01—
130-1961     9-18-1961   820.07;
                         820.99
186-1961     11-6-1961   TSO Table I
189-1961     11-20-1961  TSO Table D
62-1962      4-2-1962    TSO Table I
82-1962      5-7-1962    TSO Table F
84-1962      5-7-1962    TSO Table E
85-1962      5-7-1962    TSO Table I
86-1962      6-4-1962    TSO Table C
100-1962     6-4-1962    TSO Table I
101-1962     6-4-1962    TSO Table I
30-1962      6-18-1962   TSO Table C
114-1962     6-18-1962   TSO Table I
117-1962     7-2-1962    TSO Table D
155-1962     9-17-1962   TSO Table I
175-1962     12-3-1962   TSO Table E
156-1962     12-17-1962  TSO Table C
14-1963      2-11-1963   TSO Table E
                         1024.01;
15-1963      4-1-1963    1024.02;
                         1024.04
52-1963      4-15-1963   TSO Table E
67-1963      5-27-1963   TSO Table D
103-1963     9-16-1963   TSO Table I
107-1963     9-16-1963   TSO Table F
159-1963     12-16-1963  TSO Table I
160-1963     12-16-1963  TSO Table I
13-1964      1-20-1964   TSO Table I
10-1964      2-3-1964    TSO Table D,
                         G
18-1964      2-3-1964    TSO Table E
48-1964      5-4-1964    TSO Table A
96-1964      6-15-1964   TSO Table C
100-1964     6-29-1964   1024.04
107-1964     7-6-1964    TSO Table I
111-1964     7-6-1964    TSO Table I
117-1964     7-6-1964    1040.03
138-1964     7-20-1964   TSO Table E
166-1964     9-8-1964    TSO Table I
194-1964     11-2-1964   TSO Table I
201-1964     11-2-1964   TSO Table E
10-1965      1-11-1965   812.03
21-1965      2-1-1965    TSO Table I
27-1965      2-15-1965   TSO Table I
35-1965      3-1-1965    TSO Table I
37-1965      3-1-1965    TSO Table I
41-1965      3-1-1965    TSO Table D
23-1965      3-15-1965   TSO Table I
43-1965      3-15-1965   TSO Table I
52-1965      3-15-1965   TSO Table I
67-1965      4-5-1965    TSO Table E
86-1965      5-3-1965    TSO Table B
118-1965     6-21-1965   TSO Table I
112-1965     7-6-1965    848.01;
                         848.99
187-1965     9-7-1965    TSO Table I
192-1965     9-20-1965   TSO Table C
195-1965     9-20-1965   TSO Table I
196-1965     9-20-1965   TSO Table I
221-1965     10-18-1965  TSO Table A
19-1966      1-17-1966   TSO Table I
20-1966      1-17-1966   TSO Table I
45-1966      3-7-1966    TSO Table A
62-1966      4-4-1966    TSO Table I
80-1966      5-2-1966    TSO Table I
82-1966      5-2-1966    TSO Table I
96-1966      5-16-1966   632.01—
                         632.06
90-1966      5-31-1966   TSO Table I
97-1966      5-31-1966   TSO Table I
104-1966     6-6-1966    TSO Table D
117-1966     6-20-1966   TSO Table I
137-1966     7-18-1966   TSO Table A
194-1966     10-3-1966   TSO Table D
195-1966     10-3-1966   TSO Table D
25-1967      2-6-1967    TSO Table I
42-1967      3-6-1967    TSO Table I
43-1967      4-3-1967    TSO Table I
79-1967      4-17-1967   313.09
100-1967     5-1-1967    TSO Table B
126-1967     6-5-1967    TSO Table D
151-1967     7-3-1967    TSO Table C
161-1967     7-17-1967   TSO Table D
176-1967     7-17-1967   TSO Table E
220-1967     10-2-1967   TSO Table E
228- 1967    10-20-1967  TSO Table C
242-1967     11-27-1967  252.01—
                         252.15
251-1967     12-18-1967  660.15
5-1968       1-2-1968    TSO Table A
6-1968       1-15-1968   TSO Table C
15-1968      2-5-1968    TSO Table E
22-1968      2-5-1968    TSO Table I
105-1968     5-20-1968   TSO Table F
109-1968     6-3-1968    TSO Table D
145-1968     7-15-1968   TSO Table C
150-1968     7-29-1968   1024.04
159-1968     9-3-1968    1024.04
163-1968     9-3-1968    TSO Table B
142-1968     9-16-1968   TSO Table I
188-1968     10-7-1968   660.05
193-1968     10-21-1968  TSO Table I
215-1968     1-6-1969    1024.03
12-1969      1-20-1969   TSO Table I
16-1969      2-3-1969    TSO Table I
17-1969      2-3-1969    TSO Table I
18-1969      2-3-1969    TSO Table I
19-1969      2-3-1969    TSO Table I
9-1969       3-3-1969    816.03
40-1969      3-3-1969    TSO Table I
47-1969      3-17-1969   634.05
99-1969      5-5-1969    TSO Table I
144-1969     6-16-1969   1024.04
100-1969     7-7-1969    TSO Table I
127-1969     7-7-1969    642.25
156-1969     7-7-1969    1024.04
157-1969     7-7-1969    1024.04
168-1969     7-14-1969   TSO Table I
149-1969     7-21-1969   TSO Table C
222-1969     9-29-1969   TSO Table D
263-1969     12-1-1969   TSO Table E
275-1969     12-15-1969  TSO Table E
279-1969     12-15-1969  TSO Table I
285-1969     12-29-1969  TSO Table F
22-1970      2-2-1970    1040.05
72-1970      4-6-1970    TSO Table I
85-1970      4-20-1970   1024.04
104-1970     6-1-1970    TSO Table I
173-1970     7-6-1970    TSO Table A
199-1970     7-27-1970   TSO Table I
223-1970     8-31-1970   TSO Table A
240-1970     9-14-1970   TSO Table A
348-1970     12-7-1970   TSO Table I
359-1970     12-21-1970  TSO Table I
5-1971       1-4-1971    618.16
353-1970     1-4-1971    TSO Table C
17-1971      1-18-1971   TSO Table E
31-1971      2-15-1971   TSO Table A
                         1068.02;
42-1971      3-15-1971   1068.04—
                         1068.09;
                         1068.99
53-1971      3-15-1971   TSO Table A
58-1971      3-15-1971   TSO Table F
82-1971      4-19-1971   TSO Table E
81-1971      5-3-1971    TSO Table B
111-1971     6-7-1971    TSO Table A
112-1971     6-21-1971   TSO Table E
151-1971     7-6-1971    TSO Table I
158-1971     7-6-1971    TSO Table D
150-1971     7-12-1971   TSO Table I
203-1971     9-27-1971   234.01
221-1971     10-25-1971  TSO Table A
240-1971     11-15-1971  TSO Table I
263-1971     12-6-1971   TSO Table C
237-1971     12-20-1971  TSO Table I
270-1971     12-20-1971  TSO Table I
275-1971     12-20-1971  TSO Table C
36-1972      2-28-1972   1608.99
49-1972      3-20-1972   TSO Table E
53-1972      3-20-1972   1040.99
102-1972     5-30-1972   303.10
109-1972     6-5-1972    TSO Table I
110-1972     6-5-1972    TSO Table D
112-1972     6-5-1972    1072.07
103-1972     6-12-1972   TSO Table I
208-1972     9-18-1972   TSO Table C
231-1972     10-16-1972  830.02
240-1972     11-6-1972   TSO Table I
257-1972     11-20-1972  TSO Table B
259-1972     12-4-1972   TSO Table I
4-1973       1-2-1973    632.02
261-1972     1-2-1973    TSO Table C
7-1973       1-15-1973   TSO Table B
279-1972     1-15-1973   TSO Table E
37-1973      2-19-1973   TSO Table D
48-1973      3-19-1973   TSO Table D
61-1973      4-2-1973    TSO Table C
70-1973      4-16-1973   TSO Table I
76-1973      4-16-1973   TSO Table D
101-1973     5-7-1973    TSO Table B
103-1973     5-21-1973   TSO Table C
104-1973     5-21-1973   TSO Table I
147-1973     7-2-1973    254.03
166-1973     7-30-1973   TSO Table I
181-1973     7-30-1973   TSO Table A
182-1973     7-30-1973   TSO Table A
210-1973     7-30-1973   TSO Table E,
                         F
225-1973     9-4-1973    274.01—
                         274.05
258-1973     9-26-1973   TSO Table I
269-1973     10-29-1973  298.01
287-1973     11-12-1973  TSO Table B
3-1974       1-21-1974   TSO Table I
4-1974       1-21-1974   TSO Table I
29-1974      1-21-1974   TSO Table I
69-1974      3-4-1974    TSO Table I
70-1974      3-4-1974    TSO Table I
80-1974      3-4-1974    TSO Table E
95-1974      3-18-1974   TSO Table H
102-1974     3-25-1974   222.01
118-1974     4-1-1974    TSO Table E
120-1974     4-1-1974    TSO Table E
150-1974     4-29-1974   222.01
169-1974     5-13-1974   TSO Table E
174-1974     5-20-1974   TSO Table I
184-1974     6-3-1974    TSO Table I
200-1974     6-17-1974   TSO Table I
206-1974     6-17-1974   TSO Table A
219-1974     7-1-1974    TSO Table I
                         1020.04;
231-1974     7-1-1974    1020.06;
                         1020.07
235-1974     7-8-1974    TSO Table E
251-1974     7-15-1974   TSO Table C
271-1974     7-22-1974   1044.01
276-1974     8-12-1974   TSO Table F
324-1974     9-23-1974   TSO Table B
341-1974     10-7-1974   TSO Table E
347-1974     10-7-1974   TSO Table E
356-1974     10-7-1974   TSO Table E
378-1974     10-28-1974  TSO Table E
383-1974     11-4-1974   TSO Table C
384-1974     11-11-1974  TSO Table E
396-1974     11-18-1974  TSO Table E
398-1974     11-18-1974  TSO Table E
412-1974     12-2-1974   TSO Table C
                         868.01—
423-1974     12-9-1974   868.03;
                         868.99
430-1974     12-16-1974  TSO Table I
429-1974     1-6-1975    TSO Table I
23-1975      2-3-1975    TSO Table I
22-1975      3-3-1975    TSO Table I
56-1975      3-7-1975    351.11
78-1975      3-10-1975   TSO Table B
90-1975      3-17-1975   TSO Table E
153-1975     5-5-1975    TSO Table B
159-1975     5-12-1975   TSO Table E,
                         F
172-1975     5-19-1975   TSO Table F
190-1975     6-2-1975    TSO Table E
191-1975     6-2-1975    TSO Table E
212-1975     6-16-1975   351.13
224-1975     7-7-1975    TSO Table B
234-1975     7-7-1975    TSO Table E
251-1975     7-21-1975   TSO Table E
258-1975     7-21-1975   TSO Table I
286-1975     7-28-1975   TSO Table F
302-1975     8-25-1975   TSO Table E
306-1975     8-25-1975   1040.08
312-1975     8-25-1975   TSO Table F
320-1975     8-25-1975   TSO Table F
342-1975     9-15-1975   TSO Table I
343-1975     9-15-1975   TSO Table I
350-1975     10-20-1975  862.01
415-1975     11-17-1975  TSO Table E
423-1975     11-24-1975  TSO Table E
                         870.01;
1-1975       12-8-1975   870.02;
                         870.99
455-1975     12-15-1975  TSO Table E
322-1977     12-5-1977   TSO Table B
322-1977     12-5-1977   TSO Table E
323-1977     12-5-1977   TSO Table E
9-1978       1-3-1978    TSO Table B,
                         E
10-1978      1-3-1978    TSO Table E
13-1978      1-3-1978    TSO Table E
34-1978      2-6-1978    TSO Table B
38-1978      2-6-1978    TSO Table C
37-1978      2-20-1978   TSO Table I
58-1978      2-20-1978   TSO Table D
59-1978      2-20-1978   TSO Table D
91-1978      3-20-1978   TSO Table E
102-1978     4-3-1978    TSO Table D
105-1978     4-3-1978    TSO Table E
113-1978     4-17-1978   TSO Table I
142-1978     5-1-1978    TSO Table E
114-1978     5-15-1978   TSO Table I
115-1978     5-15-1978   TSO Table I
160-1978     5-15-1978   TSO Table E
164-1978     5-15-1978   TSO Table E
195-1978     6-26-1978   TSO Table F
206-1978     7-3-1978    TSO Table F
214-1978     7-31-1978   TSO Table E
238-1978     9-5-1978    TSO Table E
249-1978     9-5-1978    TSO Table C
268-1978     9-18-1978   TSO Table E
286-1978     10-16-1978  373.02
287-1978     10-16-1978  606.23
298-1978     10-16-1978  TSO Table E
311-1978     11-6-1978   660.14
330-1978     11-20-1978  TSO Table I
331-1978     11-20-1978  TSO Table I
351-1978     12-27-1978  1040.08
5-1979       1-2-1979    TSO Table H
22-1979      2-5-1979    TSO Table I
52-1979      3-5-1979    TSO Table E
56-1979      3-5-1979    TSO Table E
68-1979      3-19-1979   TSO Table E
70-1979      3-19-1979   TSO Table E
101-1979     5-7-1979    TSO Table F
105-1979     5-7-1979    TSO Table E
112-1979     5-21-1979   TSO Table A
113-1979     5-29-1979   TSO Table E
106-1979     6-18-1979   TSO Table D
127-1979     6-18-1979   TSO Table D
145-1979     7-2-1979    TSO Table D
151-1979     7-2-1979    TSO Table E
159-1979     7-16-1979   TSO Table I
160-1979     7-16-1979   TSO Table E
                         872.01—
162-1979     7-23-1979   872.09;
                         872.99
172-1979     7-23-1979   1068.09
188-1979     8-27-1979   TSO Table I
211-1979     9-17-1979   TSO Table I
214-1979     9-24-1979   TSO Table E
226-1979     10-1-1979   TSO Table E
235-1979     10-1-1979   TSO Table F
253-1979     11-5-1979   TSO Table I
255-1979     11-5-1979   TSO Table A
294-1979     12-26-1979  TSO Table B,
                         E
7-1980       1-7-1980    254.03
15-1980      1-21-1980   TSO Table I
48-1980      3-3-1980    TSO Table F
49-1980      3-3-1980    TSO Table F
65-1980      3-17-1980   TSO Table I
85-1980      4-21-1980   298.02
95-1980      4-21-1980   TSO Table E
126-1980     6-2-1980    TSO Table B
135-1980     6-16-1980   TSO Table E
160-1980     7-21-1980   266.03
204-1980     9-22-1980   TSO Table F
227-1980     10-13-1980  TSO Table H
229-1980     10-13-1980  TSO Table C
239-1980     10-27-1980  TSO Table C
240-1980     10-27-1980  TSO Table E
254-1980     11-24-1980  266.02
271-1980     12-22-1980  TSO Table D
274-1980     12-22-1980  TSO Table E
283-1980     12-22-1980  TSO Table A
11-1981      1-26-1981   TSO Table E
32-1981      3-9-1981    TSO Table C
33-1981      3-9-1981    TSO Table C
20-1981      3-23-1981   TSO Table I
56-1981      4-13-1981   331.11
82-1981      6-8-1981    TSO Table D
107-1981     7-13-1981   618.18
233-1981     12-28-1981  830.01
237-1981     12-28-1981  TSO Table A
240-1981     12-28-1981  TSO Table E
20-1982      2-8-1982    TSO Table H
32-1982      2-22-1982   TSO Table A
35-1982      2-22-1982   TSO Table E
93-1982      5-10-1982   TSO Table A
94-1982      5-10-1982   TSO Table E
64-1982      5-24-1982   TSO Table I
65-1982      - -1982     TSO Table I
142-1982     6-14-1982   TSO Table E
185-1982     7-26-1982   TSO Table F
194-1982     9-13-1982   TSO Table B
213-1982     9-27-1982   TSO Table I
217-1982     9-27-1982   1068.04
218-1982     9-27-1982   TSO Table E
222-1982     9-27-1982   284.01
19-1983      1-24-1983   333.02
27-1983      1-24-1983   TSO Table C
46-1983      3-14-1983   TSO Table C
66-1983      4-11-1983   TSO Table F
93-1983      6-13-1983   TSO Table E
111-1983     6-27-1983   TSO Table E
179-1983     10-24-1983  TSO Table F
182-1983     12-27-1983  TSO Table C
204-1983     12-27-1983  TSO Table B
205-1983     12-27-1983  TSO Table B
7-1984       2-13-1984   TSO Table F
27-1984      2-27-1984   TSO Table F
41-1984      3-26-1984   TSO Table B
47-1984      4-2-1984    254.13
69-1984      4-23-1984   254.12
70-1984      4-23-1984   303.11
168-1984     10-8-1984   TSO Table C
177-1984     10-22-1984  TSO Table F
184-1984     11-13-1984  373.15
205-1984     12-10-1984  254.10
215-1984     12-10-1984  TSO Table E
216-1984     12-10-1984  TSO Table E
218-1984     12-10-1984  TSO Table E
221-1984     12-10-1984  TSO Table E
222-1984     12-10-1984  TSO Table E
223-1984     12-10-1984  TSO Table E
48-1985      3-11-1985   373.15
94-1985      5-20-1985   TSO Table E
121-1985     7-22-1985   TSO Table F
136-1985     7-22-1985   254.12
140-1985     7-22-1985   TSO Table I
142-1985     7-22-1985   TSO Table I
146-1985     7-22-1985   TSO Table F
174-1985     9-9-1985    TSO Table F
175-1985     9-9-1985    TSO Table F
205-1985     10-14-1985  TSO Table F
211-1985     10-28-1985  TSO Table I
247-1985     11-25-1985  TSO Table E
283-1985     12-23-1985  TSO Table I
33-1986      1-27-1986   254.07
37-1986      1-27-1986   254.08
226-1985     1-27-1986   TSO Table I
227-1985     1-27-1986   TSO Table I
48-1986      2-10-1986   TSO Table I
172-1985     2-10-1986   TSO Table I
56-1986      2-24-1986   TSO Table F
89-1986      4-14-1986   TSO Table I
96-1986      4-14-1986   TSO Table C
101-1986     4-28-1986   254.06
169-1986     7-14-1986   TSO Table C
130-1986     7-28-1986   TSO Table I
182-1986     7-28-1986   TSO Table F
189-1986     7-28-1986   TSO Table F
203-1986     9-10-1986   TSO Table E
226-1986     9-29-1986   TSO Table F
231-1986     9-29-1986   TSO Table C
232-1986     9-29-1986   TSO Table C
233-1986     9-29-1986   TSO Table C
275-1986     11-10-1986  TSO Table B
281-1986     11-24-1986  TSO Table I
284-1986     11-24-1986  238.03
282-1986     12-1-1986   TSO Table I
312-1986     12-22-1986  TSO Table E
316-1986     12-22-1986  TSO Table E
21-1987      1- 26-1987  TSO Table B
23-1987      1-26-1987   TSO Table I
37-1987      2-9-1987    TSO Table B
39-1987      2-9-1987    TSO Table B
41-1987      2-9-1987    TSO Table B
57-1987      2-23-1987   TSO Table B
59-1987      2-23-1987   TSO Table B
61-1987      2-23-1987   TSO Table B
63-1987      2-23-1987   TSO Table B
65-1987      2-23-1987   TSO Table B
67-1987      2-23-1987   TSO Table B
69-1987      2-23-1987   TSO Table B
71-1987      2-23-1987   TSO Table B
73-1987      2-23-1987   TSO Table B
75-1987      2-23-1987   TSO Table B
77-1987      2-23-1987   TSO Table B
88-1987      3-23-1987   TSO Table F
108-1987     4-13-1987   TSO Table I
113-1987     4-13-1987   618.19
137-1987     6-15-1987   TSO Table I
187-1987     8-31-1987   TSO Table I
200-1987     9-14-1987   TSO Table C
201-1987     9-14-1987   TSO Table C
212-1987     9-28-1987   TSO Table B
220-1987     9-28-1987   TSO Table E
243-1987     10-26-1987  254.11
253-1987     11-9-1987   TSO Table I
274-1987     11-23-1987  TSO Table B
276-1987     11-23-1987  TSO Table B
302-1987     12-21-1987  TSO Table E
16-1988      1-25-1988   TSO Table E
290-1987     1-25-1988   TSO Table E
15-1988      2-22-1988   TSO Table I
46-1988      3-9-1988    TSO Table D
55-1988      3-28-1988   TSO Table E
55-1988      3-28-1988   TSO Table F
105-1988     5-23-1988   280.01
120-1988     6-13-1988   672.16
124-1988     6-27-1988   TSO Table F
128-1988     6-27-1988   660.05
161-1988     9-12-1988   TSO Table F
164-1988     9-12-1988   TSO Table I
138-1988     9-26-1988   1062.01—
                         1062.03
187-1988     10-10-1988  TSO Table F
200-1988     10-24-1988  232.01
223-1988     12-12-1988  TSO Table I
                         874.01—
221-1988     12-19-1988  874.06;
                         874.99
19-1989      1-23-1989   TSO Table F
36-1989      2-13-1989   TSO Table E
63-1989      4-10-1989   TSO Table D
65-1989      4-10-1989   254.09
76-1989      4-24-1989   TSO Table E
114-1989     6-12-1989   TSO Table H
115-1989     7-10-1989   618.19
129-1989     7-10-1989   1068.03
139-1989     7-10-1989   TSO Table E
166-1989     8-5-1989    238.05
191-1989     9-25-1989   TSO Table I
200-1989     9-25-1989   TSO Table B
209-1989     10-9-1989   TSO Table D
205-1989     10-23-1989  TSO Table E
218-1989     10-23-1989  TSO Table E
226-1989     11-13-1989  TSO Table E
229-1989     11-13-1989  TSO Table E
236-1989     11-13-1989  TSO Table C
238-1989     11-27-1989  TSO Table F
250-1989     12-11-1989  TSO Table A
254-1989     12-11-1989  624.17
255-1989     12-11-1989  624.18
270-1989     12-18-1989  TSO Table E
4-1990       1-16-1990   TSO Table F
7-1990       1-16-1990   TSO Table I
19-1990      1-29-1990   862.01
59-1990      3-12-1990   TSO Table D
60-1990      3-12-1990   TSO Table D
75-1990      4-9-1990    TSO Table E
76-1990      4-9-1990    TSO Table I
82-1990      4-23-1990   TSO Table I
90-1990      5-14-1990   TSO Table C
97-1990      5-14-1990   TSO Table E
129-1990     7-9-1990    TSO Table B
130-1990     7-16-1990   TSO Table E
72-1990      7-23-1990   TSO Table A
131-1990     7-23-1990   TSO Table B
143-1990     9-10-1990   TSO Table F
149-1990     9-10-1990   635.01;
                         635.99
151-1990     9-10-1990   TSO Table E
155-1990     9-10-1990   TSO Table H
157-1990     9-10-1990   TSO Table B
159-1990     9-10-1990   TSO Table C
166-1990     9-24-1990   660.03
186-1990     12-10-1990  254.04
217-1990     12-10-1990  242.01
221-1990     12-17-1990  TSO Table E
2-1991       1-7-1991    254.04
                         357.01—
228-1990     1-28-1991   357.03;
                         357.05
29-1991      3-11-1991   TSO Table A
46-1991      3-25-1991   TSO Table D
49-1991      3-25-1991   TSO Table A
                         1054.01—
59-1991      4-8-1991    1054.35;
                         1054.99
                         1610.01—
72-1991      4-22-1991   1610.07;
                         1610.99
94-1991      6-10-1991   238.04
101-1991     6-10-1991   234.03;
                         282.01
107-1991     6-24-1991   TSO Table I
108-1991     6-24-1991   606.28
124-1991     7-22-1991   TSO Table D
134-1991     8-19-1991   TSO Table D
117-1991     9-9-1991    TSO Table I
118-1991     9-9-1991    TSO Table I
119-1991     9-9-1991    TSO Table C
161-1991     10-14-1991  TSO Table E
164-1991     10-14-1991  1040.09
150-1991     10-28-1991  1604.17
178-1991     11-12-1991  TSO Table D
187-1991     12-9-1991   TSO Table I
191-1991     12-9-1991   TSO Table C
195-1991     12-9-1991   TSO Table E
196-1991     12-9-1991   TSO Table E
186-1991     12-23-1991  TSO Table I
192-1991     12-23-1991  355.02—
                         355.04
3-1992       1-13-1992   TSO Table E
14-1992      1-27-1992   TSO Table F
35-1992      3-9-1992    214.01—
                         214.03
52-1992      4-13-1992   TSO Table B
46-1992      4-27-1992   618.13
55-1992      4-27-1992   TSO Table D
56-1992      4-27-1992   TSO Table E
58-1992      4-27-1992   TSO Table F
77-1992      5-26-1992   TSO Table E
73-1992      6-8-1992    TSO Table B
81-1992      6-8-1992    TSO Table I
89-1992      6-8-1992    1020.03
101-1992     6-22-1992   TSO Table D
113-1992     7-27-1992   TSO Table I
122-1992     7-27-1992   TSO Table D
123-1992     7-27-1992   TSO Table D
124-1992     7-27-1992   TSO Table D
142-1992     9-28-1992   TSO Table D
148-1992     9-28-1992   TSO Table D
170-1992     11-9-1992   TSO Table G
174-1992     11-9-1992   214.02
190-1992     11-23-1992  TSO Table B
167-1992     12-14-1992  TSO Table F
203-1992     12-21-1992  TSO Table D
205-1992     12-21-1992  TSO Table C
4-1993       1-11-1993   TSO Table D
6-1993       1-11-1993   351.13
16-1993      2-8-1993    TSO Table E
19-1993      3-22-1993   TSO Table I
42-1993      3-22-1993   TSO Table E
56-1993      4-12-1993   TSO Table B
                         1054.01;
62-1993      4-26-1993   1054.04;
                         1054.17
63-1993      5-10-1993   1020.17
74-1993      5-10-1993   TSO Table C
72-1993      5-24-1993   TSO Table F
78-1993      6-28-1993   TSO Table E
99-1993      6-28-1993   TSO Table E
86-1993      7-19-1993   TSO Table E
                         834.01;
80-1993      7-26-1993   834.02;
                         834.99
117-1993     7-26-1993   234.08
122-1993     7-26-1993   TSO Table D
123-1993     7-26-1993   TSO Table D
126-1993     7-26-1993   TSO Table E
129-1993     8-16-1993   TSO Table E
109-1993     9-13-1993   TSO Table B
135-1993     9-13-1993   TSO Table F
145-1993     9-27-1993   TSO Table E
152-1993     10-11-1993  TSO Table E
161-1993     10-25-1993  298.03
168-1993     11-8-1993   TSO Table G
169-1993     11-8-1993   TSO Table G
182-1993     12-6-1993   TSO Table E
                         610.01—
103-1993     12-20-1993  610.13;
                         610.99
199-1993     12-20-1993  355.01
9-1994       1-24-1994   357.04
23-1994      2-14-1994   TSO Table I
26-1994      2-28-1994   TSO Table I
37-1994      3-21-1994   TSO Table C
45-1994      3-28-1994   TSO Table E
47-1994      3-28-1994   TSO Table I
75-1994      5-9-1994    822.01—
                         822.15
76-1994      5-9-1994    TSO Table F
94-1994      6-13-1994   TSO Table C
103-1994     7-25-1994   238.01
112-1994     7-25-1994   TSO Table I
130-1994     7-25-1994   TSO Table E
132-1994     7-25-1994   TSO Table D
133-1994     7-25-1994   TSO Table D
134-1994     7-25-1994   TSO Table D
137-1994     8-15-1994   TSO Table B
161-1994     10-24-1994  TSO Table D
197-1994     12-19-1994  TSO Table F
198-1994     12-19-1994  TSO Table F
9-1995       2-27-1995   668.01
23-1995      2-27-1995   234.04
19-1995      3-27-1995   634.045;
                         634.047
42-1995      3-27-1995   210.01;
                         242.01
49-1995      4-10-1995   TSO Table E
79-1995      5-22-1995   TSO Table D
82-1995      6-12-1995   TSO Table B
83-1995      6-12-1995   TSO Table E
88-1995      6-12-1995   TSO Table D
91-1995      6-26-1995   TSO Table A
100-1995     6-26-1995   TSO Table E
102-1995     7-10-1995   TSO Table B
103-1995     7-10-1995   TSO Table E
174-1995     11-27-1995  234.06
175-1995     11-27-1995  234.05
179-1995     11-27-1995  TSO Table F
187-1995     12-11-1995  234.07
199-1995     12-18-1995  286.01;
                         286.02
201-1995     12-18-1995  TSO Table F
29-1996      2-26-1996   TSO Table F
44-1996      3-25-1996   238.02
56-1996      4-8-1996    618.20
48-1996      4-18-1996   1040.11
58-1996      4-22-1996   1060.01—
                         1060.08
97-1996      7-22-1996   TSO Table D
113-1996     7-22-1996   TSO Table F
114-1996     7-22-1996   TSO Table F
132-1996     7-22-1996   TSO Table I
137-1996     7-22-1996   TSO Table E
138-1996     7-22-1996   276.01—
                         276.04
149-1996     9-9-1996    TSO Table F
96-1996      9-23-1996   TSO Table C
163-1996     9-23-1996   210.02
146-1996     10-14-1996  373.11
172-1996     10-14-1996  TSO Table G
148-1996     10-28-1996  212.01
164-1996     11-12-1996  1028.07
189-1996     11-25-1996  238.06
190-1996     11-25-1996  234.02
192-1996     11-25-1996  234.07
205-1996     11-25-1996  TSO Table B
225-1996     12-16-1996  TSO Table B
4-1997       1-13-1997   TSO Table E
20-1997      2-10-1997   TSO Table H
54-1997      4-14-1997   TSO Table D
61-1997      4-14-1997   303.08
70-1997      4-28-1997   TSO Table A
75-1997      4-28-1997   TSO Table I
98-1997      6-9-1997    TSO Table I
108-1997     6-23-1997   TSO Table E
136-1997     7-28-1997   253.01
149-1997     9-8-1997    TSO Table I
188-1997     11-10-1997  234.09
161-1997     11-24-1997  672.15
195-1997     11-24-1997  TSO Table B,
                         E
198-1997     12-8-1997   264.01
204-1997     12-8-1997   TSO Table F
8-1998       1-26-1998   TSO Table C
15-1998      2-9-1998    TSO Table E
34-1998      3-9-1998    TSO Table C
214-1997     3-9-1998    TSO Table F
64-1998      4-13-1998   TSO Table E
65-1998      4-13-1998   TSO Table F
50-1998      4-27-1998   TSO Table C
66-1998      4-27-1998   TSO Table E
72-1998      4-27-1998   TSO Table H
74-1998      4-27-1998   TSO Table F
78-1998      4-27-1998   TSO Table B
89-1998      5-11-1998   210.03
94-1998      5-26-1998   TSO Table F
87-1998      6-22-1998   254.03
144-1998     7-27-1998   1020.01
150-1998     7-27-1998   TSO Table F
184-1998     9-28-1998   TSO Table E
189-1998     10-12-1998  TSO Table D
215-1998     11-9-1998   TSO Table D
219-1998     11-9-1998   635.02
                         1604.01;
1-1999       1-11-1999   1604.03;
                         1604.04
55-1999      3-22-1999   TSO Table B
67-1999      4-12-1999   TSO Table E
92-1999      4-26-1999   TSO Table E
                         240.02—
                         240.05;
106-1999     5-10-1999   1604.06;
                         1604.13;
                         1604.15
124-1999     5-24-1999   TSO Table B
147-1999     6-28-1999   TSO Table D
149-1999     6-28-1999   TSO Table B
150-1999     6-28-1999   TSO Table B
164-1999     7-12-1999   660.20
176-1999     7-26-1999   TSO Table B
197-1999     9-13-1999   TSO Table B
174-1999     9-27-1999   TSO Table H
220-1999     9-27-1999   TSO Table E
201-1999     10-11-1999  TSO Table H
237-1999     11-22-1999  TSO Table I
238-1999     11-22-1999  TSO Table I
266-1999     12-13-1999  TSO Table B
268-1999     12-13-1999  TSO Table E
270-1999     12-13-1999  351.04;
                         351.16
271-1999     12-13-1999  333.03
26-2000      2-14-2000   TSO Table D
30-2000      2-14-2000   TSO Table F
66-2000      3-27-2000   TSO Table E
86-2000      4-24-2000   TSO Table E
107-2000     6-12-2000   TSO Table E
109-2000     6-12-2000   634.045
123-2000     6-26-2000   TSO Table E
142-2000     7-10-2000   TSO Table E
171-2000     9-11-2000   351.15
180-2000     9-11-2000   234.07
173-2000     10-9-2000   TSO Table E
174-2000     10-9-2000   TSO Table H
                         1060.01—
191-2000     10-9-2000   1060.08;
                         1060.99
199-2000     10-9-2000   303.08
202-2000     10-9-2000   1040.09
194-2000     10-23-2000  234.10
5-2001       1-22-2001   TSO Table F
19-2001      2-12-2001   TSO Table E
7-2001       2-26-2001   355.02
60-2001      3-26-2001   TSO Table E
41-2001      4-9-2001    TSO Table I
48-2001      4-23-2001   TSO Table I
                         1028.01—
109-2001     5-29-2001   1028.07;
                         1028.99
112-2001     5-29-2001   TSO Table E
130-2001     6-25-2001   TSO Table E
138-2001     7-9-2001    624.03
163-2001     9-10-2001   TSO Table I
165-2001     9-10-2001   TSO Table E
167-2001     9-10-2001   TSO Table E
174-2001     9-10-2001   254.14
202-2001     10-22-2001  1068.02
220-2001     11-13-2001  TSO Table E
224-2001     11-13-2001  TSO Table E
247-2001     11-26-2001  222.01
221-2001     12-10-2001  TSO Table F
231-2001     12-10-2001  TSO Table I
258-2001     12-17-2001  TSO Table E
18-2002      2-11-2002   TSO Table E
30-2002      2-25-2002   TSO Table E
31-2002      2-25-2002   TSO Table E
34-2002      3-11-2002   TSO Table I
35-2002      3-11-2002   TSO Table I
48-2002      3-25-2002   298.04
111-2001     5-29-2002   TSO Table B
124-2002     7-22-2002   TSO Table E
126-2002     7-22-2002   TSO Table E
130-2002     10-14-2002  TSO Table I
190-2002     11-12-2002  1054.26;
                         1040.08
                         1060.01—
200-2002     11-25-2002  1060.08;
                         1060.99
32-2003      3-24-2003   TSO Table D
30-2003      3-27-2003   TSO Table E
62-2003      4-28-2003   TSO Table B
69-2003      5-27-2003   TSO Table I
70-2003      5-27-2003   TSO Table I
93-2003      7-14-2003   333.01
102-2003     7-28-2003   TSO Table E
103-2003     7-28-2003   TSO Table E
                         1604.02;
115-2003     9-8-2003    1604.08—
                         1604.10;
                         1604.99
116-2003     9-8-2003    1606.01—
                         1606.05
117-2003     9-8-2003    1608.01
                         1612.01—
118-2003     9-8-2003    1612.03;
                         1612.99
126-2003     10-27-2003  TSO Table E
141-2003     10-27-2003  TSO Table D
144-2003     11-10-2003  TSO Table E
146-2003     11-10-2003  TSO Table D
159-2003     11-24-2003  TSO Table E
160-2003     11-24-2003  TSO Table E
162-2003     12-15-2003  TSO Table F
7-2004       1-26-2004   TSO Table E
24-2004      2-23-2004   TSO Table F
26-2004      2-23-2004   TSO Table E
27-2004      2-23-2004   TSO Table E
28-2004      2-23-2004   TSO Table E
29-2004      2-23-2004   TSO Table E
43-2004      3-8-2004    303.08
63-2004      4-12-2004   TSO Table I
69-2004      4-26-2004   TSO Table E
77-2004      5-10-2004   TSO Table E
79-2004      5-10-2004   1040.12
76-2004      6-14-2004   TSO Table C
108-2004     6-28-2004   TSO Table I
167-2004     10-25-2004  606.14
180-2004     11-8-2004   TSO Table E
184-2004     11-22-2004  1040.10
186-2004     11-22-2004  TSO Table I
187-2004     11-22-2004  254.04
191-2004     12-13-2004  1040.10
192-2004     12-13-2004  1040.10
201-2004     12-20-2004  254.15
202-2004     12-20-2004  TSO Table E
2-2005       1-10-2005   TSO Table F
16-2005      2-14-2005   TSO Table I
17-2005      2-14-2005   TSO Table F
24-2005      2-28-2005   TSO Table E
26-2005      2-28-2005   246.01;
                         246.02
31-2005      3-14-2005   TSO Table C
35-2005      3-14-2005   TSO Table E
47-2005      3-28-2005   TSO Table E
48-2005      3-28-2005   TSO Table D
81-2005      6-13-2005   TSO Table E
82-2005      6-13-2005   TSO Table H
103-2005     7-25-2005   TSO Table I
111-2005     7-25-2005   TSO Table E
131-2005     9-12-2005   TSO Table I
143-2005     9-26-2005   TSO Table E
150-2005     10-10-2005  TSO Table I
151-2005     10-10-2005  TSO Table E
158-2005     10-24-2005  TSO Table E
161-2005     10-24-2005  TSO Table I
172-2005     11-14-2005  TSO Table F
173-2005     11-14-2005  TSO Table E
159-2005     11-28-2005  TSO Table F
182-2005     11-28-2005  TSO Table E
162-2005     12-12-2005  TSO Table I
194-2005     12-12-2005  TSO Table E
195-2005     12-12-2005  TSO Table I
189-2005     12-19-2005  674.01—
                         674.05
14-2006      2-13-2006   TSO Table E
25-2006      2-27-2006   660.21
35-2006      3-13-2006   TSO Table E
53-2006      4-10-2006   TSO Table I
67-2006      4-24-2006   TSO Table F
75-2006      5-8-2006    TSO Table E
83-2006      5-22-2006   TSO Table I
84-2006      5-22-2006   674.01—
                         674.05
87-2006      5-22-2006   TSO Table D
114-2006     7-10-2006   TSO Table E
131-2006     7-24-2006   TSO Table F
145-2006     9-11-2006   TSO Table I
149-2006     9-11-2006   TSO Table B
150-2006     9-11-2006   TSO Table F
152-2006     9-11-2006   TSO Table E
153-2006     9-11-2006   TSO Table E
154-2006     9-11-2006   TSO Table E
180-2006     10-9-2006   TSO Table B
182-2006     10-9-2006   TSO Table E
183-2006     10-9-2006   TSO Table E
196-2006     10-23-2006  TSO Table I
205-2006     11-13-2006  TSO Table I
224-2006     11-27-2006  234.11
231-2006     12-11-2006  TSO Table E
                         1060.01—
236-2006     12-11-2006  1060.08;
                         1060.99
237-2006     12-18-2006  TSO Table E
3-2007       1-8-2007    TSO Table I
24-2007      2-26-2007   TSO Table E
35-2007      3-26-2007   TSO Table E
80-2007      5-29-2007   618.01
88-2007      6-11-2007   TSO Table B
89-2007      6-11-2007   TSO Table D
110-2007     7-9-2007    TSO Table I
111-2007     7-9-2007    TSO Table E
117-2007     7-23-2007   TSO Table I
118-2007     7-23-2007   TSO Table I
119-2007     7-23-2007   TSO Table I
120-2007     7-23-2007   TSO Table I
121-2007     7-23-2007   TSO Table F
122-2007     7-23-2007   TSO Table F
133-2007     9-10-2007   TSO Table I
143-2007     9-24-2007   TSO Table E
167-2007     11-13-2007  TSO Table I
169-2007     11-13-2007  TSO Table E
182-2007     11-26-2007  1044.02
181-2007     12-17-2007  618.19
204-2007     12-17-2007  303.08
                         1060.01—
11-2008      1-28-2008   1060.08;
                         1060.99
28-2008      2-25-2008   240.01
29-2008      2-25-2008   TSO Table E
45-2008      3-24-2008   TSO Table D
53-2008      4-14-2008   TSO Table E
82-2008      5-12-2008   840.01
95-2008      6-9-2008    TSO Table I
98-2008      6-9-2008    TSO Table E
101-2008     6-23-2008   660.07
129-2008     7-14-2008   TSO Table F
133-2008     7-14-2008   TSO Table G
134-2008     7-14-2008   TSO Table G
143-2008     7-28-2008   TSO Table F
158-2008     9-8-2008    822.16
169-2008     9-22-2008   TSO Table I
182-2008     10-13-2008  660.08
220-2008     11-24-2008  TSO Table F
214-2008     12-8-2008   TSO Table E
215-2008     12-8-2008   234.11
23-2009      2-9-2009    TSO Table I
34-2009      3-9-2009    TSO Table E
35-2009      3-9-2009    TSO Table E
43-2009      3-23-2009   TSO Table I
44-2009      3-23-2009   298.03
46-2009      3-23-2009   TSO Table F
56-2009      4-13-2009   TSO Table E
                         1478.01—
65-2009      6-8-2009    1478.04,
                         1478.99
67-2009      5-11-2009   TSO Table E
92-2009      6-8-2009    TSO Table E
98-2009      6-22-2009   TSO Table E
99-2009      6-22-2009   TSO Table E
100-2009     6-22-2009   TSO Table E
120-2009     7-13-2009   TSO Table E
121-2009     7-13-2009   TSO Table E
128-2009     7-13-2009   TSO Table E
129-2009     7-27-2009   TSO Table E
140-2009     9-14-2009   TSO Table I
144-2009     9-14-2009   222.01
148-2009     9-14-2009   TSO Table E
151-2009     9-14-2009   TSO Table E
152-2009     9-14-2009   TSO Table E
141-2009     10-12-2009  TSO Table E
176- 2009    10-12-2009  TSO Table E
177- 2009    10-12-2009  TSO Table E
201-2009     11-9-2009   331.45
205-2009     11-9-2009   TSO Table E
209-2009     11-23-2009  TSO Table I
218-2009     12-14-2009  624.03
240-2009     12-21-2009  TSO Table E
248-2009     12-21-2009  TSO Table E
61-2010      5-10-2010   TSO Table E
63-2010      5-10-2010   660.20
64-2010      6-14-2010   1604.18
68-2010      6-14-2010   1040.09
65-2010      6-28-2010   836.01—
                         836.08
113-2010     9-13-2010   TSO Table F
122-2010     9-13-2010   TSO Table E
138-2010     9-27-2010   TSO Table E
142-2010     9-27-2010   TSO Table E
143-2010     9-27-2010   TSO Table E
152-2010     10-11-2010  TSO Table E
153-2010     10-11-2010  TSO Table E
154-2010     10-11-2010  TSO Table I
167-2010     10-25-2010  TSO Table E
182-2010     12-13-2010  836.03
184-2010     12-13-2010  TSO Table E
185-2010     12-13-2010  TSO Table E
201-2010     12-20-2010  1040.10
12-2011      2-14-2011   TSO Table I
17-2011      2-28-2011   TSO Table E
22-2011      3-14-2011   TSO Table I
52-2011      5-9-2011    TSO Table E
53-2011      5-9-2011    660.08
57-2011      5-9-2011    TSO Table E
58-2011      5-9-2011    TSO Table B
59-2011      5-9-2011    TSO Table B
64-2011      5-23-2011   TSO Table E
65-2011      5-23-2011   TSO Table E
75-2011      6-13-2011   624.19
77-2011      6-13-2011   TSO Table E
78-2011      6-13-2011   TSO Table I
88-2011      6-13-2011   TSO Table E
120-2011     7-25-2011   TSO Table E
124-2011     9-12-2011   TSO Table E
148-2011     10-24-2011  624.19
149-2011     10-24-2011  660.09
153-2011     10-24-2011  TSO Table E
170-2011     11-14-2011  TSO Table E
185-2011     12-19-2011  TSO Table E
193-2011     12-19-2011  TSO Table E
18-2012      2-13-2012   303.08
20-2012      2-13-2012   TSO Table E
7-2012       2-27-2012   TSO Table C
37-2012      3-12-2012   TSO Table E
41-2012      3-26-2012   303.08
53-2012      4-9-2012    836.01—
                         836.08
72-2012      4-23-2012   TSO Table E
86-2012      5-29-2012   TSO Table E
118-2012     7-9-2012    TSO Table I
                         1060.01—
133-2012     7-23-2012   1060.08;
                         1060.99
204-2012     12-10-2012  TSO Table E
207-2012     12-10-2012  TSO Table E
208-2012     12-10-2012  1056.01—
                         1056.21
226-2012     12-17-2012  618.22
40-2013      1-14-2013   TSO Table E
8-2013       2-11-2013   1044.03
                         1060.01—
16-2013      2-11-2013   1060.08;
                         1060.99
18-2013      2-11-2013   TSO Table E
19-2013      2-11-2013   TSO Table E
20-2013      2-11-2013   234.12
7-2013       2-25-2013   206.01—
                         206.07
26-2013      2-25-2013   TSO Table F
27-2013      2-25-2013   TSO Table E
52-2013      4-8-2013    234.13
60-2013      4-22-2013   TSO Table I
62-2013      5-28-2013   TSO Table C
101-2013     7-8-2013    660.09
                         844.01—
140-2013     9-9-2013    844.11;
                         844.99 
                         1054.01—
149-2013     9-9-2013    1054.35;
                         1054.99
193-2013     11-25-2013  234.14
208-2013     12-16-2013  1040.12
114-2014     9-8-2014    TSO Table E
159-2014     11-24-2014  303.08
168-2014     12-15-2014  TSO Table F
174-2014     1-26-2015   1040.03
21-2015      2-9-2015    311.01
30-2015      2-23-2015   TSO Table F
43-2015      5-11-2015   TSO Table I
                         852.01;
67-2015      5-26-2015   852.03;
                         852.06
109-2015     7-27-2015   TSO Table E
119-2015     9-14-2015   TSO Table F
124-2015     9-14-2015   234.11
129-2015     9-28-2015   TSO Table E
                         1020.01—
                         1020.03;
144-2015     10-12-2015  1020.06—
                         1020.12;
                         1020.14
158-2015     11-9-2015   TSO Table I
169-2015     11-23-2015  TSO Table E
170-2015     11-23-2015  TSO Table E
                         880.01—
182-2015     11-23-2015  880.22;
                         880.99
183-2015     12-14-2015  618.24
187-2015     12-14-2015  1040.12
195-2015     12-21-2015  884.01—
                         884.06
14-2016      3-14-2016   TSO Table B
16-2016      3-28-2016   TSO Table E
17-2016      3-28-2016   TSO Table E
28-2016      3-28-2016   232.01
25-2016      4-25-2016   TSO Table I
42-2016      5-9-2016    303.08
55-2016      6-13-2016   TSO Table E
69-2016      7-11-2016   TSO Table E
91-2016      9-12-2016   TSO Table B
94-2016      9-26-2016   234.07;
                         TSO Table B
95-2016      10-24-2016  TSO Table F
109-2016     10-24-2016  TSO Table E
110-2016     10-24-2016  TSO Table F
113-2016     10-24-2016  844.04
97-2016      11-14-2016  1040.12
118-2016     11-14-2016  TSO Table I
121-2016     11-14-2016  TSO Table E
122-2016     11-14-2016  TSO Table B
123-2016     11-14-2016  TSO Table E
142-2016     12-12-2016  1054.04;
                         1054.26
133-2016     12-19-2016  674.01
155-2016     12-19-2016  TSO Table E
01-2017      1-23-2017   TSO Table C
16-2017      2-13-2017   TSO Table F
43-2017      4-10-2017   TSO Table F
73-2017      6-26-2017   TSO Table E
62-2017      7-10-2017   TSO Table I
92-2017      7-24-2017   TSO Table F
99-2017      9-11-2017   TSO Table E
107-2017     9-25-2017   TSO Table E
135-2017     10-23-2017  668.05
153-2017     11-27-2017  844.04
158-2017     11-27-2017  TSO Table F
03-2018      2-12-2018   876.01;
                         876.02
10-2018      2-12-2018   1060.01
10-2018      2-12-2018   1060.02
10-2018      2-12-2018   1060.99
11-2018      2-12-2018   1040.09
20-2018      2-26-2018   1040.10
33-2018      3-12-2018   TSO Table F
43-2018      4-9-2018    TSO Table E
42-2018      4-23-2018   1068.07
45-2018      4-23-2018   TSO Table B
54-2018      5-14-2018   355.02
55-2018      5-14-2018   1068.06
64-2018      6-11-2018   TSO Table B
61-2018      6-25-2018   TSO Table E
88-2018      7-23-2018   234.15
                         844.01;
                         844.03;
85-2018      7-25-2018   844.04;
                         844.06—
                         844.09;
                         844.11
                         1074.01—
76-2018      9-24-2018   1074.23;
                         1074.99
86-2018      9-24-2018   618.05
134-2018     11-13-2018  234.16
138-2018     12-17-2018  1058.01;
                         1058.02
139-2018     12-17-2018  1060.08
155-2018     12-17-2018  234.17
36-2019      4-8-2019    TSO Table B
42-2019      4-22-2019   TSO Table B
43-2019      4-22-2019   TSO Table B
44-2019      4-22-2019   TSO Table B
45-2019      4-22-2019   TSO Table B
46-2019      4-22-2019   TSO Table B
47-2019      4-22-2019   TSO Table B
48-2019      4-22-2019   TSO Table B
49-2019      4-22-2019   TSO Table F
51-2019      5-13-2019   TSO Table F
68-2019      6-10-2019   TSO Table A
691          6-16-2019   TSO Table B
89-2019      9-9-2019    TSO Table A
91-2019      9-9-2019    TSO Table E
92-2019      9-9-2019    TSO Table E
93-2019      9-9-2019    TSO Table A
94-2019      9-9-2019    TSO Table A
95-2019      9-9-2019    TSO Table A
96-2019      9-9-2019    TSO Table A
97-2019      9-9-2019    TSO Table A
99-2019      9-9-2019    TSO Table E
100-2019     9-9-2019    331.38
101-2019     9-9-2019    TSO Table A
102-2019     9-9-2019    TSO Table A
103-2019     9-9-2019    TSO Table A
104-2019     9-9-2019    TSO Table A
105-2019     9-23-2019   1044.02
106-2019     9-23-2019   TSO Table B
107-2019     9-23-2019   TSO Table A
108-2019     9-23-2019   TSO Table A
110-2019     11-12-2019  TSO Table I
118-2019     10-28-2019  TSO Table A
120-2019     10-28-2019  TSO Table E
122-2019     10-28-2019  TSO Table A
123-2019     10-28-2019  TSO Table A
126-2019     11-12-2019  TSO Table A
128-2019     11-12-2019  TSO Table I
132-2019     11-25-2019  TSO Table A
133-2019     11-25-2019  TSO Table E
134-2019     12-9-2019   TSO Table A
135-2019     12-9-2019   TSO Table A
136-2019     12-9-2019   TSO Table E
137-2019     12-9-2019   TSO Table A
143-2019     12-16-2019  TSO Table A
144-2019     12-16-2019  TSO Table A
152-2019     12-16-2019  TSO Table A
06-2020      3-9-2020    TSO Table D
07-2020      2-10-2020   TSO Table A
09-2020      2-10-2020   TSO Table E
13-2020      2-24-2020   TSO Table A
16-2020      3-9-2020    TSO Table A
17-2020      3-9-2020    TSO Table A
24-2020      3-18-2020   TSO Table A
22-2020      3-9-2020    875.01,
                         875.02
69-2020      6-22-2020   234.18
81-2020      7-13-2020   234.19
94-2020      9-14-2020   TSO Table A
106-2020     9-28-2020   1454.04
107-2020     9-28-2020   TSO Table I
108-2020     9-28-2020   TSO Table A
112-2020     9-28-2020   TSO Table A
120-2020     10-12-2020  TSO Table A
121-2020     10-12-2020  TSO Table A
126-2020     10-26-2020  1462.01
137-2020     11-16-2020  Adopting Ordinance
138-2020     11-16-2020  TSO Table E
                         1422.04,
147-2020     12-21-2020  1422.05,
                         1444.15
148-2020     12-21-2020  1478.05
152-2020     11-30-2020  234.05
01-2021      2-8-2021    TSO Table I
07-2021      2-8-2021    1478.05
28-2021      5-10-2021   TSO Table A
34-2021      4-12-2021   234.20
44-2021      5-10-2021   TSO Table A
50-2021      5-24-2021   TSO Table A
51-2021      5-24-2021   TSO Table A
52-2021      5-24-2021   TSO Table A
53-2021      5-24-2021   TSO Table A
56-2021      5-24-2021   TSO Table E
59-2021      5-24-2021   TSO Table A
60-2021      5-24-2021   TSO Table A
65-2021      6-14-2021   TSO Table A
66-2021      6-14-2021   TSO Table A
67-2021      6-14-2021   234.21
68-2021      7-12-2021   TSO Table I
69-2021      7-12-2021   TSO Table I
70-2021      6-14-2021   TSO Table A
73-2021      6-14-2021   TSO Table A
74-2021      6-14-2021   TSO Table A
75-2021      6-14-2021   TSO Table A
76-2021      6-28-2021   TSO Table A
77-2021      7-12-2021   TSO Table A
78-2021      6-14-2021   TSO Table A
79-2021      6-14-2021   TSO Table A
87-2021      6-28-2021   TSO Table A
91-2021      7-12-2021   TSO Table A
95-2021      7-26-2021   TSO Table A
99-2021      10-11-2021  TSO Table I
105-2021     9-13-2021   TSO Table A
112-2021     10-25-2021  836.04
113-2021     10-11-2021  TSO Table A
115-2021     - -         674.02,
                         674.04
123-2021     12-13-2021  1444.15
133-2021     12-13-2021  351.05
149-2021     12-20-2021  656.08
7-2022       1-24-2022   TSO Table E
8-2022       1-24-2022   TSO Table E
18-2022      2-14-2022   1462.06
57-2022      4-25-2022   TSO Table E
61-2022      5-9-2022    TSO Table E
63-2022      5-9-2022    TSO Table E
64-2022      5-9-2022    TSO Table E
66-2022      5-23-2022   TSO Table F
83-2022      6-13-2022   TSO Table F
84-2022      6-13-2022   1024.01
97-2022      7-11-2022   TSO Table E
99-2022      7-11-2022   TSO Table E
104-2022     7-25-2022   TSO Table E
109-2022     7-25-2022   642.37
119-2022     9-12-2022   TSO Table E
120-2022     9-12-2022   TSO Table B
145-2022     11-7-2022   TSO Table A
146-2022     11-7-2022   TSO Table A
152-2022     11-14-2022  351.05
153-2022     11-14-2022  TSO Table A
154-2022     11-14-2022  TSO Table F
155-2022     11-14-2022  TSO Table A
159-2022     11-28-2022  TSO Table A
168-2022     11-28-2022  TSO Table A
169-2022     12-12-2022  TSO Table A
173-2022     12-12-2022  TSO Table E
174-2022     12-12-2022  TSO Table E
177-2022     12-12-2022  TSO Table A
180-2022     12-19-2022  TSO Table A
3-2023       1-23-2023   TSO Table A
4-2023       1-23-2023   TSO Table A
7-2023       2-13-2023   TSO Table A
8-2023       2-13-2023   1060.08
9-2023       2-13-2023   TSO Table A
27-2023      3-13-2023   TSO Table A
31-2023      3-13-2023   TSO Table F
33-2023      3-13-2023   TSO Table A
35-2023      3-13-2023   TSO Table A
38-2023      3-27-2023   TSO Table A
43-2023      3-27-2023   TSO Table A
45-2023      3-27-2023   TSO Table A
49-2023      4-10-2023   TSO Table A
52-2023      4-10-2023   TSO Table A
53-2023      4-10-2023   TSO Table A
54-2023      4-10-2023   TSO Table A
55-2023      4-24-2023   TSO Table A
59-2023      4-24-2023   TSO Table A
61-2023      4-24-2023   TSO Table A
62-2023      4-24-2023   TSO Table A
63-2023      4-24-2023   TSO Table A
65-2023      5-8-2023    TSO Table A
69-2023      5-8-2023    TSO Table A
71-2023      5-8-2023    TSO Table A
72-2023      5-22-2023   TSO Table A
73-2023      5-22-2023   TSO Table A
74-2023      5-22-2023   TSO Table E
75-2023      5-22-2023   TSO Table E
83-2023      6-12-2023   TSO Table A
84-2023      6-26-2023   TSO Table A
85-2023      6-26-2023   TSO Table A
90-2023      7-10-2023   TSO Table A
93-2023      7-10-2023   TSO Table A
101-2023     7-24-2023   TSO Table A
102-2023     7-24-2023   TSO Table A
103-2023     7-24-2023   TSO Table A
104-2023     7-24-2023   TSO Table A
106-2023     7-24-2023   TSO Table A
107-2023     7-24-2023   TSO Table A
110-2023     7-24-2023   TSO Table A
111-2023     9-11-2023   355.01,
                         355.02
120-2023     9-11-2023   TSO Table A
122-2023     9-25-2023   TSO Table A
127-2023     9-25-2023   TSO Table A
128-2023     9-25-2023   TSO Table A
131-2023     10-9-2023   TSO Table A
132-2023     10-9-2023   TSO Table A
133-2023     10-9-2023   TSO Table A
139-2023     10-23-2023  TSO Table A
146-2023     11-13-2023  TSO Table A
                         880.06,
147-2023     11-13-2023  880.09,
                         880.10,
                         880.21
149-2023     11-13-2023  TSO Table A
153-2023     11-13-2023  TSO Table A
155-2023     11-27-2023  TSO Table A
156-2023     11-27-2023  TSO Table A
160-2023     12-18-2023  TSO Table A
22-2024      3-11-2024   TSO Table A
27-2024      3-25-2024   TSO Table A
29-2024      3-25-2024   TSO Table A
30-2024      4-15-2024   TSO Table A
34-2024      4-29-2024   TSO Table A
35-2024      4-29-2024   TSO Table A
40-2024      5-13-2024   TSO Table A
43-2024      5-13-2024   TSO Table A
45-2024      5-13-2024   TSO Table A
48-2024      5-28-2024   TSO Table A
50-2024      5-28-2024   TSO Table A
62-2024      7-22-2024   TSO Table F
69-2024      9-9-2024    TSO Table A
76-2024      9-9-2024    TSO Table E
78-2024      9-23-2024   TSO Table A
83-2024      9-23-2024   TSO Table A
91-2024      10-14-2024  TSO Table A
97-2024      10-28-2024  TSO Table A
98-2024      10-28-2024  TSO Table A
99-2024      10-28-2024  TSO Table A
100-2024     10-28-2024  TSO Table A
101-2024     11-12-2024  TSO Table A
102-2024     11-12-2024  TSO Table A
103-2024     11-12-2024  TSO Table A
109-2024     11-25-2024  TSO Table A
110-2024     11-25-2024  TSO Table A
113-2024     11-25-2024  TSO Table A
114-2024     11-25-2024  TSO Table A
                         1478.01—
118-2024     12-9-2024   1478.13,
                         1478.99
1-2025       1-13-2025   TSO Table E
2-2025       2-10-2025   TSO Table A
4-2025       1-13-2025   TSO Table A
5-2025       1-13-2025   TSO Table A
6-2025       1-13-2025   TSO Table A
8-2025       1-13-2025   TSO Table C
13-2025      1-27-2025   TSO Table A
14-2025      1-27-2025   TSO Table A
15-2025      1-27-2025   234.22
16-2025      1-27-2025   TSO Table A
17-2025      2-10-2025   TSO Table A
20-2025      2-10-2025   TSO Table A
21-2025      2-10-2025   TSO Table A
23-2025      2-24-2025   TSO Table A
31-2025      3-10-2025   TSO Table A
32-2025      4-14-2025   TSO Table D
34-2025      3-10-2025   TSO Table A
44-2025      4-28-2025   337.31
50-2025      4-28-2025   TSO Table A
51-2025      4-28-2025   TSO Table A
52-2025      5-12-2025   TSO Table A
55-2025      5-12-2025   TSO Table A
56-2025      5-12-2025   TSO Table A
57-2025      5-12-2025   TSO Table A
58-2025      5-12-2025   TSO Table A
61-2025      5-12-2025   TSO Table E
64-2025      5-27-2025   TSO Table A
72-2025      6-9-2025    210.04
73-2025      6-9-2025    TSO Table A
74-2025      6-9-2025    TSO Table A
                         1454.01,
75-2025      6-9-2025    1454.02,
                         1454.03,
                         1454.04
76-2025      6-23-2025   1060.02,
                         1060.99
78-2025      6-23-2025   TSO Table E
79-2025      6-23-2025   212.02
81-2025      6-23-2025   TSO Table A
83-2025      6-23-2025   TSO Table A
86-2025      7-14-2025   1462.06
                         1478.01,
                         1478.05,
90-2025      7-14-2025   1478.06,
                         1478.08,
                         1478.13,
                         1478.99
94-2025      7-28-2025   TSO Table I
103-2025     7-28-2025   TSO Table A
104-2025     7-28-2025   TSO Table A
124-2025     8-4-2025    TSO Table A
128-2025     9-9-2025    351.13
133-2025     9-9-2025    TSO Table A
135-2025     9-9-2025    TSO Table A
141-2025     9-22-2025   1479.01—
                         1479.09
147-2025     10-13-2025  TSO Table A
149-2025     10-13-2025  TSO Table A
150-2025     10-13-2025  TSO Table A
151-2025     10-13-2025  670.01—
                         670.03
155-2025     10-27-2025  TSO Table E
158-2025     11-10-2025  TSO Table A
159-2025     11-10-2025  TSO Table A
160-2025     11-10-2025  TSO Table D
163-2025     11-24-2025  1060.99
167-2025     11-24-2025  TSO Table A
168-2025     11-24-2025  TSO Table A
171-2025     11-24-2025  TSO Table A
174-2025     12-8-2025   TSO Table A
                        
 
 
CITY OF BARBERTON, OHIO
DEVELOPMENT CODE
Land Use, Subdivision, Landscaping & Signage Regulations
Effective January 11, 1996
Current through April 8, 2019

CITY OF BARBERTON
576 West Park Avenue  Barberton, OH 44203
Planning Department   (330) 848-6729
Building Department   (330) 848-6730
Orginally prepared by
GANN ASSOCIATES
(800) 762-GANN
Copyright 1994 GANN ASSOCIATES except for Section 1250.04 and Chapter 1260.

Folio infobase published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet:_http://www.amlegal.com
Title 2 : Zoning
Chapter 1000
Comprehensive Storm Water Management Plan
1000.01  Adoption by reference.
   A Comprehensive Storm Water Management Plan for the City is hereby adopted
by reference as if fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 172-2008.  Passed 9-22-08.)
Chapter 1100
General Provisions
1100.01 Establishment
(a) Title
This Code, consisting of Chapters 1000 through 1399 of the Codified Ordinances
of Barberton, Ohio, shall be known, cited, and referred to as: The City of
Barberton Development Code.
(b) Authority
This Code is adopted under the authority of:
   (1) the powers granted to the City of Barberton as a Charter City, and
   (2) Section 711.101 of the Ohio Revised Code for subdivision regulations,
and
   (3) Section 713.06 of the Ohio Revised Code for zoning regulations, and
   (4) Section 715.27 of the Revised Code for sign, fence, and related
regulations.
(c) Purpose
This Code is adopted to improve and protect the public health, safety, and
welfare of residents of the City.  To this end the Code seeks:
   (1) To further the implementation of the City's Comprehensive Plan in such a
manner as any changed conditions since its adoption require
   (2) To prevent new construction or alteration or expansion of existing
construction that does not comply with City regulations
   (3) to promote the orderly layout and utilization of land
   (4) to further safe and efficient circulation of motor vehicles and
pedestrians
   (5) to provide adequate public services and facilities for City residents
   (6) to make adequate provision for water supply, sewerage, storm water
drainage, other utility services, schools, parks, playgrounds, and other public
areas
   (7) to ensure adequate legal description and survey monumentation of
subdivided land.
(d) Repeal
Upon enactment of this Code, there shall thereby be repealed the following City
regulations:
   1. the Land Planning and Subdivision Regulations, and
   2. the Planning and Zoning Code, and
   3. Chapter 1448, Building in Flood Plain Areas, of the Building Code.
In addition, the Zoning Resolution of Coventry Township shall upon enactment of
this Code no longer have applicability in any part of the City.
Except as may have been provided in the enacting ordinance, no other ordinance,
regulation, annexation agreement, or private agreement, covenant, or easement
is intended to be repealed or abrogated. 
(e) Effective Date
This Code shall be in full force and effect on the date of effect specified in
the enacting ordinance.
(f) Separability
If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid any provision of
this Code, such judgment shall not affect any other provision hereof not
specifically included in said judgment.
Further, if such court shall adjudge invalid the ap-plication of any provision
hereof to a particular property, such judgment shall not affect the application
of said provision to any other property not specifically included in said
judgment.
1100.02 Applicability
(a) Activities Regulated
Except in conformity with the applicable provisions of this Code, within the
area of geographic applicability defined herein:
   (1) no land shall hereafter be divided, conveyed, monumented, recorded, or
transferred, and
   (2) no division of land shall be submitted for recording with the Recorder
of Summit or Wayne County, and
   (3) no building, structure, land, body of water, air rights, or other
premises in the City shall hereafter be improved, constructed or constructed
upon, developed, used, established, maintained, occupied, altered, converted,
enlarged or moved.
(b) Geographic Applicability
The regulations of this Code shall apply to all parts of the City of Barberton
and to all land annexed to the City.
(c) Minimum Requirements
The provisions herein shall, in their interpretation and application, be
considered minimum requirements.
(d) More Restrictive Regulation Applies
In any case in which any portion of this or any other City code, ordinance, or
any other applicable county, state, or federal law or regulation or any kind of
private agreement, covenant, or easement applying within the City, establishes
a requirement that is either more or less restrictive than a particular
requirement established herein, the provision that is the more restrictive or
that imposes the higher standard or requirement shall govern.
Except that among the regulations of the City, a provision establishing a rule
for a specific case or exception shall govern in lieu of a provision that
establishes a more general rule applying to a broader class of properties or
situations.
(e) Unlawful Uses Not Made Lawful
No building, structure, or use not lawfully existing on the date of effect of
this Code shall be made lawful solely by the adoption thereof.  Such structure
or use shall remain unlawful hereunder to the extent that it is in conflict
with the requirements of this Code.
Chapter 1110
Zoning Districts
1110.01 Zoning Map
(a)   Establishment of Districts
   (1)   Zoning Districts
   To achieve the purposes of this Code, the City of Barberton is hereby
divided and classified into the districts established in this chapter.
   (2)   Zoning District Map
   The district classification of all land in the City shall be shown on the
map designated as the City Zoning District Map, dated and signed by the Clerk
of Council upon adoption.
   The Zoning District Map and all amendments thereto shall be as much a part
of this Code as if fully described herein and shall be filed as part thereof by
the Clerk of Council.  The Map shall be available for public inspection in the
Building Depart-ment.  Any amendments to this Map shall be similarly dated,
filed, and made available for public reference.
   (3)   Multiple Classifications Prohibited
   Except in the TNO District, no land shall at any time be classified in more
than one zoning district, except that land may be classified in any one or more
districts designated as overlay districts herein and in a district not
designated as an overlay district.
(b)   District Boundaries
   (1)   Interpretation
      District boundary lines on the Zoning District Map shall, unless clearly
indicated otherwise, be interpreted to be on the boundary lines of the City or
on the following lines or the extension of them:
         A.   the center lines of streets or alleys, railroads, easements,
rivers, and other water bodies, or
         B.   interior side or rear lot lines.
         District boundary lines approximately following such lines shall be
interpreted as located on those lines.  Distances not specifically indicated on
the Map shall be established using the scale of the Map.
         Interpretations of the Zoning District Map not determinable by the
rules in this division shall be as provided in division 1310.04(b).
   (2)   Zoning Boundary Dividing a Lot
      Where a district boundary divides a lot in single ownership, the district
governing any portion of the lot may, at the owner's discretion, extend to the
entire lot if such extension is not at any point more than 25 feet beyond the
boundary on the Map.
(Ord. 119-1999. Passed 7-26-99.)
1110.02 Special District Regulations
(a) Precedence of Overlays
Unless specifically provided otherwise in this Code, if the requirements of an
overlay district conflict with the requirements of the underlying district or
with any other provision of City regulations, the requirements of the overlay
district shall govern.
(b) Zoning of Annexed Land
Except as may be provided by a preannexation agreement or by subsequent or
simultaneous rezoning, any parcel of land hereafter annexed to the City shall
upon annexation be classified in the AE District.
(c) Lot Areas Without Sewer
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, minimum lot areas for lots
not served by a public or community sewer system shall be as approved as safe
for septic systems by the City Health Department based on soil and groundwater
conditions.
(d) Non-Residential Uses in Residential Districts
   (1) Permitted Uses
   Principal Uses other than dwellings that are allowed as Permitted or
Conditional Uses in any Residential District shall conform to the dimensional
requirements established for single-family detached dwellings in Tables 1110B,
1110C, and 1110E.
   (2) Conditional Uses
   The Planning Commission may require reasonable standards exceeding the
requirements of Tables 1110B, 1110C, and 1110E for any such use allowed as a
Conditional Use if it finds such higher standards necessary to ensure com-
patibility of the use with the surrounding residential environment.
(e) Lot Size Averaging
   (1) Purpose
   This division is intended to allow flexibility in the planning of
residential subdivisions; to facilitate the preservation on private home lots
of mature trees, rock outcroppings; and other natural amenities, and to aid in
the development of odd-shaped tracts.
   (2) Lot Area and Width Reductions
   Individual single- and two-family lots may have lot areas per dwelling unit
and lot widths smaller than the minimum requirements provided in Tables 1110B
and 1110C subject to the restrictions of division (e)(3).
   (3) Restrictions
      A. Average Area & Width
      The mean average lot area per dwel-ling unit and lot width of all single-
and two-family residential lots in a development or any phase thereof shall be
no less than the minimum Table figures.
      B. Minimum Lot Area
      No lot area per dwelling unit shall be less than 70 percent of the
minimum Table figure.  Nor shall it be less than provided in division (f)(3).
      C. Minimum Lot Width
      No lot width shall be less than 85 percent of the minimum Table figure. 
Nor shall it be less than provided in division (f)(3).
      D. Lot Width Transition
      If a lot has a lot width below the minimum required, its width shall not
be more than 2 feet below the lesser of:
      1. the width of any lot that it abuts, or that it is separated only by an
alley from, that has a front lot line on the same street, or
      2. the applicable required minimum lot width.
(f) Density Transfer in LC District
   (1) Purpose
   To both protect property rights and encourage the preservation of open space
and environmentally sensitive areas, it is desirable to minimize the loss of
value and utility occasioned by either a regulatory requirement to preserve
open land on private property or by voluntary action to do so.
   This division therefore allows a portion of a parcel that is classified in
the LC Land Conservation District to attribute its development rights to the
balance of the same parcel. 
   This will allow total quantitative development rights for number of dwelling
units or amount of floor area to remain the same as they would be without the
LC restrictions.
   (2) Modification of Dimensional Requirements
      A. Lot Area and Width
      Land and water area located in the LC District may be counted together
with land zoned in other districts on the same property for purposes of
computing number of dwelling units or amount of floor area allowed on such
other land.
      Lot or building site areas and widths may be smaller than otherwise
required in the applicable zoning district as provided in Table 1110F as
modified by ther minimums specified in division (f)(3).
      B. Building Height
      The Planning Director shall approve the smallest exception to maximum
building height allowed herein that he or she determines necessary for the
exercise of the rights created by Density Transfer. 
      Maximum building height approved hereunder within 100 feet of a prop-erty
in a district other than the LC District shall not exceed the maximum building
height allowed by that district except where the district boundary is along an
arterial street or freeway.
   (3) Minimum Lot Dimensions
   Notwithstanding other provisions herein, no lot dimensions shall be less
than as follows.
 
Lot area in square feet:
RA Districts, for single-family attached dwellings: 1,600
R Districts: all other cases:                       4,500
Lot width in feet:
RA Districts, for single-family attached dwellings: 16
R Districts: all other cases:                       40
 
   (4) (Reserved)
   (5) Landowner-Initiated LC Zoning
      A. Voluntary Use of District
      A developer wishing to develop a cluster subdivision or to otherwise
voluntarily devote land to permanent public or common open space and transfer
its density allowance to the balance of a parcel, may request classification of
part of such parcel in the LC District.
      The Planning Commission, Planning Director, or Park and Recreation
Commission may recommend but not require that a property owner petition for
such classification for land designated as open space in the Comprehensive
Plan, Official Map, or Park System Plan adopted by the Park and Recreation
Commission.
      B. Bonus Intensity
      Property not classifiable in the LC District on the basis of an
environmental characteristic under division
      (f)(4)B but voluntarily proposed for LC zoning by the property owner
shall receive a bonus in the intensity of development permitted thereupon as
provided in Table 1110F.
      C. Rezoning Criteria
      For land having no environmental feature requiring preservation, the
Planning Commission and City Council shall, in deciding whether to classify it
in the LC District, take into account:
      1. the interest of the Park and Recreation Commission or other public
body in acquiring the property
      2. the adequacy of any homeowners association or other arrangement for
preserving perpetually as open space, and providing for the maintenance of, any
land that is not to be dedidedicated to the public
      3. the provision of adequate open space buffers bordering areas developed
in, or if undeveloped, zoned for, a lower-density residential use than the land
on the parcel that is not to be zoned LC.
   (6) Non-LC Open Spaces
   No Density Transfer hereunder shall be allowed from land required to be
provided as a yard, lawn, landscaped area, stormwater detention or retention
area, or other open space under any other regulation other than the provisions
of the LC District.
Please Note: To view the Density Transfer Graphic, see page 1110-4 of the
printed version of the Barberton Development Code
(g) Street Yards for Infill Parcels
In lieu of the minimum front yard depths and corner side yard widths otherwise
required in this chapter, the provisions of this division shall determine
minimum front and corner side yard dimensions in any block in which the depths
of 30 percent or more of the actual front and corner side yards vary from that
required by other provisions of this chapter. 
   (1) Interior Lots
   The minimum depth of the front yard on an interior lot shall be equal to the
depth of the actual street yards on the abutting lots that front on the same
street, if the depths of such yards are the same.
   If the depths of such abutting yards are differ-ent, the minimum depth of
the front yard on the subject lot shall be their mean average.
   (2) Corner Lots
   On a corner lot, the minimum depth of the front yard shall be equal to the
depth of the actual front yard or width of the actual corner side yard on the
abutting lot that abuts the front yard of the subject lot.
   The minimum width of the corner side yard on a corner lot shall be equal to
the depth of the actual front yard or width of the actual corner side yard on
the abutting lot that abuts the corner side yard of the subject lot.
   (3) Vacant Abutting Lot
   If there is no principal structure on an abutting lot or lots under
divisions (1) and (2), there shall be substituted for the abutting lot the
nearest lot on the same side of the subject lot within the same block face that
accommodates a principal structure.
(h) Pedestrian Retail Area Downtown
   (1) Purpose:
   The provisions of this division are intended to accomplish the purposes
specified below.
      A. To further public safety by mini-mizing pedestrian-vehicular conflicts
in the traditional Downtown business area, which depends on pedestrian access
      B. To preserve the suitability for comfortable pedestrian shopping of
Downtown Barberton
      C. To encourage the most efficient provision of new off-street parking
for patrons and employees in a way consistent with the present character of the
traditional Downtown.
   (2) Use Regulations
      A. Sidewalk Level Uses
      1. Applicability
      The regulations of this division (h)(2) shall apply to locations in
buildings or on lots that:
      a. are in the C-D Downtown Commercial District, and
      b. if within a building, are on the first floor or sidewalk level, and
      c. are within 40 feet of the street line along Tuscarawas Avenue or
Second Street N.W.
      For buildings in which the floors closest to sidewalk level are either
elevated above or depressed below such level, the applicant shall designate on
his or her plans one of such floors to which these regulations shall apply.
      2. Prohibited Uses
      In locations specified in division (h)(2)A, the following uses shall be
prohibited:
      a. Building-enclosed uses that are not oriented--in their use of signage,
windows, building entrances, and the like--principally toward either Tuscarawas
Avenue or Second Street N.W.
      b. Building-enclosed  uses that do not have a public pedestrian entrance
at the sidewalk level or, if approved by the Planning Director, at a level
above or below the sidewalk level, on either Second Street N.W. or Tuscarawas
Avenue
      c. Drive-through establishments, as defined herein
      d. Open sales lots, as defined herein, except for street vending areas as
permitted in division (3)B1
      e. Service stations and filling stations
      f. Car washes
      g. Vehicular areas, as defined herein, other than driveways, which shall
be a Conditional Use.
   (3) Street Yards
      A. Setbacks Prohibited
      In the C-D District, building setbacks from the street line are not
permitted abutting Tuscarawas Avenue or Second Street N.W.
      B. Exceptions
      1. Sidewalk Cafes and Street Vending Areas
      a. Setback Allowed
      Because sidewalk cafes and street vending contribute to the character of
a pedestrian-oriented retail area, a building may be set back from the street
line the minimum distance necessary in the judgment of the
      Planning Director to allow the installation of a permanent outdoor
sidewalk cafe or off-street area devoted to street vending carts or stands
proposed by the applicant. 
      Such cafe or area shall itself not be set back from the street line.
      b. Discontinuation
      The sidewalk cafe or street vending area qualifying for the exception
shall not be discontinued for more than 90 days other than for normal seasonal
closures, closures in emergency situations, or repair or maintenance unless:
      1. the operator thereof provides evidence to the Building Commissioner of
intent to replace it within 180 days of such discontinuance with another
facility of either type, or
      2. its discontinuation is approved by the Board of Zoning and Building
Appeals on the basis that continuation would impose undue hardship upon the
operator or that because of changed conditions the cafe or street vending area
no longer provides a significant public benefit.
      2. Portions of Facades
      Portions of the facade of a building, or of a storefront or other ground-
level division thereof, that do not exceed 50 percent of the frontage thereof,
such as building entrances or display windows, may be set back a maximum of 5
feet from the street line.
      Portions of such additional setback that are not landscaped shall be
surfaced with non-asphaltic hardsurfaced paving material.
      3. Upper Stories
      The requirements of division (3)A shall not apply to building stories or
portions thereof above a building height of 12 feet.
   (4) Required Frontage Window Area
      A. Minimum Window Area
      No less than 60 percent of the area between building height levels of 2.5
feet and 7.5 feet on each ground floor building facade that faces Tuscarawas
Avenue or Second Street N.W. shall be in windows and/or doors that are
transparent when viewed from the street.
      No such window or door shall be horizontally separated by more than 15
feet from the nearest other such window or door in the same facade.
      B. Coverage of Windows
      Ground floor windows and transparent doors along Tuscarawas Avenue and
Second Street N.W. in existing and newly constructed buildings shall not be
covered by signs or opaque window screening--such as dra-peries, shades, or
blinds--that obscures from view of the public street more than 50 percent of
the cumulative win-dow and transparent door area in the facade between the
height levels specified in division (4)A.
      C. Exceptions
      Entertainment uses, as defined herein, shall be exempt from the
requirements of this division (h)(4).
      The Planning Director may approve an exception to the requirements of
this division (h)(4) for uses that provide for public pedestrian movement that
bypasses Tuscarawas Avenue or Second Street N.W. if he or she determines such
movement would not adversely effect the Downtown business district.
Please Note: To view the Required Frontage Window Area Graphic, see page 1110-
7 of the printed version of the Barberton Development Code
(i) Transition Overlay Districts
   (1) Purpose
   One of the obstacles to a desirable transition from one land use to another
is the time and expense that can be associated with a petition for rezoning and
the uncertainty of the outcome.  This is especially the case in a fully
developed city like Barberton, where land use changes can affect nearby
properties to an greater degree than elsewhere.  And when properties are
rezoned in advance of need, existing uses are made nonconforming, a status that
can discourage investment in maintenance and property improvement.
   From time to time the City may desire nonetheless in selected areas to give
special encouragement to land use transition and its attendant investment,
development, and job creation, especially for larger-scale developments.
   Transition Overlay Districts (TOD's) are intended to provide a way for the
City to reduce the uncertainties associated with future land use changes
without creating Nonconformities.  TOD's are designed to facilitate and
encourage particular land use transitions in selected areas by in effect
rezoning in advance for a successor land use.
   TOD's allow the City to grant additional as-of-right development rights to a
property in advance of need, enhancing the development potential of particular
sites in a way that avoids the uncertainties attendant to future decisions on
rezoning and avoids the creation of Nonconformities.
   (2) Establishment of TOD's
   Any non-overlay zoning district established in this chapter may be
established on a parcel as a Transition Overlay District (TOD).  No more than
one TOD shall be established on any parcel.
   Such designation may be shown on the Zoning District Map as the name of the
district (for example, O-2) followed by the letter "T" (for example, "O-2 T"). 
Such overlay district shall be interpreted as supplementing and not replacing
the underlying zoning of the property.  Procedures for establishment of a TOD
on a property shall be as provided for Amendments in Section 1310.02.
   Subject to the requirements of these regulations, a Transition Overlay
District confers the right to develop or use a property under the regulations
of the TOD in lieu of under the regulations of the underlying district on an as
of right basis without the need for further amendment of the Zoning District
Map.
   The separate rights conferred by the TOD and by the underlying district are
exclusive and not cumulative.  The Certificate of Compliance shall be based on
conformity with either the provisions of the underlying district or those of
the Transition Overlay District.
   Non-compliance with the requirements of a TOD before it is used in lieu of
the underlying district shall not be considered a violation or a Nonconformity.
   (3)   Change in Underlying District
   When a particular zoning classification is established hereunder as an
overlay on a property, such overlay is intended  to be the sole means of adding
the rights attendant to such classification to those already enjoyed by that
property.
   No application shall therefore be accepted under Section 1310.02,
Amendments, to change the underlying zoning classification to the same
classification currently established as the TOD.  This restriction shall not be
interpreted to prevent an application for a change in the underlying zoning to
any other classification.
   (4)   Terminationof Underlying Zoning
   At the time of issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for a lot conforming
to the regulations of a TOD, the underlying zoning classification shall
automatically cease.
   The Building Commissioner shall remove such classification from the Zoning
District Map at the next updating thereof and record the TOD as the new
underlying zoning classification of the property.
   (5)   Conditions for Use of TOD
   No Certificate of Compliance shall be issued under provisions of a
Transition Overlay District for any property unless the conditions specified in
this division have been complied with.
      A.   Parcel Size
         The parcel utilizing the TOD classification shall have dimensions not
less than the following:
                  Area:      1.5 acres
                  Frontage:   250 feet
            B.   Frontage Landscaping
            Notwithstanding any contrary provision of Table 1220B, all Frontage
Buffers required under such Table shall be of at least Medium intensity, as
defined in Table 1220C.
            C.   Design Review
            To forestall land use conflicts in an area in land use transition
and to further neighborhood compatibility  in the absence of the normal
rezoning hearing at the time development plans are prepared, the Planning
Commission shall have determined that the specific use proposed under the TOD
is visually compatible in its publicly visible appearance, as defined herein,
with surrounding properties and adjacent public ways.
            Such compatibility shall be determined based on item 2B of Table
1310J.
            Filing requirements shall be as specified for Certificates of
Appropriateness in Tables 1320B and 1320C.  The approval procedures for such
review shall be as specified in Chapter 1320 for such Certificates except that:
            1.   action shall be taken solely by the Planning Commission in
lieu of by the Design Review Board, and
            2.   no public hearing shall be required, and
            3.   division 1320.02(g)(4), Negotiation Period, shall not apply.
(Ord. 148-1995. Passed 12-11-95.)
(j)   DAO District
Property classified in the DAO District shall conform to exterior architectural
appearance standards adopted by City Council in conjunction with the adoption
of an amendment classifying the property in this district.
(Ord. 119-1999. Passed 7-26-99; Ord. 73-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1110.03 Residential Districts
(a) Purpose
Residential Districts are intended to recognize, preserve, and protect the
present character of Barberton's single- and two-family residential
neighborhoods, to facilitate the development of new neighborhoods and infill
housing, and to provide for a variety of housing types and densities to
accommodate different age groups and lifestyles of City residents.
(b) Districts
   (1) Single-Family Detached Residential Districts
      A. RS-32 High-Density Single-Family Residential District
      This district is intended to provide for developments of manufactured or
site-built detached dwellings that offer affordable higher-density housing not
exceeding approximately 12 units per acre.  Land in this District may be
developed with Zero Lot Lines under 1250.03.
      B. RS-40 High-Density Single-Family Residential District
      This district is intended to provide for an exclusive single-family
detached residential environment characterized by lots of the size most common
in the City and densities not exceeding approximately 10 dwelling units per
acre.
      C. RS-50 Medium-Density Single-Family Residential District
      This district is intended to provide for an exclusive single-family
detached residential environment characterized by densities not exceeding
approximately 6 units per acre.
      D. RS-70 Medium-Density Single-Family Residential District
      This district is intended to provide for an exclusive single-family
detached residential environment characterized by densities not exceeding
approximately 4 1/2 units per acre.
      E. RS-85 Low-Density Single- Family Residential District
      This district is intended to provide for an exclusive single-family
detached residential environment characterized by densities not exceeding
approximately 2 units per acre.
      F. RS-100 Low-Density Single- Family Residential District
      This district is intended to provide for an exclusive single-family
detached residential environment characterized by very large lots and densities
not exceeding approximately 1 1/2 dwelling units per acre.
   (2) Single-Family Attached Residential Districts
      A. RA-16 High-Density Single-Family Attached Residential District
      This district is intended to:
      1. provide a single-family housing choice for those who prefer a small
house and lot; and
      2. to facilitate transition between attached and multi-family housing by
allowing attached dwellings and townhouses at densities of approximately 25
dwelling units per acre.
      B. RA-25 Low-Density Single- Family Attached Residential District
      This district is intended to:
      1. provide a single-family housing choice for those who prefer a small
house and lot; and
      2. to facilitate transition between detached and attached housing by
limit-ing attached dwellings and townhouses to densities of approximately 15
dwelling units per acre.
   (3) Two-Family Residential Districts
      A. RT-40 High-Density Two-Family Residential District
      This district is intended to provide for a two-family detached
residential environment characterized by lots of the size most common in the
City and densities not exceeding approximately 20 dwelling units per acre.
      B. RT-50 Medium-Density Two-Family Residential District
      This district is intended to provide for a two-family detached
residential environment characterized by densities not exceeding approximately
12 dwelling units per acre.
      C. RT-70 Low-Density Two-Family Residential District
      This district is intended to provide for a two-family detached
residential environment characterized by densities not exceeding approximately
9 dwelling units per acre.
   (4) Multi-Family Residential Districts
      A. RM-18 Low-Density Multi-Family Residential District
      This district is intended to facilitate transition between single-family
and multi-family housing by limiting mul-tifamily densities to the equivalent
of approximately 18 two-bedroom dwel-ling units per acre, a density compa-rable
to the highest density allowed in RA or RT Districts.
      B. RM-30 Medium-Density Multi-Family Residential District
      This district is intended to provide locations for apartment development
at densities not exceeding the equivalent of approximately 30 two-bedroom
dwelling units per acre.
      C. RM-50 High Density Multi-Family Residential District
      This district is intended to provide locations for apartment development
at densities not exceeding the equiva-lent of approximately 50 two-bedroom
dwelling units per acre.
(c) District Regulations
Regulations for Residential Districts shall be as established in Tables 1110B,
1110C, and 1110E of this chapter and Tables 1130A and 1130B of Chapter 1130,
Allowable Uses.
(ORd. 158-2003. Passed 12-15-03.)
1110.04 Business Districts
(a) Purpose
Business districts are intended to:
   1. provide appropriate environments for different kinds of businesses
   2. protect less intensive land uses from any adverse effects from such
businesses, and
   3. maintain the City's jobs and tax base by protecting business areas from
encroachment by residential or other incompatible uses. 
Although these districts may allow residential uses, they are not intended to
offer a residential environment protected from adverse effects of business
activity.
(b) Districts
   (1) Office Districts
      A. O-1 Neighborhood Office District
      This district is intended to provide locations in the City's
neighborhoods for smaller office buildings on smaller sites housing low
traffic-generating uses.  It is intended for:
      1. locations that can serve as a transition or buffer area between
residential and more intensive retail, office, or industrial uses
      2. major street frontage locations not suited for retail
      3. other higher-value locations not compatible with high-traffic retail
development or with industrial use, and
      4. locations that are otherwise not suited for residential or for more
in-intensive business development.
      B.   O-2 Office Center District
      This district is intended to provide locations for larger office
buildings or complexes of buildings that attract considerable traffic from
employees and visitors from a broad area.
   (2) Commercial Districts
      A.   C-1 Convenience Commercial District
      This district is intended to provide very close-to-home locations for
small areas accommodating the most frequently patronized consumer retail and
service establishments that provide convenience goods and services.  It is
intended for businesses that will draw mainly from the immediately surrounding
neighborhood but not from a broad area.
      B.   C-2 Neighborhood Commercial District
      This district is intended to provide moderately close-to-home locations
for frequently patronized consumer retail and service establishments that
provide convenience goods and services and a limited selection of comparison
goods.  It is intended for businesses that draw patrons mainly from nearby
neighborhoods but not from a broader area.
      C.   C-3 Community Center Commercial District
      This district is intended to provide locations for a broad selection of
comparison shoppers goods and services in centralized and highly accessible
locations that serve entire sections of the City and, in some cases,
communities outside the City.
      D.   C-4 Highway Commercial District
      This district is intended to provide locations along the City's arterial
streets for usually less frequently patronized establishments providing goods
and services to businesses and consumers that either do not require or are not
suited for prime locations in concentrated consumer retail centers.
      It is also intended to encourage most consumer-oriented retail and
service businesses to locate in concentrated convenience, neighborhood, or
community center areas or Downtown rather than to scatter along highway
corridors.  The District is therefore not cumulative with any other C District.
      E.   C-D Downtown Commercial District
      This district is intended to provide an area for high-intensity
pedestrian-oriented shopping and services in the older portions of Downtown
Barberton.
   (3)   Industrial Districts
      A.   I-1 Light Industrial District
         This district is intended to provide locations for low-nuisance
industrial uses.  It is intended for areas where such uses presently
predominate or where heavier industrial uses would be objectionable because of
proximity to residential or other more restricted uses.
      B.   I-2 Medium Industrial District
         This district is intended to provide locations for industrial uses
that typically produce greater adverse environmental effects than uses allowed
in I-1 but lesser effects than uses allowed only in I-3.  It is intended for
locations where such uses presently exist or where there is or will be
sufficient separation or buffering from residential or other more restricted
uses.
      C.   I-3 Heavy Industrial District
         This district is intended to provide locations for higher-nuisance and
high-hazard industrial uses, that, despite objectionable environmental effects,
are an important part of the economy of the City of Barberton.  It is intended
for areas where such uses are already established or where they would be
buffered or separated from more restricted uses.
      D.   I.U. Special Industrial District
         This district is intended to provide for selected small light
industrial businesses that can be accommodated on small lots that do not abut
Residential Districts.
(c)   District Regulations
   Regulations for Business Districts shall be as established in Tables 1110D
and 1110E of this chapter and Tables 1130C, 1130D, 1130E, and 1130F of Chapter
1130, Allowable Uses.
(Ord. 148-1995.  Passed 12-11-95; Ord. 119-1999.  Passed 7-26-99.)
1110.05 Other Districts
(a)   Purpose
Special land use situations all for zoning classifications other than the
traditional residential, commercial, office, and industrial districts.
This section establishes special purpose zoning districts to be used in
addition to the districts established in Sections 1110.03 and 1110.04.
(b)   Districts
   (1)   Underlying Districts
      A.   AE Agriculture and Estate District
      This district is intended for outlying locations the City annexes that
are inappropriate for, or not yet ready for, urban development or that lack
public sewer and water.  It is intended to provide an environment for farming
and for rural residential living.
      B.   LC Land Conservation District
      This district is intended to protect development from environmental
hazards such as flood plains or poor soils, to preserve environmentally
valuable areas from impairment by urban activities, to encourage provision of
open space, and to accomplish all of the foregoing in a way that minimizes
adverse impact on private property rights.
   (2)   Overlay Districts
      A.   PO Preservation Overlay District
      This district is intended for the purpose of requiring design review in
areas and on properties that have special historic, architectural, cultural, or
related significance that merits protection from changes that would seriously
impair that significance.
      B.   AO Amortization Overlay District
      This district is intended to promote the more rapid upgrading of selected
older areas of town to the higher development standards established by this
Code where upgrading is warranted by the visibility of an area, by its
importance in influencing public perceptions of the City, or by the desire of
property owners in the area for such upgrading.
            The AO District is intended to be mapped where Nonconformities
constitute a nuisance or as otherwise allowable under state law.
            Nonconforming properties in the AO District are required to remove
Nonconformities within a period of time as specified in Chapter 1340.
      C.   TNO Traditional Neighborhood Overlay District
            This district is intended to foster the development of Traditional
Neighborhood Development in either existing or newly developing areas of
Barberton in order to:
            1.   Offer an alternative living environment for newly developing
areas of Barberton and Summit County.
            2.   Encourage well-defined neighborhoods with concentrated centers
of activity in each.
            3.   Promote the more efficient use of land and the provision of
common neighborhood open spaces made possible thereby.
            4.   Encourage energy conservation, the reduction of air pollution,
and social interaction by allowing short neighborhood trips to be more easily
made by walking or bicycling.
      D.   DAO Derivative Architecture Overlay District
      The district is intended for use where the public welfare requires the
creation of a uniform faux-historic aesthetic that is unlikely to be achieved
by reliance on prevailing contemporary architectural practice, building
technology, or consumer preferences.  The mapping of the district is not
intended to be contingent on the existence in the surrounding area of authentic
historic buildings exhibiting the appearance mandated.
(c)   District Regulations
Regulations for Other Districts shall be as follows:
   (1)   AE District:   Table 1110B
            Table 1110E
            Table 1110F
            Table 1130A
            Table 1130B
   (2)   LC District:   1101.02(f)
            Table 1130A
            Table 1130B
   (3)   PO District:   1310.02(c)
            Table 1310B
            Section 1310.08
            Table 1310J
   (4)   AO District:   Chapter 1340.
   (5)   TNO District:   Section 1110.06
   (6)   DAO District:   1110.02(j)
(Ord. 148-1995. Passed 12-11-95; Ord. 119-1999. Passed 7-26-99.)
1110.06   TNO Traditional Neighborhood Overlay District
(a)   Regulations for TNO Districts
Properties classified in the TNO Traditional Neighborhood Overlay District
shall be regulated by the regulations of the underlying zoning district(s), any
other overlay district, and applicable provisions of other sections of this
Code and by:
   1.   a Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND) Plan approved under
1110.06(c) that includes such properties, or
   2.   the requirements of division 1110.06(b), which are mandatory if there
is no such Plan and optional if there is such a Plan.
(b)   Regulations for Areas Without TND Plans
1.  Pedestrian Retail Areas
Areas classified in any C District within the TNO Overlay District shall be
subject to the requirements for pedestrian retail areas in 1110.02(h), except
that:
   A.   provisions therein the applicability of which is restricted to the C-
D District shall apply in any C District, and
   B.   provisions therein the applicability of which is restricted to
Tuscarawas Avenue or Second Street N.W. shall apply along all streets within
any C District.
2.  Parking and Loading
   A.   Counting of Off-Street Spaces
   Off-street parking required in the TNO Overlay District shall be the number
of spaces required by Section 1210.04 less the number of on-street spaces
counted as one space per 20 feet of street frontage abutting the lot along
which parking is permitted.
   B.   Multi-User Parking
   In lieu of all or any part of the number of off-street parking spaces
required in a C or O District, there may be provided multi-user off-street
parking areas of financial support therefor under 1210.04(c)(3).
   C.   Location of Parking Spaces
   Location of off-street parking shall be as provided in 1210.06(c)(1).
   D.   Loading
   Off-street loading required in the TNO Overlay District shall be as required
in Section 1210.08 less any loading spaces provided adjacent to the lot in an
alley.
   Off-street loading shall not be located in any actual front or corner-side
yard.
   E.   Maximum Number of Spaces
   No non-single-family residential use shall provide parking or loading spaces
in excess of the numbers required herein except as multi-user parking or as
approved as a Variance under 1310.03(a).
   3.  Streets and Blocks
   A.   Street Standards
   To provide for safe traffic movement and access by emergency vehicles,
streets in the TNO District shall conform to the standards of Section 1240.02.
   B.   Standards Are Maximums
   No street shall exceed dimensions specified in Section 1240.02 for the
applicable functional street type.
   C.   Sidewalks
   Sidewalks shall be provided conforming to the requirements of 1240.09(e).
   D.   Blocks
   Maximum block length shall be 800 feet.
   4.  Open Space
   A.   Provisions
   Public or common open space shall be dedicated to the City or a homeowners
association totaling no less than 5 percent of the gross site area of the
property.
   B.   Large Central Space
   Open space provided shall include at least one open space one acre or
greater in size.  Such open space shall be located within 1,350 feet of all
residential lots or building sites unless an existing public or common open
space is already located within such distance.
   5.  Land Uses
   Within the TNO Overlay District, any property or area may be simultaneously
classified in multiple underlying Residential, Business, and/or Other
Districts.  A lot or building site so classified may at its owner's option be
used under the regulations of any one of the underlying districts in which it
has been classified, but no lot or building site shall be regulated by more
than one such district.
   6.  Architectural Control
   In those traditional neighborhood Development areas where it is determined
to be in the public interest to replicate the architectural features of
historic neighborhoods, property may be classified in the DAO Overlay District
in addition to the TNO classification.
   7.  Other Regulations
   Properties to which division (b) applies shall conform to the requirements
of Table 1110G.
(c)   Regulations for Areas with TND Plans
1.  TND Plans
A.   Eligibility
A Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND) Plan may be prepared for any area
that:
   1.      Consists of no less than 10 acres of land, and
   2.      Has no less than 60 percent of its area classified in the AE
District and/or any Residential District(s).
B.   Timing of Plan Preparation
Such a Plan may be prepared prior to, and have no immediate connection with, a
filling for a development Approval under this Code.
C.   Property Owner of City May Prepare Plan
The TND Plan may be prepared by:
   1.   The party or parties owning or otherwise controlling the property, or
   2.   The City.
D.   Contents of Plan
   The TND Plan shall consist of all drawings and data normally required to
demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this Code such as land uses, lot
dimensions, street standards, parking provision, and the like except as
provided in division (c)1G.
   The TND Plan may incorporate by reference any provision of this Code.
   The provisions of a TND Plan prepared by the City shall not exceed the
authority of the City to regulate development under the enabling legislation
specified in 1100.01(b).
E.   Approval of TND Plan
   To be valid under these provisions, the TND Plan must be approved by the
City Planning Commission and City Council under provisions for approval of
Preliminary Site Plans for Planned Unit Developments in Chapter 1320, except
that no recording shall be required.
   No TND Plan shall be approved unless City Council makes a Finding of Fact
that the Plan conforms to the Approval Criteria of Table 1110H.
   F.   Departures from Code Requirements
   Other than as provided in Table 1110G, every provision of the TND Plan that
is less restrictive or establishes a lower standard than the otherwise
applicable provision of the Code shall be accompanied by a full narrative
explanation of:
   1.   The way in which such particular provision supports one or more of the
Approval Criteria of Table 1110H, and
   2.   The reasons significant adverse effects on land use, transportation,
and public facilities are unlikely to result therefrom.
This narrative shall be considered a part of the Plan.
G.   Code Otherwise Applicable
   The TND Plan may omit any development detail regulated by this Code or
required to be shown on a plat or Site Plan.  In such case, any item for which
there is a provision on this Code but no specific provision in the Plan shall
be subject in that particular to Table 1110G and the otherwise applicable
requirements of this Code.
   Where a Plan provision for one item conflicts with an applicable Code
provision for another item not specified in the Plan, a petitioner may request
relief from either provision as a Variance under 1310.03(a).
H.   Amendment for TND Plan
   An adopted TND Plan may be amended as provided in 1320.02(h), except that no
recording of the amended Plan shall be required.
   2.  Effect of TND Plan
   A.   Submissions for Development Approvals
A preliminary plat, site plan, or preliminary site plan for a planned unit
development may be filed for any property or portion thereof for, which there
is an adopted TND Plan.
The petitioner may request approval of such submission under either:
      1.   The provision of the TND Plan and 1110.06(c)1G, or
      2.   The requirements of:
         a.  division 1110.06(b), and
         b.  the applicable underlying zoning district(s), and all other
applicable provisions of this Code.
B.   Approval of Plan-Complying Submission
   If the petitioner has requested approval under the TND Plan, the Building
Commission shall determine whether such submission is in full compliance with
the Plan and with any, there is no specific provision in the Plan.
   If he or she determines the submission is in complete compliance, he or she
shall approve the submission.  No public hearing or approval by any review body
shall be required for such approval unless there is a departure of the
submission from the TND Plan or applicable code provision.
C.   Approval of Non-Complying Submission
   Any non-compliance with such Plan or provision of a filing submitted for
approval under the TND Plan may be approved only under normal provisions for
Variance, Special Exceptions, Planned Unit Developments, or other applicable
Development Approvals under Chapter 1310.
(Ord. 119-1999. Passed 7-26-99.)
Table 1110A: Development Regulations
Regulations As Provided In:
Regulations                  As Provided In:
1.  USE Regulations:
RESIDENTIAL Districts        Tables 1130A, 1130B
BUSINESS Districts           Tables 1130C, 1130D, 1130E, and 1130F
OTHER Districts              Tables 1130A, 1130B
2.  DIMENSIONAL Regulations:
RESIDENTIAL Districts        Tables 1110B, 1110C, 1110E, and 1110F
BUSINESS Districts           Tables 1110D, 1110E, and 1110F
OTHER Districts              1110.05(c)
3.  OTHER Regulations:
DESIGN REVIEW                Section 1310.08
PARKING & Loading            Chapter 1210, Parking, Loading & Vehicular Areas
LANDSCAPING & Screening      Chapter 1220, Landscaping & Screening
SIGNS                        Chapter 1230, Sign Regulations
Other ACCESSORY USES         Chapter 1140, Accessory Uses and Yards
STREETS and Alleys           1240.09(d) and (e) Section 1240.02
LOTS & Blocks                Section 1240.03
RESERVATIONS & Dedications   Section 1240.04
EASEMENTS                    Section 1240.05
OPEN SPACE                   Section 1240.06
                             1110.02(g)
NATURAL FEATURES             Section 1240.07
                             Chapter 1260, Flood Plains
                             1110.02(g)
IMPROVEMENTS                 Section 1240.09
UTILITIES                    1240.09(f)
OTHER Regulations            Section 1110.02
                             Chapter 1250, Special Use Regulations
 
 
Table 1110B: Dimensional Requirements for
Single- and Two-Family and Agricultural Districts
 
 Single-Family Detached
 RS32 RS40 RS50 RS70 RS85 RS100 AE
                                           Single-Family Detached
                                           RS32  RS40            RS50  RS70   RS85   RS100  AE
LOTS or Building Sites
Average [a] Minimum AREA  in Square Feet  3,600 4,500           7,500 10,000 20,000 30,000 90,000
[b]:
Average [a] Minimum WIDTH in Feet          32    40              50    70     85     100    200
INTENSITY
Maximum BUILDING HEIGHT in Feet: 35        35    35              35    35     35     35     35
Maximum LOT COVERAGE  in Percent: 50      35    35              35    35     35     35     35
OTHER                                      [e]
                                           [f]
                                           Attached [g]                Two-Family
                                           RA16  RA25            RT40   RT50   RT70
LOTS or Building Sites
Average [a] Minimum AREA in Square Feet    1,750 3,000 [h]             4,500  7,500  10,000
[b]:                                       [h]
Average [a] Minimum WIDTH in ft.           16    25 [h]                40     50     70      
                                           [h]
INTENSITY
Maximum BUILDING HEIGHT in Feet:           35    35                      35    35  35
Maximum LOT COVERAGE in Percent:           70    50                     35    35  35
OTHER
 
 
   
See notes below.  See Table 1110E for yard requirements.
There are no dimensional requirements for the LC District.
Table 1110C: Multi-Family District Dimensional Requirements [g] [i]
 RM18 RM30 RM50
                                          RM18  RM30  RM50
LOTS or Building Sites                    --    --    --
Minimum AREA in Square Feet [b]:          --    --    --
Minimum WIDTH  in Feet                   --    --    --
INTENSITY
Minimum LOT AREA per Dwelling Unit:
Efficiency Unit                           1,090 660   395
1-Bedroom Unit                            1,405 855   510
2-Bedroom Unit                            2,420 1,450 870
3-Bedroom Unit                            3,350 2,075 1,280
Larger Units                              3,960 2,420 1,405
Maximum BUILDING HEIGHT in Feet:
Within 50 feet of RS, RT, or RA District: 35    35    35
Elsewhere:                             35    50    90
Maximum LOT COVERAGE in Percent:          50    60    70
 
 
   
See notes below. See Table 1110E for yard requirements.
Table 1110D: Business District Dimensional Requirements
 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-D O-1 O-2 I-1 I-2 I-3 I-U
                             C-1    C-2 C-3 C-4 C-D O-1    O-2 I-1 I-2 I-3 I-U
LOTS or Building Sites
AREA in Square Feet  [b]:
Minimum:                     --     --  --  --  --  --     --  --  --  --  --
Maximum:                     15,000 --  --  --  --  25,000 --  --  --  --  --
WIDTH in Feet:
Minimum:                     --     --  --  --  --  --     --  100 100 100 20
Maximum:                     100    --  --  --  --  100    --  --  --  --  --
INTENSITY
FLOOR AREA RATIO:  [d]
Minimum:                     --     --  --  --  2.0 --     --  --  --  --  --
Maximum:                     1.0    2.0 2.0 1.0 4.0 1.0    3.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0
BUILDING HEIGHT in Feet:
Minimum:                     --     --  --  --  20  --     --  --  --  --  --
Maximum:                     35     35  50  35  50  35     50  50  50  50  14
Within 50 feet of RS, RT, or 35     35  35  35  35  35     35  35  35  35  35
RA District:
LOT COVERAGE in Percent:
Minimum:                     --     --  --  --  --  --     --  --  --  --  --
Maximum:                     --     --  --  --  --  --     --  --  --  --  --
 
See notes below. See Table 1110E for yard requirements.
Table 1110E: Yard Requirements
 Front Yard [j][k] Corner Side Yard [j] Interior Side Yard [j] Rear Yard [j][l]
                   [k]                  [l][o] 
                Front Yard [j] Corner Side Interior Side    Rear Yard [j][l]
                [k]            Yard [j][k] Yard [j][l][o] 
A. Minimum
Depth Required:
1. Percent of
Lot Depth:
a. In AE and R  10 %           --          --               25 %
Districts
b. In C-        0 %            --          --               0 %
D District
c. In All Other
Districts:
Abutting
Protected       10 %           --          --               25 %
Districts [c]
[q]
In All Other    10 %           --          --               0 %
Locations
2. Largest
Depth Required  20             --          --               40
in Feet [m]
3. Smallest
Depth Required
in Feet [m]
a. Abutting
Protected
Districts [c]
[q]:
In RM, O, and   [n]            --          --               20
C-1 Districts
In I-3 District [n]            --          --               40
In All Other C  [n]            --          --               30
and I Districts
b. In All Other
Locations:
In AE and R     [n]            --          --               20
Districts
In All Other    [n]            --          --               --
Districts
B. Maximum
Depth Allowed
in Feet:
1. In C-        0              --          --               --
D District [p]
2. In All Other --             --          --               --
Districts
C. Minimum
Width Required:
1. Percent of
Lot Width:
a. In AE and R  --             20 %        10 %             --
Districts
b. In C-        --             0 %         0 %              --
D District
c. In All Other
Districts:
Abutting
Protected       --             20 %        10 %             --
Districts [c]
[q]
In All Other    --             20 %        0 %              --
Locations
2. Largest
Width Required  --             20          40               --
in Feet [m]
3. Smallest
Width Required
in Feet [m]:
a. Abutting
Protected
Districts [c]
[q]:
In RM, O, and   --             [n]         10               --
C-1 Districts
In I-3 District --             [n]         40               --
In All Other C  --             [n]         20               --
and I Districts
b. In All Other
Locations:
In AE and RM    --             [n]         10               --
Districts
In All Other R  --             [n]         5                --
Districts
In All Other    --             [n]         --               --
Districts
D. Maximum
Width Allowed
in Feet:
1. In C-        --             0           --               --
D District [p]
2. In All Other --             --          --               --
Districts
 
 
Please Note: To view the following graphics: Positioning of House on Lot and
Required Yards: Single- and Two-Family Residential, see page 1110-19 of the
printed version of the Barberton Development Code
Notes for Tables 1110B - 1110E
Requirements of Tables 1110B and 1110C apply to residential uses. For
requirements for non-residential uses in Residential Districts, see 1110.02(d).
Requirements apply to lots or building sites, as de-fined herein. Exceptions
may be approved as PUD's under 1310.06.
Site Plan Review is required for site condominiums, site cooperatives, and
land-lease developments, all as defined herein, and for other properties with
more than one principal building on a lot.  See Section 1310.07.
[a] See 1110.02(e), Lot Size Averaging.
[b] For lots without public sewer, see 1110.02(c).
[c] Protected Districts
   Abutting an RM District: RS, RT, and RA Districts are Protected Districts.
   Abutting a C, O, or I District: all R Districts are Protected Districts.
   Abutting an RS, RT, RA, AE, or LC District: there are no Protected
Districts.
[d]  Floor Area Ratio requirements apply to both non-residential and multi-
family residential uses in those districts in which multi-family is permitted. 
A building may have either non-residential or mul-ti-family residential uses,
or both, totalling up to the maximum Floor Area Ratio.
[e] No subdivision or other development in the RS-32 District shall consist of
less than 25 lots, building sites, or dwelling units.
[f] Buffering between RS-32 and other Residential Districts shall be as
provided in Chapter 1220.
[g] Single-family detached and two-family detached dwellings in RA and RM
Districts shall meet all requirements for such dwellings of the least
restrictive RT District.
[h] For single-family attached dwellings only.  For multiple townhouses on a
single lot, equivalent lot area and lot width shall be required per dwelling
unit.  For detached dwellings, see notes [g] and [i].
Lots less than 30 feet wide may require access from an existing or new alley if
they have garages in order to comply with the limitations on front yard
coverage by parking in 1210.06(c)(2)A.
[i] Townhouses and single-family attached dwellings in RM Districts shall meet
all requirements for such dwellings of the least restrictive RA District.
[j] Yards for Tall Buildings
To the figure derived from calculations in the table add one foot of upper-
story setback for every 3 feet of building height over 35 feet (where maximum
building height restriction permits such heights).  Such extraordinary setbacks
shall be required only at the applicable height levels.
[k] Garage Street Setback
Notwithstanding other provisions herein, a garage
shall be set back no less than 20 feet from the
street right-of-way onto which it has access.  See also next footnote [k].
[k] Infill Setbacks
Division 1110.02(g), Street Yards for Infill Parcels, may impose a requirement
that is either greater or lesser than provided in this table.
[l] For exceptions to interior side and rear yard requirements, see 1250.03,
Zero Lot Line.
[m] "Largest Depth (Width) Required" signifies that no yard of the specified
type shall be required under this table to be larger than the figure indicated-
-even if the percentage calculation in A1 or C1 yields a larger yard
requirement--except  for buildings over 35 feet in height (see note [j]).
"Smallest Depth (Width) Required" signifies that no yard of the specified type
shall be smaller than the figure indicated, even if the percentage calculation
in A1 or C1 yields a smaller requirement.
[n] Minimum Street Yards
shall be as follows for street classifications as defined in the Barberton
Comprehensive Plan:
   Minor Streets:                      5 feet
   Collector Streets:                  10 feet
   Arterial Streets:                  20 feet
   Freeways:                      0 feet
   Tuscarawas Ave. &  Second St. NW in C-D District       0 feet.
[o] Interior side yard requirements shall not apply where a dwelling unit is
attached to another unit at the side lot line.
[p]  Applies only abutting Tuscarawas Avenue and Second Street N.W.
[q] Except abutting lots in Protected Districts hous-ing uses that are
identical or similar in the judgment of the Building Commissioner to the
subject use. Larger yards would not be needed for an O1-zoned church next to
another church zoned RS50.
Encroachments into required yards shall be permit-ted only as provided in
Chapter 1140.
Table 1110F: Computation of Density Transfer from LC District
The calculations in this table shall determine the development intensity
allowable, and minimum lot area per dwelling unit and lot width required, on a
parcel when density is transferred from LC-zoned land to the balance of the
property.
1. Calculate an assumed net site area (excluding streets) for the entire
parcel.
   For single- and two-family residential:
      NSAP = 0.8 x GSAP  [a]
   For all other development:
      NSAP = 0.9 x GSAP  [b]
2. Calculate the amount of development (dwelling units or floor area) allowed
on the parcel.
   For residential development:
      DU = NSAP / MLA  [c]
   For non-residential development:
      FA = NSAP / FAR  [c]
Steps 3 - 5 apply to residential development only:
3. Calculate the actual net site area (excluding streets) of the developable
land outside the LC District.
      NSAD = GSAD x ( 1 - PSA )
4. Calculate the reduced minimum lot area per dwelling unit [d] requirement.
      RLA = NSAD / DU
5. Calculate the reduced minimum lot width [d] requirement.
      RLW = MLW x ( RLA / MLA )  [c]
Steps 6 - 9 apply only when applicant has petitioned for rezoning to LC
District under 1110.02(g)(5).
6. Calculate the amount of the landowner initiative bonus.
      B = .20 x PLC
7. Calculate the amount of development (dwelling units or floor area) allowed
on the parcel with the bonus.
      DUB = DU x (1 + B)
      FAB = FA x (1 + B)
8. Calculate the reduced minimum lot area per dwelling unit [d] requirement.
      RLAB = RLA x (1 - B)
9. Calculate the reduced minimum lot width [d] requirement.
      RLWB = RLW x (1 - B)
Notes for Table 1110F
x :    Multiplied by
- :    Less (subtraction)
/ :    Divided by
[a]  The 0.8 figure is based on an assumed typical 20 percent of land in
streets in a conventional development without Density Transfer.
[b]  The 0.9 figure is based on an assumed typical 10 percent of land in
streets in a conventional development without Density Transfer.
[c]   1. The zoning district applying to all property abutting the LC District
shall be used to determine MLA, FAR, and MLW.  If more than one district abuts
the LC District, the district abutting the largest part of the border of the LC
District shall be used.
   2. GSAP, NSAP, GSAD, and NSAD shall apply only to the portion of the parcel
located in the district used in the computations in [c]1, above.  Density in
the remainder of the property shall be computed in the normal manner specified
by district regulations.
[d]  Shall not be less than provided in 1110.02(f)(3).
B:  Landowner initiative bonus, expressed in decimal.
DU:  Number of dwelling units allowed after Density Transfer.
FA:  Floor area in square feet allowed after Density Transfer.
FAB:  Floor area in square feet allowed after Density Transfer and landowner
initiative bonus.
FAR:  Maximum Floor Area Ratio allowed by the zoning district specified in note
[c].
GSAD:  Gross site area in square feet of developable land located outside of
the LC District.
GSAP:  Gross site area in square feet of the entire parcel.
LCA:  Land area in square feet in the LC District.
MLA:  Minimum lot area per dwelling unit in square feet required by the zoning
district specified in note [c].
MLW:  Minimum lot width in feet required by  the zoning district specified in
note [c].
NSAD:  Net site area in square feet (excluding streets) of the developable land
located outside the LC District.
NSAP:  Net site area in square feet (excluding streets) of the entire parcel.
PLC:  Percentage (in decimal) of land area zoned  LC that was so zoned by
landowner  petition.
PSA:  Percentage (in decimal) of land devoted  to streets.
RLA:  Reduced lot area per dwelling unit in square feet required after Density
Transfer.
RLAB:  Reduced lot area per dwelling unit in square feet required after Density
Transfer  and landowner initiative bonus.
RLW:  Reduced lot width in feet required after Density Transfer.
RLWB:  Reduced lot width in feet required after Density Transfer and landowner
initiative bonus.
Table 1110G:  TND Dimensional, Yard, and Use Requirements
Lots or Building Sites RS, RA, RT Districts RM Districts C, O & I Districts
Lots or Building Sites     RS, RA, RT Districts RM Districts C, O & I Districts
Average maximum AREA in    125%                 --           --
square feet:
Average maximum WIDTH in   115%                 72           72
feet:
Intensity
Minimum BUILDING HEIGHT in --                   70%          70%
feet:
Minimum LOT COVERAGE in    --                   70%          70% [a]
percent:
Maximum LOT AREA per       --                   120%         40% [b]
dwelling unit:
Minimum FLOOR AREA RATIO:  --                   --           60%
Yards
Maximum FRONT YARD depth:  6, 12, 18 [c]        6            6
Maximum CORNER SIDE YARD   6, 8, [d]            6            6
width in feet:
Maximum INTERIOR SIDE YARD 6                    6            0
width in feet:
Uses
Prohibited USE GROUPS:
Permitted Uses:            --                   4, 5, 6      --
Conditional Uses:          --                   --           --
 
These requirements are in addition to and do not supersede the requirements of
Tables 1110B, 1110C, 1110D, and 1110E and other applicable provisions of this
Code.  Where the requirements of this table conflict with the requirements of
the aforementioned tables or other provisions of this Code, the requirements of
this table shall govern.  Where a minimum requirement elsewhere in this Code
exceeds a maximum specified herein, the figure herein shall also be considered
as the minimum.
Percentages standards specified herein are, except where otherwise indicated,
percentages of the corresponding development standards in Tables 1110B, 1110C,
1110D, and 1110E.  Note that the requirements of this table are opposites of
the requirements in the aforementioned tables.  This table establishes maximums
for standards the other tables set minimums for and minimums the other tables
set for maximums.  Standards not specified as percentages are in the unit of
measure indicated.
[a]   In Industrial Districts, 14 feet.
[b]   This percentage applies to the area of the lot or building site rather
than to the maximum coverage requirements of this Code.  There are no maximum
coverage requirements of this Code.  There are no maximum lot coverage
requirements for Business Districts in Table 1110D.
[c]   18 feet in RS-70 and RT-70, 12 feet in RS-50 and RT-50, 6 feet in all
other RS, RT, and RA Districts.
[d]   18 feet in RS-70 and RT-70, and 6 feet in all other RS, RT, and RA
Districts.
Table 1110H:  Approval Criteria for TND Plans
1.   Efficient Use of Land
An economical use of land is achieved without undue crowding.
2.   Pedestrian-Friendly Environment
The arrangement of buildings, streets, blocks, and land uses serves to
facilitate and encourage local trips by foot or bicycle.
3.   Orientation to Public Streets
A proximity of land uses, buildings, and doors and windows to-and their
orientation toward rather than away from-public streets serves to encourage
more secure, better frequented, and livelier public areas.
4.   Vehicular Areas Subordinated
The size and visibility of vehicular areas, as defined herein, from public
streets, serves to encourage more secure, better frequented, and livelier
areas.
5.   Neighborhood Focal Points
Open spaces and convenience or neighborhood commercial areas can serve as focal
points and gathering places for surrounding residential areas.
6.   Clustering of Non-Single-Family Uses
Non-single-family residential land uses tend to be clustered at a limited
number of centers of activity within the development.
7.   Progression of Densities
Residential densities generally show a progressive reduction with increasing
distance from centers of  activity.
8.   Continuity of Circulation
Street systems facilitate a continuity of circulation through all parts of a
residential neighborhood.
9.   Standards Altered Only to Achieve TND    Character
Any provision of the Plan that specified either a lower standards or a higher
standards than established elsewhere by this Code or that removes from or adds
to Code requirements is necessary to achieve conformity with the other Approval
Criteria herein.
(Ord. 148-1995.  Passed 12-11-95; Ord. 119-1999. Passed 7-26-99.)
Chapter 1130
Allowable Uses
1130.01 General Regulations
(a) Uses Allowed
Only the following uses of land, bodies of water, air rights, buildings,
structures, or other premises are allowed in the City of Barberton:
   (1) Pre-Existing Uses
   Uses lawfully established on the effective date of this Code, subject to the
provisions of Chapter 1340, Nonconformities
   (2) Uses With Prior Permit
   Uses that:
      A. had a Building Permit lawfully issued prior to the effective date of
this Code, and
      B. began construction within 6 months thereof and diligently prosecuted
such construction to completion, and
      C. are constructed and occupied in conformance with the plans on the
basis of which the Permit was issued
   (3) Permitted Uses
   Permitted Uses in the applicable zoning district, as provided in Tables
1130A, 1130C, and 1130E, subject to the conditions and requirements of
applicable City regulations.
   (4) Conditional Uses
   Conditional Uses in the applicable zoning district, as provided in Tables
1130B, 1130D, and 1130F, subject to the approval of a Conditional Use Permit as
provided in division 1310.03(b) and to other conditions and requirements of
applicable City regulations
   (5) Temporary Uses
   Temporary Uses subject to the provisions of division 1310.04(a).
(b) Uses Fitting Multiple Classifications
   (1) Identical Classification in Different Groups
   In a few cases a use may be listed in more than one Use Group in Tables
1130G - 1130J.  As a consequence, the use may be designated under Tables 1130A
- 1130F as both a Permitted Use and a Conditional Use in the same zoning
district.  In such case, the use shall be considered a Permitted Use in that
district.
   (2) Different Classifications
   If a Principal Use can be considered to fall under two or more different use
classifications that are listed in different Use Groups, it shall be regulated
by the classification that is in the judgment of the Building Commissioner the
narrowest or most specific.
   (3) All Other Cases
   Otherwise, if a Principal Use can be classified both as a Permitted Use and
as a Con-ditional Use, it shall be considered a Conditional Use.
(c) Other Regulations
   (1) Interpretation of Sales Uses
   Uses identified as stores, shops, sales establishments, and the like shall
be interpreted to be engaged in retail sales only unless specifically indicated
to the contrary.
   (2) Outdoor Activities
   Sales, merchandise display, storage, repair, and motor vehicle servicing
shall be conduct-ed entirely indoors except for the uses specified herein.
      A. Temporary Uses
      Outdoor activity allowed as a Temporary Use under division 1310.04(a).
      B. Vending Machines
      Vending machines, as defined herein, news boxes, pay telephones, motor
fuel pumps, and the like located outdoors.
      C. Incidental Residential Sales
      Children's lemonade stands and simi-lar incidental activities customarily
associated with residential uses.
      D. Incidental Servicing
      Incidental servicing, as defined herein, of motor vehicles.
      E. Listed Uses
      The following uses, and other uses characteristically involving outdoor
activity, where specifically listed as permitted in the various zoning
districts:
      1. open sales lots, as defined herein
      2. open air flea markets, farmers markets, and the like
      3. outdoor cafes, as defined herein
      4. street vendors, as defined herein
      5. outdoor recreation facilities such as amusement parks, miniature golf,
skating rinks, race tracks, stadiums, and amphitheaters
      6. drive-through establishments, as defined herein
      7. permanent farm stands
      8. outdoor storage
      F. Accessory Outdoor Sales
      Outdoor sales areas or displays as an Accessory Use on the premises of a
business or on public or private land immediately adjacent thereto that:
      1. do not exceed 25 percent of the floor area of the business or 300
square feet of land area, whichever is less, per establishment, and
      2. conform to all City regulations governing use of public sidewalks,
street rights-of-way, or other public lands.
   (3) Special Industrial Conditional Uses
   In any I Industrial District, the Planning Commission may approve or
conditionally approve as a Conditional Use a use allowed only in a higher-
numbered Industrial District as provided herein.
The Board shall approve such Conditional Use only upon making findings of fact
that:
   A. the proposed use conforms to the Approval Criteria for Conditional Uses
of Table 1310D, and
   B. because of technological advances or special methods of operating or of
controlling external effects, the proposed use:
      1. will not produce the objectionable environmental effects--such as
noise, traffic, glare, odor, dust, vibration, and the like--commonly associated
with such proposed use, and
      2. will instead produce a level of such effects comparable to or less
objectionable than those customarily produced by uses listed as allowed in the
present zoning district classification of the property.
The burden of providing evidence to support such findings--in the form of
scientific data, expert opinion, or other information acceptable to the Board--
shall be upon the applicant.  Such evidence shall be submitted with the
application.
The Board shall request comments concerning the effects of the proposed use and
the evidence presented from the Planning Director, Building Commissioner, City
Engineer, Fire Chief, Health Department, and other City officials as
appropriate.
Table 1130A: Permitted Uses in Residential & Open Land Districts
Use Group Zoning District
          LC AE All RS All RT All RA All RM
Use Group                    Zoning District
                             LC AE All RS All RT All RA All RM
1. Conservancy               X  X  -      -      -      -
1C. Special Conservancy      -  X  -      -      -      -
2. Agricultural              -  X  -      -      -      -
3. General                   -  X  X      X      X      X
4. Single-Family Residential -  X  X      X      X      X
5. Two-Family Residential    -  -  -      X      X      X
6. Attached Residential      -  -  -      -      X      X
7. Multi-Family Residential  -  -  -      -      -      X
8. Local Institutional       -  X  X      X      X      X
 
Table 1130B: Conditional Uses in Residential & Open Land Districts
Use Group Zoning District
          LC AE All RS All RT All RA All RM
Use Group                             Zoning District
                                      LC AE All RS All RT All RA All RM
1C. Special Conservancy               X  -  -      -      -      -
2C. Special Agricultural              -  X  -      -      -      -
3C. Special General                   -  X  X      X      X      X
4C. Special Single-Family Residential -  X  X      X      X      X
5C. Special Two-Family Residential    -  -  -      X      X      X
6C. Special Attached Residential      -  -  -      -      X      X
7C. Special Multi-Family Residential  -  -  -      -      -      X
8C. Special Local Institutional       -  X  X      X      X      X
 
These tables indicate the general types of uses allowable in each district. 
Specific uses for each Use Group listed appear in Tables 1130G, 1130H, 1130I,
and 1130J.
Table 1130C: Permitted Uses in Commercial Districts
Use Group C1 C2 C3 C4 CD
Use Group                       C1 C2 C3 C4 CD
3. General                      X  X  X  X  X
7. Multi-Family Residential     X  X  X  -  X
8. Local Institutional          X  X  X  X  X
8C. Special Local Institutional X  X  X  X  X
9. General Business             X  X  X  X  X
10. Neighborhood Office         -  X  X  X  X
11. Retail Office               -  X  X  X  X
12. Convenience Retail          X  X  X  X  X
13. Neighborhood Retail         -  X  X  -  X
14. Community Center Retail     -  -  X  -  X
15. Office Center               -  -  X  -  X
16. Highway Commercial          -  -  -  X  -
 
 
Table 1130D: Conditional Uses in Commercial Districts
Use Group C1 C2 C3 C4 CD
Use Group                            C1 C2 C3 C4 CD
3C. Special General                  X  X  X  X  X
7C. Special Multi-Family Residential X  X  X  -  X
9C. Special General Business         X  X  X  X  X
10C. Special Neighborhood Office     -  X  X  X  X
11C. Special Retail Office           -  X  X  X  X
12C. Special Convenience Retail      X  X  X  X  X
13C. Special Neighborhood Retail     -  X  X  -  X
14. Community Center Retail          -  X  -  -  -
14C. Special Community Center Retail -  -  X  -  X
15. Office Center                    -  X  -  -  -
15C. Special Office Center           -  -  X  -  X
16C. Special Highway Commercial      -  -  -  X  -
 
These tables indicate the general types of uses allowable in each district. 
Specific uses for each Use Group listed appear in Tables 1130G, 1130H, 1130I,
and 1130J.
Conditional Uses are subject to 1310.03(b).
Table 1130E:  Permitted Uses in Office and Industrial Districts
Use Group O1 O2 I1 I2 I3 IU
Use Group                       O1 O2 I1 I2 I3 IU
3. General                      X  X  X  X  X  X
7. Multi-Family Residential     X  X  -  -  -  -
8 .Local Institutional          X  X  -  -  -  -
8C. Special Local Institutional X  X  -  -  -  -
9. General Business             X  X  X  X  X  X
10. Neighborhood Office         X  X  -  -  -  -
15. Office Center               -  X  X  X  -  -
16. Highway Commercial          -  -  X  X  -  -
17. Light Industrial            -  -  X  X  X  -
17C. Special Light Industrial   -  -  -  X  X  -
18. Medium Industrial           -  -  -  X  X  -
18C. Special Medium Industrial  -  -  -  -  X  -
19. Heavy Industrial            -  -  -  -  X  -
20. Urban Industrial            -  -  -  -  -  X
 
 
*   In the I-U District, no use in any lot or building site shall exceed a
gross floor area of 15,000 square feet.
Table 1130F:  Conditional Uses in Office and Industrial Districts
Use Group O1 O2 I1 I2 I3 IU
Use Group                              O1 O2 I1 I2 I3 IU
3C.   Special General               X  X  X  X  X  X
7C.   Special Multi-Family ResidentiXl X  -  -  -  -
9C.   Special General Business      X  X  X  X  X  X
10C.   Special Neighborhood Office  X  X  X  -  -  -
11C.   Special Retail Office Uses   -  -  X  X  -  -
15C.   Special Office Center        -  X  X  X  -  -
16C.   Special Highway Commercial   -  -  X  X  -  -
17C.   Special Light Industrial     -  -  X  -  -  -
18C.   Special Medium Industrial    -  -  -  X  -  -
19C.   Special Heavy Industrial     -  -  -  -  X  -
20C.   Special Urban Industrial     -  -  -  -  -  X
 
*   In the I-U District, no use in any lot or building site shall exceed a
gross floor area of 15,000 square feet.
These tables indicate the general types of uses allowable in each district. 
Specific uses for each Use Group listed appear in Tables 1130G, 1130H, 1130I,
and 1130J.
Conditional Uses are subject to 1310.03(b).
(Ord. 47-2016. Passed 5-9-16.)
Table 1130G: Residential, Institutional, and Open Land Use Groups
[SU] identifies a use that is subject to special provisions in Chapter 1250.
NOTE:  Districts in which the Use Groups in this table are allowed appear in
Tables 1130A - 1130F.
Group 1: Conservancy Uses
Conservancy uses are uses suitable for flood plains, reclaimed lime lakes, or
other environmentally haz-ardous or sensitive areas.
1. Athletic fields
2. Bridle paths
3. Forestry
4. Gardens, community
4. Golf fairways
5. Hiking trails
6. Nurseries, tree and shrubbery (no retail sales)
7. Parks without buildings
8. Picnic areas
9. Playgrounds without buildings
10. Reclamation, restoration, or remediation of environmentally damaged land or
water areas mandated by state or federal government or court order
11. Reserves, open space, without buildings
12. Temporary Uses approved under 1310.04(a)
13. Wildlife sanctuaries, without buildings
14. Uses that are not Permitted or Conditional Uses in this or any other Use
Group and are judged similar to a Permitted Use in the applicable district
under division 1310.04(c)
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Group 1C: Special Conservancy Uses
Special Conservancy Uses are uses that may be compatible with a conservancy
area under special conditions.
1. Boat houses
2. Dams, flowages, and relocation of water courses
3. Drainage facilities, man-made
4. Dredging
5. Filling
6. Golf course buildings
7. Locks
8. Park buildings and picnic shelters
9. Parking, off-street
10. Reclamation, restoration, or remediation of environmentally damaged land or
water areas undertaken voluntarily by the property owner or user
11. Piers
12. Removal of soil or peat
13. Accessory structures to Conditional Uses in the applicable District
14. Accessory structures to Permitted Uses in the applicable District
15. Uses that are not Permitted or Conditional Uses in this or any other Use
Group and are judged similar to a Conditional Use in the applicable district
under division 1310.04(c)
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Group 2: Agricultural Uses
Agricultural Uses are uses appropriate for farming areas that are not urbanized
nor planned for urbanization in the near future.  They do not necessarily
provide a suitable environment for urban residential uses.
1. Agriculture, as defined herein, except activities listed in Group 2C
2. Farm stands, permanent, for the sale of produce
3. Feed, flour, and grain storage
4. Orchards
5. Greenhouses and nurseries
6. Stables, non-commercial
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Group 2C: Special Agricultural Uses
Special Agricultural Uses are uses that may be compatible with an agricultural
environment under appropriate conditions.
1. Agriculture: mink, poultry, and hog farms and farms feeding offal or garbage
2. Airports
3. Campgrounds
4. Cemeteries
5. Dumps, except toxic waste disposal
6. Excavations, such as for artificial lakes or borrow pits
7. Feeding stations, cattle
8. Golf courses and country clubs
9. Landfills, except toxic waste disposal
10. Oil and gas wells  [SU]
11. Recycling centers
12. Stables, commercial
13. Surface mining and quarries
14. Top soil removal
15. Transfer stations, solid waste
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Group 3: General Uses
General Uses are customary public, accessory, or other uses allowable in all
non-conservation zoning districts.
1. Accessory Uses to Permitted and Conditional Uses in the applicable District
2. Bus stops, local
3. Construction buildings or trailers, temporary
4. Offices accessory to a Permitted Use in the applicable district
5. Parking, off-street, as an Accessory Use only
6. Parking, on-street, where permitted by City regulations
7. Pedestrian paths, walkways and hiking trails, except skywalks
8. Permitted Public Uses:
   a. Poles, tunnels, conduits, wires, cables, headends, vaults, laterals,
pipes, drains, mains, valves, hydrants, and similar distribution equipment for
public services or public utilities
   b. street, alley, and railroad or transit rights-of-way
   c. fire alarm and police call boxes
   d. traffic signals, and
   e. pay telephones.
9. Planned Unit Developments, subject to 1310.06
10. Real estate sales or leasing offices, temporary
11. Temporary Uses approved under 1310.04(a)
12. Uses that are not Permitted or Conditional Uses in this or any other Use
Group and are judged similar to a Permitted Use in the applicable district
under division 1310.04(c)
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Group 3C: Special General Uses
Special General Uses are public, accessory, or other uses normally allowable in
all non-conservation zoning districts permitting development only after special
review to assure compatibility.
1. Air rights development over land
2. Air rights development over a body of water
3. Conditional Public Uses:
   The use of a lot other than for Permitted Public Uses listed in Group 3 by a
governmental body, public utility, or railroad for the provision of public
utilities or services, including sewerage, water supply, electricity, gas,
cable television, public safety, government administration, transportation, and
communications. 
   Conditional Public Uses include:
      A. power plants and substations
      B. water or sewage treatment plants, reservoirs, and pumping stations
      C. railroad and utility buildings
      D. police and fire stations
      E. municipal buildings and local government offices, and
      F. public transportation facilities, including shelters, garages,
terminals, parking and turnaround areas, and service buildings, except as
specifically listed elsewhere.
4. Expansion of, addition to, or substantial reconstruction of a Conditional
Use, except routine maintenance
5. Offices accessory to a Conditional Use in the applicable district
6. Radio, television, and cable television towers
7. Uses that are not Permitted or Conditional Uses in this or any other Use
Group and are judged similar to a Conditional Use in the applicable district
under division 1310.04 (c)
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Group 4: Single-Family Residential Uses
Single-Family Residential Uses are uses always  compatible with the most
restricted single-family residential environments.
   No use in this Group may be located on the ground floor in any Business
District, as defined herein.
1.   Home occupations [SU]
2.   Manufactured homes, as defined herein, on individual lots [SU]
3.   Model homes as an Accessory Use
4.   Single-family detached dwellings [SU]
5.   Yard sales, as defined herein, during daylight hours, not to exceed 3
consecutive days or 18 days per calendar year per household
6.   Zero lot line development [SU]
7.   Small group home
8.   Small adult care facility
(Ord. 89-2014.  Passed 9-8-14.)
Group 4C:   Special Single-Family Residential Uses
Special Single-Family Residential Uses are uses that may be compatible with the
most restricted single-family residential environments under appropriate
conditions.
   No use in this Group may be located on the ground floor in any Business
District, as defined herein.
1.   Group homes, as defined herein.
Group 5:  Two-Family Residential Uses
Two-Family Residential Uses are uses always compatible with a residential
environment of single- and two-family dwellings.
   No use in this Group may be located on the ground floor in any Business
District, as defined herein.
1.   Two-family dwellings.
2.   Small group home.
3.   Small adult care facility.
(Ord. 89-2014.  Passed 9-8-14.)
Group 5C:   Special Two-Family Residential Uses
Special Two-Family Residential Uses are uses that may be compatible with a
single- and two-family residential environment under appropriate conditions.
(RESERVED)
Group 6:  Attached Residential Uses
Attached Residential Uses are uses always compatible with a residential
environment intermediate between single- and two-family detached and multi-
family development.
   No use in this Group may be located on the ground floor in any Business
District, as defined herein.
1.   Single-family attached dwellings, as defined herein, in unit groupings of
8 or fewer units
2.   Townhouse dwellings, as defined herein
3.   Small group home
4.   Small adult care facility
(Ord. 89-2014.  Passed 9-8-14.)
Group 6C:   Special Attached Residential Uses
Special Attached Residential Uses are uses that may be compatible with an
intermediate residential environment under appropriate conditions.
(RESERVED)
Group 7:   Multi-Family Residential Uses
Multi-Family Residential Uses are always compatible with a multi-family
residential environment.
   No use in this Group may be located on the ground floor in any Business
District, as defined herein.
1.   Multi-family dwellings, as defined herein
2.   Small group home
3.   Small adult care facility
(Ord. 89-2014.  Passed 9-8-14.)
Group 7C:   Special Multi-Family Residential Uses
Special Multi-Family Residential Uses are uses that may be compatible with a
multi-family residential environment under appropriate conditions.
   No use in this Group may be located on the ground floor in any Business
District, as defined herein.
1.   Apartment hotels, as defined herein
2.   Dormitories
3.   Fraternity or sorority houses
4.   Manufactured home parts, subject to 1310.07
5.   Shelters for the homeless
6.   Single-room occupancy housing
Group 8: Local Institutional Uses
Local Institutional Uses are public or semi-public uses normally allowable in a
neighborhood setting without special review to assure compatibility.
1. Churches, synagogues, and other houses of wor-ship as a Principal Use or
Accessory Use to a dwelling or other Permitted Use or Conditional Use in the
District
2. Day care centers, child, as defined herein, as an Accessory Use to a
Permitted or Conditional Use in the District
3. Parks, playgrounds, and reservations, public or private
4. Small group home
5. Small adult care facility
(Ord. 89-2014.  Passed 9-8-14.)
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Group 8C: Special Local Institutional Uses
Special Local Institutional Uses are public and semi-public uses normally
allowable in a neighborhood setting only with special review to assure
compatibility.
1. Cemeteries, human or pet
2. Day care centers, adult, as defined herein
3. Day care centers, child, as defined herein, as a Principal Use
4. Golf courses and country clubs
5. Large group home [SU-special use] and large adult care facility [SU-special
use] (See Section 1250.11)
6. Mental health centers, community, as defined herein
7. Mortuaries
8. Nursing homes
9. Philanthropic institutions, as defined herein
10. Recreational institutions, as defined herein
11. Schools, elementary, junior high, and high: public, private, or parochial
(Ord. 89-2014.  Passed 9-8-14.)
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 1130H: Local Business Use Groups
[SU] identifies a use that is subject to special provisions in Chapter 1250.
NOTE:  Districts in which the Use Groups in this table are allowed appear in
Tables 1130A -1130F. 
Group 9: General Business Uses
General Business Uses are uses always compatible with any retail, office, or
industrial environment.
1.   Automated teller machines
2.   Day care centers, child, as an Accessory Use to a Permitted or Conditional
Use in the District
3.   Rental or lease of items sold in the applicable District as a Permitted
Use
4.   Repair or servicing (indoor) of items produced on the premises as a
Permitted Use in the District
5.   Repair or servicing (indoor) of items sold in the applicable District as a
Permitted Use
6.   Sale, incidental only, of items produced on the premises as a Permitted
use in the District
7.   Sale, incidental only, of items repaired or serviced on the premises as a
Permitted Use in the applicable district
8.   Showrooms, non-retail, for items produced on the premises as a Permitted
Use in the District
9.   Storage (indoor) of items produced, sold, rented, leased, serviced, or
repaired on the premises as a Permitted Use in the District
10.   Internet café, as defined herein.
(Ord. 225-200.  Passed 12-8-08.)
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Group 9C: Special General Business Uses
Special General Business Uses are uses that may be compatible with any retail,
office, or industrial environment under appropriate conditions.
1.   Rental or lease of items sold in the District as a Conditional Use
2.   Repair or servicing (indoor) of items produced on the premises as a
Conditional Use in the District
3.   Repair or servicing (indoor) of items sold in the applicable District as a
Conditional Use
4.   Sale, incidental only, of items produced on the premises as a Conditional
Use in the District
5.   Sale, incidental only, of items repaired or serviced on the premises as a
Conditional Use in the applicable district
6.   Showrooms, non-retail, for items produced on the premises as a Conditional
Use in the District
7.   Storage (indoor) of items produced, sold, rented, leased, serviced, or
repaired on the premises as a Conditional Use in the District
8.   Firearms, dangerous ordnances or weapon sales (retail or wholesale, as
defined herein)
9.   Gunsmith shops, not including firing ranges
(Ord. 60-2012.  Passed 4-23-12.)
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Group 10:  Neighborhood Office Uses
Neighborhood Office Uses are office and related non-retail and non-industrial
uses that generate moderate traffic and are otherwise compatible with highly
dispersed locations close to residential areas. 
1.   Dental offices, maximum 2 dentists
2.   Graphics and drafting services
3.   Group homes, as defined herein
4.   Lofts, as defined herein, except on the ground floor
5.   Medical offices, maximum 2 doctors
6.   Mortuaries (no crematories)
7.   Nursing homes, as defined herein
8.   Offices, business and professional, including contractor offices (no
outdoor storage) not listed elsewhere, except retail office uses, as defined
herein
9.   Offices, government, political, and institutional, not listed elsewhere,
except retail office uses, as defined herein
10.   Optometry offices, maximum 2 optometrists
11.   Secretarial services
12.   Studios, art, music, craft, interior design, or photography
13.   Tourist homes and bed and breakfast lodgings
(Ord. 18-2006.  Passed 2-13-06.)
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Group 10C:  Special Neighborhood Office Uses
Special Neighborhood Office Uses are uses that may be compatible with a
neighborhood office environment under appropriate conditions.
1.   Crematories as Accessory Uses to mortuaries
2.   Day care centers, child, as defined herein, as a Principal Use
3.   Mental health centers, community, as defined herein
4.   Parking, off-street, as a Principal Use
5.   Tourist homes and bed and breakfast lodging
6.   Limited outdoor storage, special, as defined herein
(Ord. 43-2013.  Passed 3-25-13.)
--------------------------------------------------------------------
Group 11: Retail Office Uses
Retail Office Uses  are office uses that generate considerable traffic from
customers from the general public, that often require high-visibility locations
to attract business, frequently have evening and weekend business hours, or
commonly require physical expansion on their site, and that are in these or
other respects similar to retail stores.
1. Banks
2. Clinics, as defined herein
3. Credit unions
4. Employment agencies
5. Finance companies
6. Government or non-profit agencies that frequently attract the general
public, such as drivers license bureaus, unemployment offices, welfare offices,
or income tax assistance centers
7. Insurance sales offices
8. Legal clinics
9. Tax preparation offices
10. Real estate sales offices, residential
11. Savings and loans and savings banks
12. Securities brokerages
13. Travel bureaus
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Group 11C: Special Retail Office Uses
Special Retail Office Uses are uses that may be compatible with a retail office
environment under appropriate conditions.
1.   Motor vehicle sales use, as defined herein (PROHIBITED IN CD District)
(Ord. 47-2016. Passed 5-9-16.)
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Group 12: Convenience Retail Uses
Convenience Retail Uses are retail and personal service uses that provide very
frequently pur-chased consumer goods and services, that typically generate
modest traffic from a limited geograph-ic area, and that are therefore suited
to highly dispersed locations closest to residential areas.
1.   Bakeries, retail
2.   Barber shops
3.   Beauty shops
4.   Candy shops
5.   Clothing repair shops
6.   Coffee houses
7.   Convenience food markets
8.   Delicatessens
9.   Donut shops
10.   Drug stores
11.   Dry cleaner and laundry drop-off stations
12.   Florist shops
13.   Food stores
14.   Health food stores
15.   Ice cream shops
16.   Laundromats
17.   Money exchanges
18.   Newspaper and magazine shops
19.   Nut shops
20.   Photo processing stores
21.   Popcorn shops
22.   Restaurants
23.   Restaurant outdoor cafes outside public right-of-way
24.   Shoe repair shops
25.   Tailor shops
26.   Tobacco shops
27.   Yogurt shops
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Group 12C: Special Convenience Retail Uses
Special Convenience Retail Uses are very frequently-patronized retail and
personal service uses that may be compatible in highly dispersed locations
closest to residential areas under appropriate conditions.
1.   Restaurant outdoor cafes within the public right-of-way
2.   Tattoo/body piercing as a primary use
(Ord. 19-2019.  Passed 4-8-2019)
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Group 13: Neighborhood Retail Uses
Neighborhood Retail Uses are retail and service uses that typically provide
frequently purchased consumer goods and services together with a limited
selection of comparison goods and that are therefore suited to semi-dispersed
locations close to residential areas.
1.   Art and craft supply stores
2.   Art shops or galleries
3.   Beauty supplies sales, including cosmetics, wigs, perfumes, and the like
4.   Bicycle sales
5.   Book stores
6.   Camera and photographic supply stores
7.   Card stores
8.   China and glassware shops
9.   Clothing stores
10.   Collectable sales, such as coins, stamps, comic books, etc.
11.   Dairy stores (no processing or bottling)
12.   Domestic appliance stores, including radio, television, stereo, lighting,
clock, and music stores
13.   Filling stations, as defined herein
14.   Gift shops
15.   Hardware stores
16.   Health clubs, as defined herein
17.   Jewelry and watch stores
18.   Kiosks housing retail or service Permitted Uses
19.   Liquor stores (package goods only)
20.   Locksmith shops
21.   Lofts, as defined herein, except on the ground floor
22.   Mail receiving services
23.   Office supply stores
24.   Optician sales, retail
25.   Paint stores
26.   Pet grooming and veterinary offices, excluding kennels or animal boarding
27.   Picture framing shops, retail
28.   Post offices
29.   Printing and photocopying shops with 6 or fewer employees
30.   School supply stores
31.   Stationery stores
32.   Tanning salons
33.   Taverns, as defined herein
34.   Ticket offices, theatre and amusement
35.   Ticket offices, transportation
36.   Tile stores
37.   Variety stores
38.   Video cassette sales or rental stores
39.   Wallpaper stores
40.   Yard goods and fabric stores
(Ord. 144-2004. Passed 10-11-04; Ord. 33-2012.  Passed 3-12-12.)
Group 13C: Special Neighborhood Retail Uses
Special Neighborhood Retail Uses are uses that may be compatible with a
neighborhood retail environment under appropriate conditions.
1.    Banquet halls
2.    Drive-through establishments, as defined herein
3.    Kiosks housing retail or service Conditional Uses
4.    Meeting halls
5.    Motor vehicle servicing shops, as defined herein
6.    Service stations, as defined herein
7.   Limited indoor storage area, as defined herein (excluded from use in CD).
(Ord. 168-2008.  Passed 9-22-08.)
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 1130I: Areawide Business Use Groups
[SU] identifies a use that is subject to special provisions in Chapter 1250.
NOTE:  Districts in which the Use Groups in this table are allowed appear in
Tables 1130A -1130F.
Group 14: Community Center Retail Uses
Community Center Retail Uses are retail and service and related uses that
provide a broad selection of less frequently purchased comparison or shoppers
goods and services, that generate heavy traffic from a wide area, and that are
therefore suited for centralized locations separated from residential areas.
1.   Amphitheaters, outdoor
2.   Antique shops
3.   Apartment hotels, as defined herein
4.   Aquariums
5.   Auditoriums
6.   Banquet halls
7.   Boat and marine rental, no open sales lot
8.   Boat launching areas
9.   Bowling alleys
10.   Bus and rail stations, intercity
11.   Camping equipment sales
12.   Carpet and rug stores
13.   Catalog stores
14.   Catering services
15.   Computer sales
16.   Convention halls
17.   Crafts shops
18.   Custom dressmaking establishments
19.   Dance halls
20.   Department stores and discount department stores
21.   Drive-through establishments, as defined herein
22.   Educational institutions, as defined herein
23.   Filling stations, as defined herein [SU]
24.   Flea markets, swap meets, farmers' and similar markets, permanent indoor
25.   Flea markets, swap meets, farmers' and similar markets, permanent outdoor
26.   Furniture stores, including upholstery when conducted as part of the
retail operations and secondary thereto
27.   Furrier shops, including the incidental storage and conditioning of furs
28.   Game rooms
29.   Garden supply, tool, and seed and nursery plant stores
30.   Hearing aid stores
31.   Hobby shops
32.   Home centers, as defined herein
33.   Home furnishing stores
34.   Hotels and motels, as defined herein
35.   Ice skating rinks, indoor or outdoor
36.   Interior decorating shops, including upholstery and the making of
draperies, slip covers, and other similar articles when conducted as a
secondary part of the retail operations
37.   Leather goods and luggage stores
38.   Libraries, private, and reading rooms
39.   Marinas
40.   Marine equipment and supply stores
41.   Millinery shops
42.   Motor vehicle part and accessory stores
43.   Motor vehicle repair shops, as defined herein
44.   Motor vehicle servicing shops, as defined herein
45.   Museums
46.   Musical instrument sales
47.   Night clubs, as defined herein
48.   Orthopedic and medical appliance sales
49.   Parking, off-street, as a Principal Use
50.   Pawnshops
51.   Performing arts center
52.   Pet shops
53.   Record, tape, compact disc, and sheet music stores
54.   Recreational institutions, as defined herein
55.   Recycling collection points, as defined herein
56.   Second hand stores and rummage shops
57.   Service stations, as defined herein
58.   Sewing machine sales
59.   Shoe stores
60.   Sporting goods and exercise equipment stores
61.   Stadiums and arenas
62.   Theatres, indoor
63.   Ticket offices, theatre and amusement
64.   Tour bus or similar services
65.   Tourist information centers
66.   Tourist homes and bed and breakfast, lodging
67.   Toy stores
(Ord. 144-2004. Passed 10-11-04; Ord. 60-2012.  Passed 4-23-12.)
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Group 14C: Special Community Center Retail Uses
Special Community Center Retail Uses are uses that may be compatible with a
community retail environment under appropriate conditions.
(RESERVED)
Group 15:  Office Center Uses
Office Center Uses are office and related uses that are predominantly non-
retail in character, may gen-erate considerable employee and visitor traffic,
and are therefore incompatible with dispersed locations close to residential
areas.
1. Armories
2. Banquet halls
3. Clinics, as defined herein
4. Data processing centers
5. Day care centers, child, as defined herein, as a Principal Use
6. Exhibit halls
7. Graphics and drafting services
8. Health clubs, as defined herein
9. Hospitals
10. Hotels and motels
11. Laboratories, medical, dental, optical, research, film, photo, or testing
12. Lofts, as defined herein, except on ground floor
13. Mail order houses and letter shops
14. Meeting halls
15. Mental health centers
16. Motion picture studios (no outdoor sets)
17. Offices, business and professional, not listed elsewhere, except retail
offices, as defined herein
18. Offices, government, political, and institutional, not listed elsewhere,
except retail offices, as defined herein
19. Package delivery services
20. Parking, off-street, as a Principal Use
21. Performing arts centers
22. Post offices
23. Radio stations and studios
24. Recording studios
25. Religious institutions, as defined herein
26. Research laboratories and development facilities
27. Restaurants
28. Secretarial services
29. Schools, commercial
30. Studios, art, music, craft, interior design, or photography
31. Taxi services
32. Television stations and studios
33. Training centers, business
34. Union halls
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Group 15C:  Special Office Center Uses
Special Office Center Uses are office-related uses that may be compatible with
an office center environment under appropriate conditions.
1. Airports, as defined herein
2. Alcohol or drug abuse treatment facilities
3. Auditoriums
4. Automobile and truck rental establishments
5. Blueprinting and photostating establishments
6. Business machine sales
7. Computer sales
8. Convention halls
9. Dwellings related to a hospital or mental health center for exclusive
occupancy by hospital staff and their immediate families
10. Exhibit halls
11. Helicopter pads, as an Accessory Use to a hospital or other Permitted Use
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Group 16: Highway Commercial Uses
Highway Commercial Uses are retail, wholesale, service, and semi-industrial
uses that provide goods and services to consumers or businesses, that do not
normally require prime consumer retail locations, that require larger sites,
that produce greater adverse environmental effects, or are otherwise
incompatible with more concentrated or more restricted consumer retail
environments and that are therefore suited to free-standing facilities along
arterial streets rather than to locations in concentrated consumer retail
centers.
1. Airport transportation services
2. Armories
3. Auction rooms
4. Blueprinting and photostating establishments
5. Bottled gas dealers
6. Bowling alleys
7. Building materials and products sales
8. Building moving or wrecking services
9. Business machine sales
10. Car washes
11. Catering services
12. Computer sales
13. Construction offices
14. Dance halls
15. Drive-through establishments, as defined herein
16. Electrical showrooms and shops
17. Equipment rental
18. Exterminating services
19. Farm stands, permanent
20. Fence and fence materials sales
21. Filling stations, as defined herein
22. Flea markets, swap meets, farmers’ and other markets, permanent, indoor
23. Flea markets, swap meets, farmers’ and other markets, permanent, outdoor
24. Frozen food sales, including locker rental
25. Fuel and ice sales
26. Garden supply, tool, and seed and nursery plant stores
27. Greenhouses and nurseries
28. Kennels and domestic animal boarding
29. Lawn care services
30. Lawn mower, snow blower, snowmobile sales
31. Locksmith shops
32. Machinery and equipment sales
33. Manufactured home sales
34. Marine equipment and supply stores
35. Meeting halls
36. Miniature golf courses and driving ranges
37. Mini-warehouses
38. Model home/garage displays as Principal Use
39. Monument sales
40. Motor vehicle, boat, and trailer sales
41.Motor vehicle repair shops, as defined herein
42. Motor vehicle servicing shops, as defined herein
43. Newspaper distribution agencies
44. Orthopedic and medical appliance sales
45. Package delivery services
46. Parking, off-street, as a Principal Use
47. Pawnshops
48. Pet grooming and veterinary offices, excluding kennels or animal boarding
49. Plumbing and heating supply sales
50. Pool and billiards halls
51. Printing, publishing, and binding shops with over 6 employees
52. Radio, television, cable television, and cellular communications towers
53. Recreational institutions, as defined herein
54. Recycling collection points, as defined herein
55. Repair shops
56. Service stations, as defined herein
57. Sewer cleaning and rodding services
58. Sign painting (no fabrication)
59. Skating rinks, indoor
60. Skating rinks, outdoor
61. Studios, art, music, craft, interior design, or photography
62. Swimming pool sales
63. Taxidermists
64. Taxi and limousine services
65. Towing services, not to include wrecking yards
66. Trophy sales
67. Union halls
68. Water softener services
69. Wholesaling establishments
(Ord. 19-2006.  Passed 2-27-06; Ord. 60-2012.  Passed 4-23-12; Ord. 47-2016. 
Passed 5-9-16.
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Group 16C: Special Highway Commercial Uses
Special Highway Commercial Uses are uses that require special review to assure
compatibility even in a highway commercial environment.
1. Adult uses, as defined herein
2. Amusement parks
3. Archery ranges, outdoor
4. Campgrounds
5. Correctional institutions
6. Entertainment device arcades
7. Fuel storage, bulk
8. Outdoor storage associated with a Permitted or Conditional Use
9. Race tracks, animal
10. Race tracks and drag strips, motor
11. Shooting ranges, outdoor or indoor
12. Skateboard tracks, outdoor
13. Trailer parks for recreational vehicles
14. Truck stops
15. Open sales lot, as defined herein as a principal or accessory use.
(Ord. 22-2009.  Passed 2-9-09; Ord. 143-2011.  Passed 10-10-11; Ord. 47-2016. 
Passed 5-9-16; Ord. 19-2019.  Passed 4-8-2019.)
Table 1130J: Industrial Use Groups
[SU] identifies a use that is subject to special provisions in Chapter 1250.
NOTE:  Districts in which the Use Groups in this table are allowed appear in
Tables 1130A -1130F.
Group 17:  Light Industrial Uses
Light Industrial Uses are industrial uses that produce modest adverse
environmental effects and can therefore be located moderately close to
residential or other more restricted uses.
A. Specific Uses
1. Armories
2. Bakery plants
3. Boat and marine equipment sales
4. Boat building (under 5 tons)
5. Bottling works
6. Breweries and distilleries
7. Building moving and wrecking services
8. Canning & preserving factories, except fish products and sauerkraut
9. Cold storage plants
10. Dry cleaning & dying plants, using nonflammable cleaning fluids and
excluding carpet and bag cleaning
11. Dwelling unit of caretaker or guard, as an Accessory Use
12. Feed, flour, and grain storage
13. Filling stations, as defined herein
14. Laundry plants
15. Laboratories, medical, dental, optical, research, film, or testing
16. Linen, uniform, or diaper supply
17. Lofts, as defined herein
18. Machine shops, precision
19. Metal plating, electrolytic process
20. Mini-warehouses
21. Motor, rail, or air freight terminals
22. Motor vehicle repair shops, as defined herein 
23. Motor vehicle servicing shops, as defined herein 
24. Paint, cold mixing or grinding of
25. Painting or varnishing shops
26. Printing, publishing, & binding shops with over 6 employees
27. Recycling collection points, as defined herein
28. Service stations, as defined herein
29. Sign painting shops (no fabrication)
30. Storage, open, of trucks or buses
31. Truck stops
32. Union halls
33. Vulcanizing shops
34. Warehousing and storage, indoor, and distribution facilities not allowed
only in Group 17C or any higher-numbered Use Group
35. Wholesaling establishments
36. Woodworking shops
B. Industrial Products
Any use consisting of assembly, cleaning, compounding, distillation,
manufacturing, packaging, processing, production, reclamation, reconditioning,
refining, repair, servicing, testing, or treatment of:
1. Apparel
2. Bags
3. Baked goods
4. Beverages, non-alcoholic
5. Bicycles & tricycles
6. Brooms & brushes
7. Buttons
8. Candy and confections
9. Cemetery monuments and burial caskets
10. Ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay & gas- or
electrically-fired kilns
11. Chewing gum
12. Clocks & watches
13. Coffee
14. Cosmetics
15. Cutlery
16. Dairy products
17. Dies & gauges
18. Drugs & medications
19. Electrical & electronic appliances & instruments, small
20. Electrical & electronic appliance & instrument parts, small
21. Extracts
22. Flowers, artificial, or plumes
23. Food products not allowed only in Group 17C or any higher-numbered Use
Group
24. Fur goods (excluding tanning & dying)
25. Furniture & wood products
26. Garments
27. Hand tools & hardware products
28. Handicrafts
29. Heating, ventilation, air conditioning appliances & supplies
30. Hosiery
31. Ice, natural or dry
32. Ice cream & similar products
33. Instruments, small precision
34. Jewelry
35. Mattresses
36. Medical, dental, optical, orthopedic, or prosthetic goods
37. Musical instruments
38. Novelties
39. Office machines
40. Office or artists' supplies
41. Pencils
42. Perfumes
43. Sheet metal products, light, such as HVAC ducts, cornices, or eaves
44. Signs and billboards, including electric and neon
45. Silverware & plated utensils
46. Sporting goods
47. Stamps, metal & rubber
48. Syrups
49. Toiletries
50. Toys
51. Wine
52. The following materials previously manufactured and/or prepared elsewhere:
      bone         glass         rubber
      bristles         hair         shell
      broomcorn      horn         textiles
      canvas         leather         tobacco
      cellophane      metal         wax
      cloth         paper         wire
      cork         plastics         wool
      feathers         precious or      wood
      felt           semi-precious      yarns
      fiber           metals or
      fur           stones
C. Uses consisting of mixing, compounding, and packaging of:
1. Chemicals
2. Cleaning & polishing products
3. Ink or inked ribbon
4. Soap, washing or cleaning
--------------------------------------------------------------------
Group 17C:  Special Light Industrial Uses
Special Light Industrial Uses are uses that may be compatible with a light
industrial environment under appropriate conditions.
1. Fuel storage, bulk
2. Marinas
3. Oil and gas wells
4. Outdoor storage associated with a Permitted or Conditional Use
5. Recycling centers, as defined herein, involving sorting and crushing
processing only
6. Stadiums and arenas
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Group 18:  Medium Industrial Uses
Medium industrial uses are industrial and related uses that may produce greater
adverse environmental effects than light industrial uses but lesser effects
than heavy industrial uses and require a corresponding intermediate degree of
separation or buffering from more restricted uses.
Any use consisting of assembly, cleaning, compounding, distillation,
manufacturing, packaging, processing, reclamation, reconditioning, refining,
repair, servicing, testing, or treatment facilities, except uses that are:
   1. allowed only in Group 18C or one or more higher-numbered Use Groups, or
   2. established in City regulations as specifically prohibited uses:
      A. in all Industrial Districts, or
      B. in all districts, in all Business Districts, or in the City generally.
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Group 18C:  Special Medium Industrial Uses
Special Medium Industrial Uses are uses that may be compatible with a medium
industrial environment under appropriate conditions.
1. Airports
2. Correctional institutions
3. Crematories
4. Race tracks, animal
5. Race tracks and drag strips, motor
6. Scavenger services
7. Sewer cleaning and rodding services
8. Solid waste transfer stations
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Group 19:  Heavy Industrial Uses
Heavy Industrial Uses are industrial and related uses that may produce
substantial adverse environmental effects and therefore require locations
removed or heavily buffered from residential or other more restricted uses.
A. Specific Uses
1. Annealing or heat treating plants
2. Arsenals
3. Automatic screw machines
5. Blast furnaces or coke ovens
6. Cotton gins
7. Drop forge plants using power hammers
8. Garbage, refuse, offal, or dead animal reduction, incineration, or dumping
except in a private incinerator constructed and operated as required by law
9. Nitrating of cotton or other cellulose material
10. Ore reduction, smelting, or refining
11. Outdoor storage associated with a Permitted Use
12. Planing mills
13. Punch presses
14. Quarries
15. Race tracks, animal
16. Race tracks and drag strips, motor
17. Railroad freight switching, storage, or classification yards or repair
shops
18. Rendering plants
19. Rock, slag, clay, stone, or concrete crushing, grading, or screening
20. Sawmills
21. Scrap operations
22. Shipbuilding or repair (5 tons or more)
23. Slaughterhouses
24. Solid waste transfer stations
25. Stamping or pressing plants
26. Steam generating plants
27. Stockyards and feeding pens
28. Tanning, curing, or storage of raw hides or skins
29. Union halls
30. Wool pulling or scouring
B. Industrial Products
Any use consisting of assembly, compounding, cleaning, distillation,
manufacturing, packaging, processing, refining, reclamation, reconditioning,
repair, servicing, testing, or treatment of:
1. Abrasives
2. Acetylene
3. Acids, corrosive, any not listed
4. Acoustical materials
5. Agar
6. Aircraft
7. Alcohol
8. Alkalis, corrosive, any not listed
9. Ammonia
10. Ammunition
11. Animal or bone black
12. Anti-knock compounds for gasoline
13. Asbestos
14. Asphalt
15. Automobile bodies
16. Balata
17. Balls or bearings
18. Barrels, drums, or pails, steel
19. Batteries, wet cell
20. Bedsprings
21. Beryllium
22. Bleaching powder
23. Bluing
24. Boilers or tanks
25. Bolts or nuts
26. Bone
27. Bricks or building blocks
28. Briquettes, fuel
29. Bronze powder
30. Calcimine
31. Cans
32. Candles
33. Canvas
34. Caoutchouc
35. Carbide
36. Carbon
37. Carbonic gas
38. Carbonic ice
39. Carborundum
40. Cardboard
41. Cattle or sheep dip
42. Celluloid
43. Cellulose nitrate products
44. Cement & cement products
45. Ceramic glaze or porcelain enamel frit manufacture
46. Ceramic products
47. Charcoal
48. Chemicals (from raw substances)
49. Chicle
50. Chlorine
51. Clay products
52. Cleaning & polishing preparations
53. Coal
54. Coal gas
55. Coal oil
56. Coke
57. Concrete and concrete products
58. Construction equipment
59. Copper
60. Cork
61. Cottonseed oil
62. Creosote
63. Dextrine
64. Disinfectants
65. Dyestuffs
66. Emery cloth
67. Enamel
68. Excelsior
69. Explosives
70. Fabrics, impregnated or coated
71. Fats
72. Felt
73. Fertilizer (from minerals or organic materials)
74. Fiberglass
75. Fish & fish products
76. Fireworks
77. Flammable liquids
78. Fungicides
79. Gas: artificial, natural, industrial, compressed, or liquified
80. Gelatine
81. Glass
82. Glucose
83. Glue (using animal products)
84. Glycerine
85. Grain, feed, or flour
86. Graphite
87. Grease
88. Gum & wood chemicals 
89. Guncotton products
90. Guns, howitzers, mortars, & related equipment
91. Gutta percha
92. Gypsum
93. Hair
94. Hydrochloric acid
95. Insecticide
96. Ink (from basic substance)
97. Insulation
98. Iron
99. Jute
100. Lacquer
101. Lampblack
102. Lard
103. Lime
104. Linoleum
105. Malt
106. Matches
107. Meat products (other than poultry & rabbits)
108. Metallic powder, any not listed
109. Metal-working machinery
110. Mineral insulation
111. Mineral wool
112. Molasses
113. Mortar
114. Nitric acid
115. Nuclear or radioactive materials or waste
116. Nylon
117. Offal, fish or animal
118. Oils
119. Oilcloth
120. Oiled clothing
121. Oxygen
122. Paints
123. Paper or pulp (by sulfite processes emitting noxious gases or odors)
124. Patent leather
125. Pet food
126. Petroleum & petroleum products
127. Phenol or phenol products
128. Phonograph record blanks
129. Pickles
130. Picric acid
131. Pipe, steel
132. Plaster of Paris
133. Plastics
134. Plywood, veneer or shingles
135. Portland cement
136. Potash
137. Products of distillation of bone, coal, or wood
138. Pulp (by sulfite processes emitting noxious gases or odors)
139. Pyroxyline
140. Radioactive waste
141. Radio isotopes
142. Rayon
143. Relishes
144. Roofing materials
145. Rope
146. Rubber, natural or synthetic
147. Rubber products
148. Rugs
149. Salt
150. Sandpaper
151. Sashes & doors
152. Sauerkraut
153. Shellac
154. Shoddy
155. Shoe polish
156. Shortening
157. Size
158. Soap
159. Sodium compounds
160. Stoves
161. Stove polish
162. Starch
163. Steel
164. Sugar
165. Sugar beets
166. Sulfonated oils & assistants
167. Sulfuric acid
168. Sulfurous acid
169. Synthetic polymers and resins
170. Tallow
171. Tanks & tank components
172. Tar
173. Tar products, including roofing and waterproofing
174. Terra cotta
175. Textiles
176. Tile
177. Tires
178. Tobacco products
179. Transmission cable
180. Transportation equipment
181. Turpentine
182. Wallboard
183. Wallpaper
184. Window shades
185. Wire
186. Wood & gum chemicals
187. Wood (distillation only)
188. Varnish
189. Vinegar
190. Yeast
191. Zinc
C. Bulk Storage (except incidental storage for use on the premises) of:
1. Acids, corrosive, any not listed
2. Alkalis, corrosive, any not listed
3. Batteries, wet cell
4. Beryllium
5. Carbonic gas or ice
6. Coal or coke
7. Dead animals
8. Explosives
9. Fuel, solid
10. Gas: artificial, natural, industrial, compressed, or liquified
11. Garbage or rubbish
12. Grain
13. Gunpowder
14. Hydrochloric acid
15. Hides or skins, raw
16. Nitric acid
17. Offal
18. Picric acid
19. Petroleum & petroleum by-products
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Group 19C:  Special Heavy Industrial Uses
Special Heavy Industrial Uses are uses that cannot be assured to be compatible
with even a relatively unrestricted heavy industrial environment without
special review.
1. Hazardous or toxic materials disposal sites
2. Incinerators
3. Landfills and dumps
Group 20:  Urban Industrial Uses
1.   Bakeries
2.   Blueprinting and photostating establishments
3.   Boxes or cabinets, manufacturing
4.   Breweries
5.   Building materials and product sales
6.   Business machines
7.   Canning and preserving factories, except for fish products
8.   Chocolate and cocoa products manufacturing
9.   Coffee roasting
10.   Cold storage plants
11.   Computer centers
12.   Computer repair and sales
13.   Industrial, scientific, or business research, development and testing
laboratories and offices
14.   Contractors and construction offices
15.   Electronic instruments and devices, assembling and manufacturing
16.   Equipment rentals
17.   Frozen food sales
18.   Garden supplies
19.   Greenhouses and nurseries
20.   Lawn care services
21.   Laboratories, medical, dental, optical, research, film, or testing
22.   Laundry plants
23.   Locksmith shops
24.   Machinery and equipment sales
25.   Machine, precision
26.   Manufacture of instruments, toys, novelties, rubber and metal stamps,
cameras, and photographic equipment, business and household machines and
appliances
27.   Marine equipment and supply stores
28.   Mini-warehouses
29.   Monument sales
30.   Newspaper distribution agencies
31.   Orthopedic and medical appliance repair and sales
32.   Package delivery services
33.   Pet grooming and veterinary clinics
34.   Plumbing and heating supply sales
35.   Printing, publishing, and binding shops
36.   Recreational institutional
37.   Repair shops
38.   Sign painting
39.   Skating rinks (indoor)
40.   Studios, art, music, craft, interior design, or photography
41   Swimming pool sales
42.   Union halls
43.   Warehousing and storage
44.   Wholesale establishments
Group 20C:  Special Urban Industrial Uses
1.   Plastic extruding
2.   Punch press
3.   Any Group 20 use in excess of 15,000 square feet but not greater than
50,000 square feet
(Ord. 148-1995. Passed 12-11-95; Ord. 119-1999.  Passed 7-26-99;  Ord. 2-2000. 
Passed 2-14-00.)
Chapter 1140
Accessory Uses and Yards
1140.01 Accessory Uses and Projections
(a) General Provisions
   (1) Timing
   Accessory Uses and structures shall be compatible with the Principal Use of
the lot on which they are located and shall not be established prior to the
establishment of the principal use.
   (2) Location
   Accessory Uses may be located in yards subject to the provisions of Tables
1140C and 1140D. 
   (3) Standards
   Accessory Uses shall conform to applicable standards of Table 1140A.
   (4)   Only "Domestic Animals" as defined in Chapter 1360 shall be permitted
on Residential Single-Family, Two-Family and Multi-Family lots, Zoning Code
District, RA, RS, RT and RM.
(Ord. 157-2003. Passed 12-15-03.)
(b) Special Accessory Uses
   (1) Garages, Parking, and Loading
   Garages, carports, open parking spaces, load-ing spaces, and parking of
commercial vehicles, recreational vehicles, collector cars, or junk cars as
Accessory Uses shall be subject to applicable provisions of Chapter 1210,
Parking, Loading, and Vehicular Areas.
   (2) Accessory Motor Vehicle Servicing
   Incidental servicing, as defined herein, of motor vehicles owned or leased
by residents of the premises shall be an Accessory Use for residential uses in
Residential Districts.  No other motor vehicle servicing or repair shall be
permitted as such an Accessory Use.
   (3) Signs
   Signs shall conform to the provisions of Chapter 1230, Sign Regulations.
   (4) Backlit Awnings
      A. Size
      Awnings that are mounted on building facades and that are artificially
illuminated from behind or within, whether or not bearing a sign, shall not
exceed:
      1. an awning height of 5 feet measured vertically from the top of the
awning to the lowest portion of the awning, including any fringe or valance,
and
      2. a length equal to 66 percent of the building frontage of the wall on
which the awning is displayed along the street, alley, parking area, or other
area toward which the awning faces.
      B. Exception
      Awnings larger than any dimension specified in division (b)(4) may be
allowed as a Conditional Use under division 1310.03(b).
      C. Where Displayed
      Backlit awnings shall be displayed on ground level stories only.
   (5) Swimming Pools
   Swimming pools shall conform to the requirements of Tables 1140A and 1140B.
   (6) Antennas
      A. Dish Antennas
      Satellite dish antennas shall conform to the provisions of Section
1250.06.
      B. Other Antennas
      Radio or television towers or antennas as Accessory Uses shall not have
an antenna height exceeding 35 feet in Residential Districts except where such
limitation would serve to prevent amateur radio communications. Towers and
antennas shall not be so positioned as to be a hazard to any utility line.
   (7) Projections Over Roofs and Canopies
   Projections or displays mounted on and extending vertically above the
highest point of a roof, parapet, canopy, or awning are prohibited except for:
      A. such signs as are allowed to so project by Chapter 1230, and
      B. chimneys, spires, towers, elevator penthouses, mechanical equipment,
tanks, antennas, and similar necessary or customary projections of necessary
and customary height.
   (8) Fences
   Fences shall conform to the provisions of Section 1250.07.
   (9) Maintenance
   Backlit awnings, projections over roofs and canopies, and all other
Accessory Uses and projections permitted by this chapter shall be maintained by
the occupant of the premises in safe, intact, and presentable condition as
determined by the Building Commissioner.
   (10)   Outdoor Furnace.
   Outdoor furnaces, as defined herein, are prohibited for any residential use.
For any nonresidential use, a Conditional Use Permit is required.
(Ord. 196-2008.  Passed 10-27-08.)
Table 1140A: Standards for Accessory Uses
 
Maximum Height [a] in  Residential Districts:
 In feet:                                     15
 In stories:                                  1
Maximum Coverage [b] of:
 Required Rear Yard [c]:                      30 %
 Required Front Yard [c] [d]:                 20 %
 
 
Minimum Setback from Principal or Other Accessory        10
Building in feet [e]:
Minimum Setback from Lot Lines [f]:
Accessory Use          Lot Line Set Back is From         Setback in Feet
Motor fuel pump        Front or Corner Side              15
Dish antenna           Any                               8
Dog run                Any                               10
Any, on corner lot     Rear, abutting lot in RS, RT, or  6
                       RA District
Any                    Any                               2
Swimming pool:
Residential            Any                               10
Club or commercial     Any abutting an R District        25
Pool building, club or Any abutting an R District        75
commercial
 
 
Maximum Number & Size ofResidential Accessory Buildings [g] :
                Maximum Number                   Maximum Floor Area in Square
                                                 Feet
Detached Garage 1                                770 [h]
All Other       1                                300
Total for All   2                                1,020
Minimum setback of air conditioning condenser or
heat pump from dwelling on another lot or        10 feet
building site [i]:
 
Notes for Table 1140A
This table applies except where City regulations applicable to a specific kind
of accessory use provide a greater or lesser standard.  They apply in all
districts except where indicated otherwise.
[a] Fence height, as defined herein.
[b] See also 1210.06(c)(2) for maximum coverage by off-street parking.
[c] Cumulative for all accessory structures in yard.  Excludes areas occupied
by open patios and decks, open off-street parking, and swimming pools.  Per-
centage of coverage applies to area of actual yard when smaller than area of
required yard.
[d] Applies to open porches only.
[e] Except decks, patios, and Accessory Uses that are structurally a part of
the principal building.
[f] Except fences, walls, landscape screens, berms, and hedges.  Yard
restrictions of Table 1140D may impose greater setbacks from lot lines.   
[g] On single- and two-family residential lots or building sites in RS, RT, &
RA Districts. 
[h] Or 50% of floor area of dwelling served, whichever is less.  A larger
garage may be approved as a Conditional Use on a lot having no less than 100
feet of frontage.
[i] Attached garages and other areas of a residential building not used for
human occupancy may be located within this setback.
Table 1140B: Requirements for Swimming Pools
 Residential Pools * Other Pools
                             Residential Pools * Other Pools
In R Districts:
                                                 Private pools *
Type of Use                  Permitted           Conditional
                                                 Commercial pools *
                                                 Prohibited
Minimum lot area             None                3 acres
In All Districts:
Maximum pool area in percent 5 %                 5 %
of lot area
Minimum fence height around  5 feet              5 feet
pool or entire lot
                                                 Commercialpools *: arterial
Motor vehicle access to pool N/A                 streets
area permitted only from                         Private pools *: arterial or
                                                 collector streets
 
* As defined herein.
1140.02 Yards
(a)   Obstructions
Yards, as defined herein, shall be required as provided in Chapter 1110.  The
yard space required for one building or structure shall not be used as the
required yard space of another adjoining building or structure.
Yards may be obstructed by Accessory Uses or building projections only as
provided in Tables 1140C and 1140D.
(b)   Reduction in Lot Area
No lot shall be so reduced in area, except as the result of partial acquisition
by a public body, that yards or other setbacks are less than required by this
Code.
(c)   Vacant Through Lots
On a vacant through lot, either of the lot lines abutting a street may be
established as the front lot line.
Except that where a through lot is contiguous to a lot on which a front lot
line has been established by an existing building, the same street line shall
serve as the front lot line of the through lot.
Table 1140C:
Maximum Projection into Required yard
Maximum Projection: ApplicablePercent of Actual Yard Depth
                    Yard Inches
Maximum Projection:         ApplicablePercent of Actual Yard Depth
                            Yard  Inches
Projection or Accessory Use
Awnings/canopies            Any   --25%
Bay windows                 Any   18--
Chimneys                    Any   24--
Eaves, sills, cornices, or  Front --25%
gutters                     Any   24--
 
Any:   Any yard in which projection or use is allowed by Table 1140D
Table 1140D:
Prohibited Yard Obstructions
on Single- and Two-Family Lots
Projection or Accessory Use Interior Side Yard Corner Side Yard Front Yard [b]
Projection or Accessory Use  Interior Side Yard Corner Side Yard Front Yard [b]
Arbors & trellises           -                  -                x
Balconies, open              x                  -                -
Decks [d]                    x                  x                x
Dish antennas [a]            x                  x                x
Dog houses                   x                  x                x
Dog runs                     x                  x                x
Galvanized chain link fences -                  -                x
Garages or carports [a]      -                  x                x
Gardens, vegetables          -                  -                x
Greenhouses                  x                  x                x
Laundry drying equipment     x                  x                x
Patios, terraces, open       x                  x                x
Patios, terraces, enclosed   x                  x                x
Porches open [c]             x                  -                -
Recreational equipment       x                  x                x
Sheds & storage buildings   x                  x                x
(detached)
Stoops [e]                   -                  -                -
Swimming pools, residential  x                  x                x
[a]
Television or radio towers   -                  x                x
or antennas [a]
Tennis courts, private       x                  x                x
Yards specified are required yard, unless otherwise provided by note [b].
Prohibitions apply only in RS, RT, and RA Districts.
       x = Prohibited
[a]   See also separate regulations for this use in this chapter or in Chapter
1210 or 1250.
[b]   This prohibition applies to the actual yard, as defined herein.
[c]   Maximum 200 square feet. The structure width cannot exceed a width of 20
feet and a depth of 10 feet. The structure MUST maintain the required yard as
outlined in this code.
[d]   Decks as defined for this table are structures located in rear yard only.
[e]   Maximum 50 square feet.
(Ord. 148-1995. Passed 12-11-95; Ord. 88-1999.  Passed 5-24-99; Ord. 180-2013. 
Passed 12-9-13; Ord. 20-2019.  Passed 4-8-2019.)
Chapter 1150
Sexually Oriented Businesses
   
1150.01   Definitions
   
1150.02   Sexually oriented business uses
CROSS REFERENCES
Obscenity (pornography) - see Ohio R.C. 2907.31 et seq.
Abusing or contributing to the delinquency of a child - see GEN. OFF. 630.03
Child molesting or attempt - see GEN. OFF. 630.05
Sex related offenses - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 666
1150.01 Definitions
   The definitions contained in this section shall be applicable to this
chapter, together with the definitions contained in Chapter 1360 of this
Development Code and any other definitions contained in this Code
   (a)   “Adult arcade”  means any place to which the public is permitted or
invited wherein coin-operated or token-operated or electronically,
electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to
five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   (b)   “Adult bookstore” or “adult video store”  means a commercial
establishment which, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale
or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
      (1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions,
slides, or other visual representations which depict or described specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
      (2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia, other than medical or
contraceptive devices, which are designed for use in connection with specified
sexual activities.
   (c)   “Adult cabaret”  means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features:
      (1)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or
      (2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
      (3)  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   (d)   “Adult motion picture theater”  means a commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides, or similar photographic reproductions, which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas,  are regularly shown.
   (e)   “Adult theater” means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state
of nudity, or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   (f)   “Nude model studio”  means any place where a person who appears in a
state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided solely to be
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by
other persons.
   (g)   “Nudity” or a “state of nudity” means:
      (1)  The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, genitals, or areola of
the female breast; or
      (2)  A state of dress which fails to cover opaquely a human buttock,
anus, or genitals, or areola of the female breast.
   (h)   “Sexually oriented business” means an adult arcade, adult bookstore,
adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater or adult
theater.  "Sexually oriented business" does not include a nude model studio.
   (i)   “Specified anatomical areas” means human genitals.
   (j)   “Specified sexual activities” means any of the following:
      (1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
      (2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
      (3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated.
   (Ord. 150-96. Passed 10-28-96)
1150.02 Sexually Oriented Business Uses
   (a)  A sexually oriented business shall be located only in accordance with
the following restrictions:
      (1)  No such business shall be located on any parcel within 700 feet of
any Residential District located within the boundaries of the City or any
adjoining city or township;
      (2)  No such business shall be located on any parcel within 1,000 feet of
any library, private or public elementary or secondary school, pre-school, day
care center, public park or church located within the boundaries of the City or
any adjoining city or township;
      (3)  No such business shall be located on any parcel within 1,000 feet of
another sexually oriented business located within the boundaries of the City or
any adjoining city or township;
      (4)  Such businesses shall only be located in C-4, I-1, I-2 and I-
3 Districts.
   (b)  For the purposes of subsection (a) hereof, measurement shall be made in
a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
nearest portion of  the building or structure used as a part of the premises
where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line
of the premises of a church or public or private elementary or secondary
school, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, Residential
District, or residential lot.
   (c)  For the purposes of subsection (a) hereof, the distance between any two
sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects from the closet exterior wall of
the structure in which each business is located.
   (d)  No person shall establish, operate or cause the establishment or
operation of any sexually oriented business in violation of the provisions of
this section.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit or limit
the display, sale or rental of descriptive, printed, film or video material or
any live performance which, taken as a whole, contains serious literary,
artistic, political, medical, educational or scientific value.
   (e)  Notwithstanding Chapter 1340 of this Development Code, any sexually
oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of this chapter that
is in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nonconforming use.  A
sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not
rendered a nonconforming use by the subsequent location of a church, public or
private elementary or secondary school, public park or library within 1,000
feet, or a Residential District or use within 500 feet, of the sexually
oriented business.  When a nonconforming sexually oriented business use of a
structure or premises is voluntarily discontinued or abandoned for more than
six months, the structure, building, or premises shall not thereafter be used
except in conformity with the subdivision of uses for the use district in which
it is located.  Chapter 1340 of this Development Code shall supplement this
subsection (e) when there is not a direct conflict between these Code
provisions. (Ord. 150-96. Passed 10-28-96; Ord. 60-1997. Passed 4-14-97)
Title 3 : Land Planning and Improvements
Chapter 1210
Parking, Loading, & Vehicular Areas
1210.01 Purpose and Applicability
(a) Purpose
Parking and loading facilities located off-street are desirable to enhance
access to land uses and reduce congestion and hazards on public streets. 
Such facilities are, however, often difficult to provide in neighborhoods that
were developed before automobile and truck usage and the provision of off-
street parking and loading became common.  And the provision of off-street
facilities can at times even be detrimental to the character of older parts of
the City.
The provisions of this chapter therefore attempt to balance the benefits to the
City of off-street parking and loading facilities with the physical and
economic obstacles to their provision and with the desirability of retaining
Barberton's traditional character. 
This chapter sets requirements for off-street parking, loading, and other areas
utilized by motor vehicles to reduce congestion and traffic hazards, provide
proper access to land uses, and maintain and improve the character of business
and residen-tial areas.
(b) Applicability
Applicability of the provisions of this chapter to each type of vehicular area
shall be as specified below.
   (1) Off-Street Parking Areas
   Section 1210.02
   Section 1210.03
   Section 1210.04
   Section 1210.05
   Section 1210.06
   (2) Off-Street Loading Areas
   Section 1210.02
   Section 1210.03
   Section 1210.08
   (3) Off-Street Stacking Areas
   Section 1210.02
   Section 1210.07
   (4) All Other Vehicular Areas
   Section 1210.02
1210.02 Provisions Applying to All Vehicular Areas
(a) Applicability
The requirements of this section shall apply to off-street parking areas, off-
street loading areas, stacking areas, and all other vehicular areas, as defined
herein.
Areas that are regularly used as parking, loading, stacking, or other vehicular
areas shall be considered to be such areas whether or not formally designated
for such purpose.
(b) Use of Vehicular Areas
   (1) Allowable Uses
   Except as otherwise provided herein, vehicular areas shall be used solely
for:
      A. parking or stacking of motor vehicles of patrons, residents,
occupants, guests, visitors, employees, proprietors, officers, or suppliers of
the use they serve
      B. loading and unloading for such use
      C. vehicle circulation and maneuvering
      D. other customary accessory uses thereto, and
      E. temporary parking by authorized construction, maintenance, or repair
personnel or public service or utility personnel.
   (2) Specifically Prohibited Uses
   Except as permitted in division (b)(3), there shall be in vehicular areas
no:
      A. offering or display of vehicles or other merchandise for sale, rent,
or lease, or
      B. storage of any kind, or
      C. motor vehicle dismantling, repair, restoration, or servicing work, nor
storage of vehicles undergoing such work.
   (3) Exceptions
   Uses prohibited in division (b)(2) shall be permitted as provided herein.
      A. Vehicle sale, rental, storage, or repair shall be permitted
respectively on the premises of lawful businesses engaged in such sale,
storage, or repair, subject to division 1130.01(c)(2)
      B. Vehicle repair shall be permitted to repair or service a disabled
vehicle for no more than 72 hours in emergency situations
      C. Retail sales shall be permitted in a parking structure as:
      1. incidental retail that is an Accessory Use for the convenience of
parkers, such as vending machines or a newsstand, or
      2. ground floor retail uses within a parking structure, where such uses
are allowed by the regulations of the applicable district.
      D. Any prohibited use shall be permitted as an incidental non-commercial
Accessory Use to single- and two-family detached or attached or townhouse
dwellings or as otherwise permitted under City regulations, except that only
incidental servicing, as defined herein, of motor vehicles shall be so
permitted
      E. Any prohibited use may be allowed as a Temporary Use under division
(b)(4) of this Section.
   (4) Temporary Uses
   Vehicular areas shall be used temporarily for other than the purposes
specified in division (b)(1)--such  as for carnivals, farmers' markets, or
Christmas tree or other merchandise  sales--only if authorized as a Temporary
Use under division 1310.04(a).
(c) Grading and Surfacing
   (1) Requirement
   All permanent vehicular areas shall be graded for proper drainage.  Storm
water runoff shall be discharged into City storm sewers or in an-other manner
approved by the Service Director.
   Except as provided in division (c)(2), all new vehicular areas shall be
surfaced with Portland cement concrete, asphaltic concrete, brick, paving
block, or other all-weather, dust-free, hardsurfaced material approved by the
Building Commissioner, not including gravel or loose fill. All driveway
approaches must be approved by the City Engineer.
   Load bearing capacity for loading area surfacing shall be as approved by the
Service Director.
   (2) Exceptions
      A. I-3 District
      On a lot in the I-3 Heavy Industrial District, no surfacing shall be
required for any part of a vehicular area located more than 200 feet from a
Residential District. 
      B. Deficient Storm Water Facilities
      The requirement for surfacing shall be deferred on a property if the
Service Director determines that City storm sewers or other drainage facilities
are currently inadequate to handle the run-off that would be added by the
surfacing.
      Surfacing shall be required at such time as facilities have been provided
adequate to handle such runoff.
(d) Maintenance
All vehicular areas shall be maintained free of dust, trash, and debris. 
Vehicular areas in current use shall be cleared of snow within a reasonable
time after snowfalls. 
The surfacing, curbing, wheel stops, lighting fixtures, marking, signage, and
related appurtenances shall be maintained in good condition so long as such
areas are used as vehicular areas.
(e) Landscaping and Screening
Landscaping and screening of vehicular areas shall be as provided in Chapter
1220, Landscaping and Screening.
(f) Driveways and Curb Cuts
Driveways to vehicular areas shall be subject to the provisions of division
1240.02(f) in Chapter 1240, Other Planning and Improvements Standards.
(Ord. 50-2001. Passed 4-23-01.)
1210.03 Provisions Applying to Parking and Loading Areas
(a) Applicability
   (1) To Uses
   Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in conformance with Tables
1210A - 1210D and other provisions herein for:
      A. all uses established after the date of effect of this chapter, and
      B. all existing uses that are conforming in the number of parking spaces
and that are:
      1. enlarged or expanded, or 
      2. otherwise changed in density, intensity, capacity, or other measure
that determines requirements hereunder, or
      3. changed to any other use to which different parking or loading
requirements herein apply.
   No additional spaces shall be required for expansion or change of a use if
the standards herein would require an increase over the spaces already provided
of below 15 percent.
   Parking for changed, enlarged, or expanded uses that are nonconforming in
the number of parking spaces shall conform to Table 1340A.
   (2) To Spaces
   The requirements herein shall apply to any provision, removal, enlargement,
alteration, maintenance, or use of any off-street parking or loading spaces or
areas that either:
      A. are existing as of the effective date of these regulations, or 
      B. are new spaces or areas required to be provided or voluntarily 
provided in excess of the requirements herein.
   The requirements apply to parking that is either a Principal or Accessory
Use.
   (3) To Open Sales Lots
   Open sales lots or storage lots for motor vehicles shall not be considered
as parking.
(b) Exceptions to Parking and
Loading Requirements
   (1) Variances
   Variances to parking and loading requirements may be approved as Variances
under division 1310.03(a).
   (2) Alternative Space Needs Data
   The Planning Commission may approve exceptions to parking and loading
requirements as a Special Exception under division 1310.03(b) on the basis of
submission by the applicant of parking or loading demand studies, documented
industry standards, or other evidence of fact or expert opinion satisfactory to
the Commission that:
      A. peak parking demand for the use necessitates fewer spaces than
required herein, or
      B. other requirements of this chapter are inapplicable to the particular
use.
   (3) C-D District
   No off-street parking or loading spaces shall be required for any use in the
C-D Downtown Commercial District.  This exemption is made in order to minimize
curb cuts disruptive to safe and efficient pedestrian circuculation and to
encourage provision Downtown, where land for parking is limited, of public
parking spaces in centralized locations.
   (4) Time-Shared Parking or Loading
      A. Eligibility
      The Planning Commission may, as a Special Exception under division
1310.03(b), credit off-street parking or loading spaces that are provided for
one use toward the spaces required herein for another use that normally uses
them at different times of the day, week, and/or year upon request of an
applicant and subject to the requirements of this division.
      If the Commission determines that any use proposing to share spaces
      provided for another use is likely to regularly utilize such spaces
during all or most of the same time periods, it shall disallow the crediting of
such spaces.
      B. Location of Shared Parking
      Credited parking spaces shall be located no further from the additional
use(s) to which they are to be credited than the distances specified in
division 1210.06(b)(2), Distance From Use.
      C. Agreement
      Credited spaces shall be included in a written agreement filed with the
Commission and approved as legally sufficient by the Director of Law.
      1. Users
      The agreement shall allow the utilization of credited spaces by the
additional use(s) to which they are to be credited and specify the times, if
any, to which such utilization is restricted.
      2. Times of Use
      The agreement shall specify the type of establishment and hours, days, or
periods during the year during which spaces proposed for crediting are normally
used thereby seven days a week for both the use(s) for which the spaces are
provided and for the use(s) to which they are also to be credited hereunder.
      3. Spaces Not Reserved
      The agreement shall specify that no space to be credited shall be a
reserved parking space, as defined herein, 24 hours a day.
      D. Signage
      A directional sign at each entrance to the facility shall indicate the
avail-
      ability of the spaces therein to each use to which they have been
credited together with the limitations on when they may be occupied for each
such use.
(c) Preservation of Existing Spaces
   (1) Reduction in Compliance Prohibited
   No off-street parking or loading spaces or areas provided in full or partial
conformity with the provisions of these or previous regulations, shall be
reduced in size, number, or other characteristic below or further below the
requirements herein so long as the use they serve continues in operation unless
they are replaced with equivalent spaces. 
   A use that undergoes a reduction in floor area or other measure specified
herein for determining the number of required spaces may nonetheless reduce the
number of spaces to those required herein for the smaller use.
   (2) Current Lease or Agreement Required
   A party providing required spaces through a lease or other agreement under
division 1210.04(c)(2) or (c)(3) shall possess a currently valid lease or other
agreement therefor at all times that the use remains in operation.
   (3) Conversion of Residential Garages 
   Residential garages shall not be converted into non-parking use if the level
of compliance with parking requirements herein will be reduced, or the degree
of nonconformity increased, after such conversion.
(d) Illumination
   (1) Intensity
   Uses providing illuminated open parking spaces or loading spaces shall
provide not less than 0.2 footcandles of illumination at the surface of each
parking space.
   (2) Glare
   Illumination shall be shielded, diffused, or indirect so as not to produce
glare on abutting lots or public streets.
   (3) Hours
   No later than 30 minutes after the close of the parking or loading facility
or of all the uses it serves, lighting facilities for off-street parking and
loading areas shall be extinguished or, if needed for security in the judgment
of either the parking provider or the Building Commissioner, reduced to an
intensity approved by the City Engineer.
(e) Access
   (1) Access from Street
   Each off-street parking and loading area shall have vehicular access to and
from a public street or alley in a manner that will least interfere with
traffic movement thereupon.
   (2) Aisle or Drive Required
   Each required off-street parking space and loading space not having direct
access to a street or alley shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway of
such width and design as to provide a safe and efficient means of vehicular
access.
   Dimensions of aisles shall be as provided in Table 1210D.  Dimensions of
driveways shall be as provided in Table 1240E.
   (3) Small Parking Areas Exempt
   Uses required hereunder to provide 6 or fewer parking spaces or less than 2
loading spaces are exempt from the requirements of division (e)(2) as they
apply to parking spaces or loading spaces, respectively.
   (4) Tandem Parking Exempt
   Tandem parking spaces, as defined herein, shall be allowed for parking or
loading only:
      A. for valet parking, as also defined herein, or
      B. for parking used exclusively by parkers who normally leave the parking
facility at the same time, such as parking for sporting or entertainment events
or worship services, or
      C. for all parking spaces provided for the exclusive use of any
individual single-, two-, or multiple-family residential dwelling unit except
the first space provided therefor.
   (5) Forward Vehicular Motion
   Off-street parking areas, except for uses pro-viding 6 or fewer parking
spaces, and off- street loading areas shall be designed to enable vehicles to
enter or leave them moving in a forward direction.  Space for vehicle
maneuvering necessary for compliance herewith shall be provided on the lot.
   (6) Dead-End Aisles
   Except in the case of attended parking areas, as defined herein, spaces at
the end of deadend aisles shall be provided with back-up space for the
vehicles  parked therein that has been approved as sufficient by the City
Engineer.
(f) Other Provisions
   (1) Spaces Credited to a Single Use
   No parking or loading space shall be credited as a required parking or
loading space for more than one use---or as both a parking space and a loading
space for the same use---except for spaces qualifying as Time- Shared Parking
or Loading under division (b)(4) of this section.
   Required parking spaces may, however, be available as parking spaces to more
than  one use, as in shopping center parking lots or City parking facilities.
   (2) Site Plan Required
   A Site Plan showing off-street parking and loading facilities shall be
required as provided in Table 1320C.
   The Building Commissioner may defer this requirement in any instance in
which the specific use of the premises, and therefore the specific parking and
loading requirements applicable, are not yet determined, such as may be the
case for an industrial subdivision.
   (3) Temporary Parking or Loading Areas
   A temporary off-street parking or loading area not conforming to one or more
requirements of this chapter may be approved as a Temporary Use under division
1310.04(a).
   (4) Occasional Parking or Loading Areas
   Off-street parking or loading areas that do not conform to one or more
requirements of this chapter may be approved by the Planning Commission as a
Special Exception under division 1310.03(b) if they are used repeatedly but
only on an occasional, non-daily basis.
   (5) Signs
   All signs accessory to off-street parking and loading areas shall conform to
the provisions of Chapter 1230, Sign Regulations.
1210.04 Number of Parking Spaces Required
(a) Requirements
The number of parking spaces required for any use shall be determined by:
   (1) the applicable figures in Tables 1210A and 1210C, and
   (2) reductions to such figures as provided in division (d) of this section.
More than one type of reduction may be applied to a single use.  Each such
reduction shall be separately computed based on the number of spaces required
in Tables 1210A and 1210C.
Spaces required hereunder may be any of the types of spaces specified in
division (b) of this section.  They may be provided  through any of the means
specified in division (c) of this section.
(b) Types of Parking Spaces
Except as specifically provided otherwise in this chapter and subject to
applicable regulations therein, any of the types of parking spaces 
listed in this division may be used to satisfy in whole or in part the
requirements herein to provide off-street parking.
   (1) Types of Spaces by Location
      A. On-Site Spaces
      On-site spaces are off-street spaces provided on the same lot as the
establishment(s) they serve.
      B. Off-Site Spaces
      Off-site spaces are off-street parking spaces provided on a different lot
than the establishment(s) they serve and that are subject to the requirements
of division 1210.06(b).
      C. On-Street Spaces
      In special circumstances only, on-street spaces may be credited toward a
requirement for off-street parking as provided in division (d)(2)D of this
section.
   (2) Other Types of Spaces
   Required parking spaces may be either free or paid parking.  Required spaces
for employees and residents shall be without time limit; other spaces may have
time limits.  Required spaces may be in open surface parking or in structures.
(c) Options for Parking Space Provision
Except as specifically provided otherwise herein, the requirement herein for a
use to provide the number of off-street parking spaces specified in division
(a) of this section may be satisfied in any of three ways.
   (1) Direct Provision by the Use
   A use or property owner may install and maintain parking spaces on land it
controls.
   (2) Leases or Other Agreements
   A use may obtain required parking spaces under a lease, an agreement for
Time-Shared Parking under division 1210.03(b)(4), or another agreement for the
provision of spaces that are under different ownership or control than the use
they serve.
   Such agreement shall have been approved for legal sufficiency by the
Director of Law, shall confirm the availability of the spaces to the use, and
shall be transferable to subsequent uses on the same property.
   (3) Financial Support of  Multi-User Parking
   If approved by the Planning Commission as a Special Exception, a use may
provide partial financial support for installation and maintenance of parking
spaces provided jointly for multiple uses, such as in City parking lots or
multi-user private lots.
(d) Reductions in Number of Spaces
   (1) Administration
      A. Applicant Must Establish Eligibility
      The applicant for any reduction in number of spaces under this division
(d) shall be completely responsible
      for providing, and certifying in an affidavit to the completeness and ac-
curacy of, all data and information required to establish eligibility therefor.
      B. Reporting of Reductions
      Any action taken to reduce the number of required parking spaces under
division (d) shall be reported in writing within 5 days of the action to the
Building Commissioner.
      C. Change in Eligibility for Reduction
      A use that provides a reduced number of spaces as permitted herein but
ceases to comply with the applicable requirements therefor for any reason and
does not then supply the number of spaces required without the reduction, shall
become nonconforming with respect to the number of spaces.  A parking reserve
area under division (e) may be required in order to prevent such nonconformity.
      A use that did not initially comply with the requirements for a
reduction, including the required approval specified, but that later complies,
shall qualify for the reduction subject to the other provisions herein.
   (2) Types of Reductions
      A. Uses Sharing Patrons and Employees
      The Building Commissioner may find based on data submitted by the
applicant that a use requiring parking is combined with a second use utilizing
the same parking area that:
      1. serves as a subsidiary use, and
      2. shares all its employees with the first use, and
      3. is normally utilized by customers, visitors, or employees only as part
of a stop to utilize the first use.
      Upon making such findings, he or she shall waive the spaces required for
the second use.
      For example, a service station with a convenience food store that is sub-
sidiary to the station, is normally patronized only while doing business with
the service station, and is serviced by the same employees, shall be required
to provide only the spaces required for the service station. 
      B. Captive Market Uses
      The Planning Commission may determine that a use not qualifying under
division (d)(2) does not require the normal amount of parking because it
benefits from a captive market. 
      With a captive market, a use draws a significant number of customers or
visitors who do not arrive at the use by motor vehicle because the use is
located on the same lot as, or within walking distance of, a second use or uses
that generate such customer or visitor traffic. 
      For example, a restaurant located in an office building may draw some
customers from the offices therein and may not therefore require parking for
those customers.  Or a convenience market may be located close enough to a
concentration  of housing to draw pedestrian traffic therefrom.
      The Commission may in such cases reduce the parking required for the
first use by an amount approximating the percentage of captive market patronage
accounted for by the second use.
      C. Reduction for Employee Spaces Demand Reduction
      The Planning Commission may reduce the number of spaces required
      for the employees of a use if the use submits binding written agreements
approved as legally sufficient by the Director of Law for the institution of
and continuing maintenance by an employer of programs likely in the judgment of
the Commission to significantly reduce demand for employee parking.  Such
programs may involve car pooling, subsidy of employee bus fares, charging
employ-ees for parking, or other measures.
      D. Reduction for Use of On-Street Spaces
      The Planing Commission may approve as a Special Exception the crediting
toward required parking spaces of one on-street space per 20 feet of street
frontage located within the applicable distance specified in division 1210.06
(b)(2) excluding driveways and no-parking areas.  To approve such crediting,
the Commission shall find that:
      1. such spaces will be reasonably available to the use, and
      2. without such crediting, provision of the required number of spaces
less all other applicable reductions provided by this division is impractical.
      E. Reduction for Senior Housing
      The Planning Commission may as a Special Exception reduce by no more than
50 percent the number of spaces required for multi-family residential buildings
upon finding that:
      1. such buildings consist of not less than 90 percent senior citizen
dwelling units, as defined herein, and
      2. probable lower vehicle ownership among residents as evidenced by data
submitted by the applicant will reduce resident parking demand.
      F. Reduction Under PUD
      The number of required spaces may be reduced for a development approved
under Planned Unit Develop-ment procedures as provided in Section 1310.06.
      G. Other Reductions
      The number of required spaces may be reduced on the basis of alternative 
data on parking space needs under division 1210.03(b)(2), timeshared parking
under division 1210.03(b)(4), or by Variance under division 1210.03(a)(1).
(e) Parking Reserve Areas
   (1) When Required
   An on- or off-site open area reserved for possible future conversion to
parking may be required as a condition of a reduction in the number of required
parking spaces under division 1210.03(b) or 1210.04(d) or other provision of
this Code.
   In determining whether to require such an area, the applicable Review Body
shall consider:
      A. the likelihood of a future need for additional parking, and
      B. the availability of land therefor either on the site or within the
distances specified for off-site parking in division 1210.06(b)(2).
   (2) Size of Reserve Area
   The reserve area shall be large enough to accommodate in surface parking a
number of parking spaces equal to the difference between:
      A. the number of spaces provided for the use and
      B. the number required by Table 1210A or 1210C without the reduction(s)
that require a reserve area.
   The Site Plan required by Table 1320C shall show the boundaries of the
reserve area.
   (3) Use of Reserve Area
   A parking reserve area shall be used only for open space, outdoor
recreation, outside storage where permitted, or other purposes that would not
impose significant obstacles  to its later conversion to parking.  Vegetative
ground cov-er shall be installed and maintained in all areas not requiring a
different surface for any such use.
   (4) Other Requirements
   A parking reserve area shall be sized, located, and otherwise arranged so as
to allow, upon its conversion to parking, conformance to all requirements of
City regulations that applied to off-street parking at the time of its original
installation.
   (5) Covenant and Guarantee
   Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Com-
   pliance for any use required to provide a parking reserve area, the
applicant for the Certificate shall execute and record with the Summit or Wayne
County Recorder, as applicable, a covenant running with the land for the
benefit of the City of Barberton.
   The covenant shall specify that at such time as the City determines that
eligibility has ceased for an applicable parking space reduction utilized on
the property, the property owner will install the number of reserve spaces, or
any portion thereof specified by the Building Commissioner, within 90 days of
the date of the Commissioner's written request or within any extension thereof
that he or she may grant.
   The Commissioner shall make such request only upon determining that the
spaces required to be installed are necessary to achieve the purposes of this
chapter.  The covenant shall remain in effect until the number of reserve
spaces has been reduced to zero.
   The property owner shall provide a financial guarantee of future
installation of parking in the reserve area until such time as the City has
determined the reserve area is no longer needed for additional parking.  The
guarantee shall conform to the requirements of Section 1350.02.
1210.05 Parking of Special Vehicles
(a) Parking of Commercial Vehicles
   (1) Applicability
   The requirements of this division (a) shall apply to all commercial
vehicles, as defined herein, including those that are restorable vehicles, as
also defined herein.
   (2) In Residential Districts
      A. Restricted Vehicles
      There shall not be parked or stored on a lot in a Single- or Two-Family
Residential District:
      1. any commercial vehicle weighing more than 9,000 pounds unloaded, or
      2. over 1 commercial vehicle below such weight per dwelling unit, or
      3. any trailer not used for recreational purposes, such as to tow a boat
or snowmobile.
      B. Exceptions
      Notwithstanding division (a)(2)A, any vehicle specified therein may be
parked or stored:
      1. in an enclosed building that conforms to regulations applicable in the
District, or
      2. temporarily for loading or unloading of household belongings for the
purpose of moving a residence, or
      3. temporarily for deliveries, repairs, construction, landscaping, earth
moving, maintenance, garbage pickup, or utility or service calls.
      C. Other Regulations
      No vehicle of any kind parked or stored in any Residential District shall
by virtue of its contents or of the activities associated with it create health
or safety hazards or nuisances affecting neighboring properties.
   (3) In Other Districts
   There shall be no restrictions on parking or storage of commercial vehicles
in non-residential districts other than as provided in division 1210.06(a) or
elsewhere in City regulations.
(b) Parking of  Recreational Vehicles
   (1) In Residential Districts
   A single recreational vehicle, as defined herein, per dwelling unit may be
parked or stored for more than 3 consecutive days on a lot in a Residential
District subject to the restrictions herein.  The provisions herein shall not
apply to van conversions.
      A. Not Used as Dwelling
      The vehicle shall not be occupied for living or sleeping purposes while
on the lot.
Please Note: To view the Recreational Vehicle Parking Graphic, see page 1210-13
of the printed version of the Barberton Development Code
        B. Stored Collapsed
      It shall be stored in its collapsed position if it is a vehicle of the
collapsible type not stored in a garage, carport, or covered parking space.
      C. Parking Locations
      1. Short-Term Parking
      The vehicle may be parked or stored for no longer than 72 hours in an
actual front or corner side yard for purposes of loading or unloading.
      2. Long-Term Parking
      The vehicle may be parked or stored for over 72 hours only in the
locations specified herein.
      a. Inside a Structure
      The vehicle shall be parked in a garage, carport, or covered parking
space, where one exists on the prem-ises large enough to accommodate the
vehicle.
      b. In Rear or Side Yard
      Otherwise, the vehicle shall be parked in the driveway or a widening
thereof with surfacing conforming to division 1210.02(c) located in an actual
rear or interior side yard behind the front building line and no less than 3
feet from any lot line.
      c. Multi-Family
      Otherwise, where the dwelling unit does not have its own driveway (as may
be the case with multi-family units), the vehicle shall be parked in an open
off-street parking space on the premises outside of an actual front or corner
side yard or in an off-street space off the premises.
   (2) In Other Districts
   There shall be no restrictions on parking of recreational vehicles in non-
residential districts.
(c) Parking of Collector Vehicles
A maximum of 2 restorable vehicles, as defined herein, owned by one or more
residents of the premises may be parked in the open on any lot in an RS, RT, or
RA District subject to the requirements herein.
   (1) Type of Vehicle
   No such vehicle shall be a commercial vehicle, as defined herein.
   (2) Location
   The vehicle shall be located in conformance with the standards for location
of recreational vehicles in division (b)(1)C of this section, except that in no
case shall such a vehicle be located in an actual front or corner side yard.
   (3) Covering
   If located in the open, the vehicle shall be concealed with a car cover or
comparable covering except while being actively worked on. 
   (4) Safety
   To prevent entry by small children, vehicle doors, tailgates, hatches, and
trunk lids shall be either locked or wired shut except while actively being
worked on.
   (5) Parts and Tools
   Detached vehicle parts, materials, and tools shall not be stored in the
open. 
   The provisions of this division shall not be interpreted to allow any
business related to the repair, dismantling, restoration, or sale of such
vehicles except as may be allowable under other provisions of this Code.
(d) Parking of Junk Vehicles
No junk vehicle, as defined herein, shall be parked or stored in any district
unless it is parked:
   (1) entirely within an enclosed building, or
   (2) in connection with a motor vehicle servicing or repair shop; dismantling
or restoration service; junk, salvage, or wrecking yard; motor vehicle sales
establishment; or other business employing such vehicles in its operations.
Junk vehicles parked or stored in the open shall be subject to the screening
requirements of Chapter 1220, Landscaping  and Screening.
1210.06 Other Parking Provisions
(a) Allowable Open Parking
No motor vehicle, boat, or trailer shall be parked or stored on the premises of
any use other than in a completely enclosed structure except:
   (1) vehicles owned, leased, temporarily borrowed, or rented by persons or
organizations lawfully occupying the premises, and
   (2) vehicles proprietors, officers, or employees of organizations occupying
the premises used to reach work the same day, and
   (3) vehicles of customers, clients, suppliers, contractors, guests, or
visitors parked temporarily while visiting occupant persons or organizations or
for loading, unloading, moving, construction, maintenance, repair of the
premises, or for public service or utility work, and
   (4) vehicles awaiting service, repair, or delivery to or pick-up by a
customer of a vehicle repair or service establishment that are parked no longer
than 72 hours prior to and 72 hours after such service, with no more than 2
such vehicles per service bay parked overnight
   (5) vehicles available for sale, rent, or lease on the premises of uses
permitted under applicable City regulations to engage in such business.
No unlicensed semi-trailer or other unlicensed com-mercial vehicle shall be
parked or stored in the open on any premises for purposes of storage of any
materials therein.
Where off-site parking is permitted hereunder, the premises of a use shall be
considered for purposes of this division to include the off-site parking area.
(b) Off-Site Parking
   (1) When Permitted
   Except as may be specifically provided other-wise in this Code, in RS, RT,
and RA Districts required off-street parking for dwellings shall be provided on
the same lot as the use served.  Parking spaces within garages or carports and
on driveways shall be counted as required spaces for such dwellings.
   In all other cases, required parking may be fully or partially provided off-
site on a separate lot that is in the same possession by deed, lease, or other
written instrument as provided in division 1210.04(c)(2).
   (2) Distance From Use
   Required parking provided off-site shall be located within the distance
provided below.
 
                     Maximum Walking Distance From Use Served in Feet:
Use Served           Spaces For
                     Residents Customers, Clients &  Visitors  Employees [b]
                               [a]
Multi-Family         400       600                              1,500
Residential:
Commercial,
Entertainment,Retail N/A       400                              1,500
Office:
Institutional:       N/A       600                              1,500
Office/Industrial:   N/A       800                              1,500
 
[a] Valet parking is exempt from this requirement.
[b] The Planning Commission may approve a greater distance for employee parking
if shuttle bus or van service is provided during AM and PM peak hours between
the parking area and the use with a frequency the Commission deems adequate and
if the distance to be walked by an employee using the service does not exceed
the table figure.
   For purposes of determining the applicability of this division, the Planning
Director shall determine how many of the spaces required are to be considered
as employee spaces, customer/visitor spaces, and resident spaces.  He or she
may require information from the provider for use in making this
determination.  His or her determination may be appealed as provided in
division 1310.03(c).
   (3) Districts Allowed In
   In a Residential District, an off-site parking area shall be a Permitted Use
if it exclusively serves one or more uses that are Permitted Uses in the same
district.
   It shall be a Conditional Use if:
      A. it serves a use or uses that are Conditional Uses in the district, or
      B. it is located on a lot within the distances specified in division (b)
(2) of a non-residentially zoned lot and exclusively serves such lot.
   In non-residential districts, off-site parking areas for any use shall be a
Permitted Use.
Please Note: To view the Parking in Street Yards Graphic, see page 1210-16 of
the printed version of the Barberton Development Code
(c) Parking In Yards
   (1) Yards Permitted In
   A. Street Yard Parking Prohibited
   In RM Multi-Family Residential, O Office, and I Industrial Districts,
Accessory Use parking areas for other than single-or two-family or townhouse
dwellings shall not be located in actual front or corner side yards.  Such
yards shall be landscaped as provided in Chapter 1220.
   B. Yard Parking Permitted
   Except as provided in division (c)(1)A, off-street parking areas may be
located in any required or actual yard, subject to the landscaping requirements
of Chapter 1220.
Please Note: To view the Single-Family Parking Graphic, see page 1210-16 of the
printed version of the Barberton Development Code
   (2) Parking in Residential Yards
      A. Coverage
      In RS, RT, and RA Districts, coverage of actual yards by parking areas,
driveways, or parked vehicles shall not exceed the figures in the table below.
 
Actual Yard           Maximum Coverage in Percent of Yard Area
Front or Corner Side:
     RS Districts 25 %
     RT, RA Distri35 %
Interior Side         --
Rear                  50 %
 
      B. Exception
      In RS Districts where there is no attached garage and the dimensions of
actual side yards and the absence of an alley preclude vehicular access to the
interior side and rear yards, maximum coverage of front and corner side yards
shall be 35 percent.
      C. On Driveway Only
      In RS, RT, and RA Districts all motor vehicles not enclosed within a
building shall be parked entirely upon a driveway or comparably surfaced wi-
dening thereof and shall not encroach upon any sidewalk.
(d) Interconnection of Parking
   (1) Interconnection Required
   To enhance convenience for the public and avoid unnecessary and potentially
hazardous turning movements on public streets, an open accessory off-street
parking area shall be connected to any other such area or por-tion thereof it
abuts that is located either on the same lot or on an abutting lot.
   This requirement shall apply to parking areas serving any retail, personal
service, entertainment, retail office, or other office use(s), all as defined
herein, open to the public.
   (2) Means of Connection
   Such connection shall be by either:
      A. an alley abutting both areas, or
      B. an access drive on the lot that allows convenient motor vehicle
movement in both directions between the areas without entering the street.
   (3) Easements Required
   Easements judged legally sufficient by the Director of Law allowing traffic
to move between such parking areas on abutting parcels in different ownership
shall be submitted to the Building Commissioner prior to issuance of a
Certificate of Compliance for any such parking areas not connected by an alley.
   If the current owner of an abutting lot will not grant such easement, the
parking area on the subject lot shall be so designed as to allow such
connection in the future.
   No off-street parking area, whether or not currently abutting another such
parking area, shall be approved without submission of an agreement by the
property owner to grant
   such easement to any future abutting parking area to which these provisions
may apply.  Such agreement shall have been approved as legally sufficient by
the Director of Law.
   (4) Exceptions
   The Building Commissioner may exempt a parking area from the requirement for
interconnection if he or she determines that inter-connection would not be
likely to significant-ly facilitate circulation between nearby uses.
(e) Handicapped Parking Spaces
   (1) Number
   All off-street parking areas except those providing only valet parking
spaces shall reserve for the handicapped the cumulative number of spaces
provided in the table below, rounded upward to the next whole space.
 
Spaces in Parking Facility   Number of Handicapped Spaces Required Per 25
                             Spaces or Fraction
First 100 spaces             1
Second 100 spaces            0.5
3rd, 4th, and 5th 100 spaces 0.25
 
   Facilities with from 501 to 1,000 spaces shall provide handicapped spaces
totalling 2 percent of the spaces in the parking facility.  Larger facilities
shall provide 20 handicapped spaces plus 1 handicapped space per 100 spaces
over 1,000 spaces in the parking facility.
   Facilities providing medical care and other services for the mobility-
impaired shall in lieu of all foregoing figures provide handicapped spaces
totalling 10 percent of the spaces in the parking facility.  Facilities
specializing in such services shall provide handicapped spaces totalling 20
percent of all spaces in the parking facility.
   (2) Van-Accessible Spaces
   One of every 8 handicapped spaces provided shall be van-accessible spaces,
with a minimum of one such space per parking facility.  Van-accessible spaces
are not required to be restricted to use by vans.
   (3) Location
   All such spaces located in on-site Accessory Use parking areas shall be
located on the shortest handicapped-accessible  route to the single
handicapped-accessible  building entrance of the Principal Use.
   All such spaces that are in Principal Use parking areas or Accessory Use
off-site parking areas shall be located on the shortest handicapped-accessible
route to the single elevator, wheelchair ramp, or other point of barrier-free
access to the single handicapped-accessible entrance to the parking facility.
In facilities having more than one handicapped-accessible  entrance, such
spaces shall be located on the shortest handicapped-accessible routes to all
such entrances.
   (4) Signage
   All handicapped spaces shall display a sign bearing the symbol of
accessibility in a location that cannot be obscured by a parked vehicle.  Van-
accessible spaces shall in addition display below the symbol of accessibility
the words "Van-Accessible."
   (5) Valet Parking
   Facilities having only valet parking spaces shall provide a passenger
loading area on a handicapped-accessible  route to the entrance to the use
served.
   (6) Dimensions
   Handicapped spaces shall conform to the dimensions specified in Table 1210D.
(f) Other Parking Requirements
   (1) Small Car Spaces
   Up to 30 percent of the following kinds of required off-street parking
spaces may be of small car parking space dimensions as provided in Table 1210D:
      A. employee spaces, as determined by the Planning Director
      B. lodging guest or resident spaces located in a parking structure.
   Such spaces shall be identified by signage as intended for small cars only.
   (2) Marking
      A. Marking Required
      All permanent off-street parking spaces shall be marked by durable
painted lines, tiles, curbs, or other means approved by the Building
Commissioner that clearly designates individual spaces and distinguishes such
spaces from maneuvering, loading, open sales or storage, or other areas on the
lot or in the structure.
      B. Exemptions
      Marking shall not be required for:
      1. parking spaces established for exclusive use of individual single- or
two-family structures or individual single-family attached or townhouse
dwellings, or
      2. tandem parking spaces, as defined herein, or
      3. parking spaces at service station fuel pumps and other spaces that are
not customarily marked
      4. temporary spaces established under division 1210.03(f)(3)
      5. occasional spaces established under division 1210.03(f)(4).
   (3) Wheel Stops or Curbing
      A. Where Required
      Where open parking spaces are so located that vehicles parked therein
might extend beyond the parking surface--such as onto streets, sidewalks, other
pedestrian ways, landscaped areas, screening, or abutting lots in different
ownership--there shall be installed concrete wheel stops or curbing or other
means of restraint approved by the Building Commissioner to prevent such
encroachment.
      The Commissioner shall not approve highway guard rail type structures for
this purpose except where he or she determines such structures necessary for
public safety.
      B. Exemption
      This requirement shall not apply to uses with 6 or fewer parking spaces.
   (4) Off-Site Space Rental
   No more than two parking spaces on a lot in an RS, RT, or RA District may be
rented to a person not resident thereupon for the parking of a vehicle, and
such vehicle shall not be a commercial vehicle.  Such spaces shall conform to
all applicable requirements herein for on-site spaces.
   (5) Parking Structures
   Structures providing parking shall conform to the standards for building
height, yards, and other requirements for Principal or Accessory Use buildings,
as applicable, of the applicable district.
   (6) Other Regulations
   Off-street parking areas shall conform to the requirements for vehicular
areas in Section 1210.02 and for parking and loading areas in Section 1210.03.
1210.07 Off-Street Stacking
(a) Dimensions
Stacking spaces, as defined herein, shall be no less than the following
dimensions:
   Width:  10 feet      Depth:  20 feet.
(b) Number of Spaces
The number of stacking spaces required shall be as provided below.
 
Use            Number of Spaces Required Location of Spaces
Car Wash       10                        At vehicular entrance to building
               1                         At vehicular exit from building
               5                         Between entrance street [a] and first
                                         station [b]
Drive-Through  2 [c]                     Between first [b] and last [d]
Establishment                            stations
               1                         Between last station [d] and exit
                                         street [e]
 
[a] The right-of-way of the street from which vehicles enter the drive-through
lane.
[b] The station abutting each drive-though lane closest to the entrance to such
lane from the street.  The space opposite this station shall be credited toward
this requirement.
[c] Shall not apply to drive-throughs having only one station.
[d] The station abutting each drive-though lane closest to the exit from such
lane to the street.  The spaces opposite this station or any other station
other than the first shall be credited toward this requirement.
[e] The right-of-way of the street into which vehicles exit from the drive-
through lane.
The Building Commissioner may reduce the number of spaces required if the City
Engineer makes a written finding based on a traffic analysis submitted by the
applicant that such reduction will not normally result in congestion or traffic
hazards on public streets.
(c) Other Regulations
Stacking areas shall conform to the requirements for vehicular areas in Section
1210.02.
1210.08 Off-Street Loading
(a) Location
   (1) On Same Lot
   Off-street loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the use to be
served, except as otherwise specifically permitted herein.
   (2) In Rear Yards Only
   Loading spaces shall be located outside of:
      A. required front yards
      B. required side yards, and
      C. any required yard abutting a lot in a Residential District.
   (3) No Projection Into Street
   Except as provided in division (a)(5), loading spaces and related
maneuvering areas shall be located or provided with suitable barriers so that
no portion of a parked vehicle shall project across a public sidewalk or into a
street or alley.
   (4) Within Building
   Loading spaces may be located outside of or within a building.
   (5) In Alley
   Loading spaces may be provided in an alley or on the street if the Building
Commissioner determines that off-street provision is impractical.
(b) Number and Dimensions
Numbers and dimensions of off-street loading spaces shall be as provided in
Tables 1210B and 1210D.
(c) Other Regulations
Off-street loading areas shall conform to the requirements for vehicular areas
in Section 1210.02 and for parking and loading areas in Section 1210.03.
Table 1210A: Required Number of Off-Street
Parking Spaces for Residential & Lodging Uses
 Minimum Number of Spaces Required Per Dwelling or Lodging Unit
                        Minimum Number of Spaces Required Per Dwelling or
                        Lodging Unit
RESIDENTIAL  [a] [b]
Efficiency Units        1.25 [c]
1-Bedroom Units         1.5 [c]
All Other Units         2.0
Small Existing Lots [d] 0
Home Occupations        [e]
Lofts                   [e]
LODGING  [b] [f]
Bed & Breakfast         1
Hotel or Motel          1 [g]
Apartment Hotel         1
Rooming House [h]       0.5
 
Requirements may be reduced under 1210.04(d).
Requirements do not apply in C-D District.
*Exception: Buildings located in the C-D District with more than three dwelling
units shall comply with the parking provisions stated in Table 1210A.
See also Table 1210C for spaces for other uses.
Fractional spaces shall be rounded to the nearest integer, except that all
values greater than zero and less than one shall be rounded to one.
[a] Includes single- and two-family detached or attached, townhouses,
apartments, group homes, and manufactured homes.  Required spaces include visi-
tor parking but shall be increased by 1 space for each roomer or lodger with a
car on the premises.
[b] One space for each truck or business vehicle employed by an establishment
on the premises shall be provided in addition to the number of spaces indicated
in this table.
[c] In manufactured home parks, the requirement of the Ohio Department of
Health for 2.0 spaces will supercede this requirement.
[d] Single- or two-family detached dwellings on existing lots of record having
a lot width of less than 60 feet and lacking access to an alley.
[e] See Table 1210C.
[f] Plus 1 space per employee on largest shift.
[g] Plus spaces for any restaurant, tavern, nightclub, retail, and meeting
rooms. Provisions of 1210.04(d)(2)A or B may apply.
[h] Number of spaces per bed, not per unit.
(Ord. 262-2001. Passed 12-17-01.)
Table 1210B: Required Number of Off-Street Loading Spaces
 No. of Spaces per 25,000 SF Standard Applies From (SF) Up To (SF)
                     No. of Spaces per 25,000 Standard Applies From  Up To (SF)
                     SF                       (SF)
Low Usage
1. Office            0.25                     30,001                 -
2. Medical Office    0.25                     5,001                  -
3. Hospital          0.25                     0                      500,000
4. Public School,    0.25                     0                      -
Assembly, Recreation
Moderate Usage
1. Wholesale         0.5                      0                      50,000
                     0.25                     50,001                 -
                     0.5                      0                      100,000
2. Shopping  Center 0.25                     100,001                500,000
                     0.125                    500,001                -
High Usage
1. Other Retail      0.83                     10,001                 70,000
                     0.31                     70,001                 -
2. Quality or Family 0.83                     0                        -
Restaurant
                     1                        0                      50,000
3. Industrial        0.5                      50,001                 100,000
                     0.25                     100,001                -
 
SF: Square feet of net floor area.
Fractional spaces shall be rounded to the nearest integer, except that all
values greater than zero and less than one shall be rounded to one.
Requirement is the total of all applicable figures.
Uses providing no loading spaces shall provide other facilities approved by the
Building Commissioner that facilitate loading.
Requirements for uses not listed shall be as provided for the most similar use.
Requirements of this table shall not apply in the C-D Downtown Commercial
District.
Table 1210C: Required Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces for Non-Residential
and Non-Lodging Uses
 Minimum Number of Spaces Required[a]
 Per [b] Employee Per 1,000 Square Feet Per Person Design Other of Comment
                  Floor Area            Capacity[c]
                Minimum Number of Spaces Required[a]
                Per [b]  Per 1,000 Square Per Person      Other of Comment
                Employee Feet Floor Area  Design Capacity
                                          [c]
SCHOOLS
Elementary      1        --               --
Junior High     1        --               --
High School     1        --               .25 [d]
Commercial      1        --               .25 [d]
Auditorium,     --       17               --
School
RECREATIONAL
Arena/Stadium   --       --               .30
Auditorium      --       33               --
(non-school)
Boat Launch     --       --               --              8 spaces per
                                                          ramp.
Boat Storage/   0.5      2.0              --
Repair
Bowling Alley   --       --               --              5 spaces per
                                                          bowling lane.
Club or Lodge   --       5                --
Community       1        --               .30
Center
Dance Hall      --       --               .30
Game Room       --       10               --
Golf Course     1        --               -- [m]
Golf Driving    --       --               --              1.5 spaces per
Range                                                     tee.
Health Club     --       5                --
                                                          1.25 spaces per
Marina          --       --               --              boat space or
                                                          berth.
Meeting Hall    --       --               .30
Skating Rink    --       5                --
Swimming Pool   1        --               .30
Tennis or                                                 2 spaces per
Racquetball     --       --               --              court.
Court
Theatre, Indoor --       --               .30
Other Outdoor                                             Plus 2 spaces
Recreation Area 1        --               --              per 1,000 sq.
                                                          ft. of lot area.
INSTITUTIONAL
Child Day Care  1        2                --
Center
Government      --       3.5              --
Office
House of        --       --               .25
Worship
Institution
Office or       --       1                --
Meeting Hall
Library,
Museum, or      --       2.5              --
Gallery
Nursing Home    1        --               --              1 space per 3
                                                          residents.
Public Utility  1        --               --
& Service
MEDICAL
Animal Hospital --       2.5              --
Clinic          --       6                --
                                                          3.0 spaces per
Hospital        --       --               --              bed, excluding
                                                          bassinets.
Medical/Dental  --       4                --
Office
MOTOR VEHICLE
Car Wash        1        ---              ---  [g]
Motor Vehicle   ---      3.3              ---  [k] [n]
Sales
Repair,
Servicing, or   ---      ---              ---  [k]
Body Shop
Service or      1        ---              ---  [k]
Filling Station
OFFICE
                                                          Except retail
Up to 30,000 SF ---      3.5              ---             offices, as
                                                          defined herein.
30,000 SF and                                             Except retail
up              ---      3                ---             offices, as
                                                          defined herein.
RETAIL
Department      ---      4                ---
Store
Furniture,
Carpet, &       ---      1.5              ---
Appliance Sales
Hardware Store  ---      3.5              ---
Open Sales Lot  ---      ---              ---  [n]
Shopping
Center: [i]
Under 400,000   ---      4                ---
SF
400-600,000 SF  ---      4.5              ---
Over 600,000 SF ---      5.25             ---
Supermarket/    ---      5                ---
Food Store
Other Retail/   ---      4                ---  [g]
Retail Office
HOME            1 [f]    ---              ---  [e]
OCCUPATIONS
LOFTS           1 [f]    0.25             ---  [l]
SERVICE
Bank or
Financial       ---      5                ---  [g]
Institution
Barber or       ---      4                ---
Beauty Shop
Contractor      1        ---              ---
Office
Junk/Salvage    ---      ---              ---  [h]
Yard
                                                          1 for every 2
Laundromat      ---      ---              ---             washing
                                                          machines.
Mini-Warehouse  1        ---              ---             1 space per 10
                                                          storage lockers.
Mortuary        1        10               ---
Night Club      ---      20               ---
Restaurant:
Carry Out Only  ---      16               ---  [g]
All Other       ---      20               ---  [g]
Tavern          ---      20               ---
Other Service   ---      4.5              ---  [g]
INDUSTRIAL
Cartage &       1        ---              ---
Express Firms
Manufacturing,
Research,       1        2                ---  [j] [o]
Testing
Open Storage                                              As a Principal
Yards           1        ---              ---             Use. 15 % of lot
                                                          area.
Radio or TV
Station or      1        ---              ---
Studio
Warehousing or  1        0.5              ---  [j] [o]
Wholesaling
 
   Unless otherwise provided herein, required parking is the sum of the
requirements in all columns.
Notes for Table 1210C
NOTE:  The requirements of this table may be reduced under 1210.04(d).
See also Table 1210A for required spaces for residential and lodging uses.
Parking for uses not listed shall be as provided for the most similar listed
use as determined by the Building Commissioner.
Floor area shall be net floor area, as defined herein.
All required space figures shall be prorated for each establishment.
Fractional spaces shall be rounded to the nearest integer, except that all
fractions less than one shall be rounded to one.
Requirements of this table shall not apply in the C-D Downtown Commercial
District.
[a]  One space for each truck or business vehicle employed by an establishment
on the premises shall be provided in addition to the number of  spaces
specified.
[b]  Maximum number of non-resident full- and part-time employees, including
owners and mana-
gers, expected to be on duty on the premises at any one time, as specified in
an affidavit of the applicant.
[c]  Per seat in main auditorium or meeting room or per person of design
capacity of the facility.  Twenty-four inches of seating space shall be
considered a seat for purposes of this requirement where individual seats are
not discernable, such as  in pews, benches, or bleachers.  Where folding chairs
or other moveable seats are used, 6 square feet of seating floor area shall be
considered a seat.
[d]  Capacity in full-time students attending classes at any one time who are
of legal driving age or older.
[e] Plus sufficient parking for customers, clients, and visitors to the home
occupation.
[f] Plus 1 space per non-resident apprentice, student, or contractor regularly
working or studying on the premises.
[g]  Plus stacking spaces as provided in division 1210.07(b).
[h] 5 spaces plus 2 spaces per acre above 1 acre of lot area.
[i] The number of parking spaces required for retail and personal service uses
located in a shopping center, as defined herein, shall be as provided for
shopping centers in this table rather than the sum of the spaces required for
the individual uses.  Except that the number of spaces shall be as provided in
this table for the individual use for:
   A. any use located in a shopping center that has a parking requirement
herein that exceeds by more than 25 percent the applicable shopping center
requirement herein, and
   B. any use occupying over 50 percent of the net floor area, as defined
herein, of the cen-ter.
This number shall be added to the applicable num-ber of spaces required by this
table for shopping centers applied to all other uses in the center.
[j]  Employment standard or floor space standard, whichever is greater, shall
be used.  If employment is not known when plans are drawn, floor space standard
may be used and a parking reserve area may be required (see 1210.04(e)).  If
upon occupancy the employment standard yields a greater number of required
spaces, the Building Commissioner may require the provision of the additional
parking required thereby.
[k]  2 parking spaces per service bay, 1 parking space per fuel pump hose, and
2 stacking spaces per fuel pump island or end-to-end row of islands.  A service
bay shall not be considered a parking space.
[l] Plus the number of spaces that would be required under Table 1210A if the
residential portion of the loft were a dwelling unit.
[m] 6 spaces per hole.  For miniature golf courses, 3 spaces per hole.
[n] 0.2 spaces per 1,000 square feet of open sales lot area.
[o]  Plus spaces required for offices, sales facilities, and other uses, if
any.
Table 1210D: Minimum Space and Aisle Dimensions
 Parking Space [a]                              Loading Space [b]
 For Small Cars  For Other Cars For Handicapped For Tractor For Other Trucks 
 [c]                            Spaces          Trailers    [e]
                     Parking Space [a]           Loading Space [b]
                     For      For    For         For      For Other Trucks 
                     Small    Other  Handicapped Tractor  [e]
                     Cars [c] Cars   Spaces      Trailers
1. Spaces (in feet)
A. Depth             16 [f]   18 [f] 20 [g]      60       25
B. Width             7.5      8      8 [g]       14       10
C. Vertical          7        7      7 [i]       14       12
Clearance
2. Access Aisle
Width Adjacent to
Space in ft. [g] [h]
A. Van-Accessible    --       --     8           --       --
Spaces
B. Other Spaces      --       --     5           --       --
3. Circulation
Aisles (in feet)
A. Vertical          7        7      7 [i]       14 [d]   12
Clearance
B. Width:
Angle of spaces:
0 degrees  [1W]:    13       13     13          15       12
    [j]        19W]:    19     19          15       12
30 degrees [1W]:     11       11     11          15       12
45 degrees [1W]:     13       13     13          15       12
60 degrees [1W]:     18       18     18          15       12
90 degrees [2W]:     24       24     24          15       12
 
[1W] One-way aisle only
[2W] Two-way aisle
[a] Dimensions do not apply to tandem spaces.
[b] Requirements apply to uses required to provide 1 or more loading spaces by
Table 1210B.
[c] As provided in 1210.06(f)(1).
[d] Specified clearance shall be maintained along all access drives and
maneuvering areas between the loading space and the street.
[e] Permitted for uses not normally serviced by tractor-trailers.
[f] Required depth shall be increased 1 foot for parallel handicapped spaces
and 3 feet for other parallel spaces.
[g] Maximum slope in all directions shall be 2 percent.
[h] Access aisle shall be level with space(s) it serves.  Two adjacent
handicapped spaces may share a single access aisle provided that a vehicle can
back up into each space to assure that vehicles parked in both spaces can use
the same aisle for access to the vehicle.
[i] Van-accessible spaces shall be provided with 8.17 feet clearance. 
Specified clearance shall be maintained along at least one vehicular access
route from parking site entrances and exits.
[j] Zero degree parking is parallel parking.
Chapter 1220
Landscaping & Screening
1220.01 Purpose
The purpose of the requirements in this chapter is to provide for appropriate
landscaping and screening that will:
(a) recognize the character of the City of Barberton as both an industrial/
commercial  center and a residential community and protect residential and all
other environments from adverse effects--such as noise, odors, and dust--of
more intensive adjacent uses
(b) protect parking area users from wind, glare, and temperature extremes
(c) mitigate the adverse effects on public streets and adjacent properties of
noise, blowing dust and debris, water runoff, and glare from motor vehicle
headlights and parking area lighting
(d) discourage unsafe access to and circulation within off-street parking areas
(e) contribute to improved community appearance and property values
(f) preserve privacy in residential areas next to non-residential uses and
discourage trespass thereupon, and
(g) provide trees that improve the urban environment by cooling the air and
land, reducing carbon dioxide in the air, and producing oxygen.
It is further the objective of these regulations to relieve property owners of
the large setback requirements that are typically used in other cities to
buffer neighboring uses--but which are difficult to achieve on Barberton's
smaller older lots--by requiring smaller intensively screened or landscaped
buffers in their place.
Please Note: To view the Landscaping and Screening Graphic, see page 1220-1 of
the printed version of the Barberton Development Code
1220.02 Requirements
(a) Where Required
Landscaping and screening shall be required as provided in Tables 1220A and
1220B except as provided under Exceptions herein.
(b) Exceptions
   (1) Conditional Uses
   Because of their special character, Conditional Uses may be required to
provide landscaping or screening exceeding the requirements herein.
   (2) Existing Uses
   Application of these provisions to uses existing before the effective date
thereof shall be as provided in Chapter 1340, Nonconformities.
   Except that conformity to the requirements herein for Screen Barriers shall
be achieved prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for any
construction or alteration.
   (3) Screening on Abutting Lot
   No Transition Buffer or Screen Barrier shall be required along a lot line if
permanent screening meeting all requirements therefor exists along such lot
line on the abutting lot.
   (4) Below-Grade Areas
   The height of a Frontage Buffer or Screen Barrier along a lot line for a
below-grade parking or loading area may be reduced by the amount that the mean
grade along and within 4 feet outside that lot line exceeds the highest point
of the finished grade of the parking or loading area.
   (5) Reduction in Intensity
   The Planning Commission may approve as a Special Exception a reduction in
the intensity required by Table 1220A or 1220B--to the next most restrictive
level of intensity only--if it determines the required intensity would be
impractical or would impose an undue burden on the occupant. The Commission
shall in no case approve an intensity less than Light intensity.
   (6) Building Walls
   An existing legal building wall may be used to meet the requirements for a
Screen Barrier under Table 1220B or for screening under Table 1220C.
   (7) Shared Driveway
   No Transition Buffer or Screen Barrier shall be required along that portion
of a lot line along which there is a driveway or vehicular aisle shared with an
abutting lot.
   (8) Lots With Insufficient Space
   The Building Commissioner may waive the requirement for installation of a
Transition Buffer or Screen Barrier, or reduce any of the required dimensions
thereof, for a use on any developed lot on which there is insufficient yard
space to allow its installation, such as on properties built with small yards
or none at all.  No waiver shall be granted if a reduction in dimensions would
allow the installation, and any reduction shall be the minimum needed to permit
the installation.
   (9) Temporary Uses
   Uses qualifying as Temporary Uses under di-vision 1310.04(a)--such as
temporary off-street parking areas for special events and temporary open sales
lots--shall be exempt from all requirements of this Chapter except those the
Building Commissioner determines necessary to protect the public welfare.
   (10) Access Ways
   Transition Buffers and Frontage Buffers shall not be required along the
width of access ways, which shall be subject to the limits on width in Table
1240E.  Widths of access ways shall not be counted for purposes of spacing
requirements in Table 1220C.
   (11) Vision Clearance Triangle
   Walls, fences, hedges, berms, and other opaque landscaping or screening
obstructions shall conform to the provisions on Vision Clearance Triangles in
division 1240.02(e)(8).
   (12) Other
   Requests for other exceptions may be submitted to the Board of Zoning
Appeals under provisions for Variances in division 1310.03(a).
1220.03 Landscape Plan
(a) When Required
A Landscape Site Plan shall be filed with an application for a permit,
certificate, or approval as provided in Tables 1320B and 1320C for any use
required to provide any:
   (1) Transition Buffer
   (2) Frontage Buffer, or
   (3) Landscaped Island.
Within 3 days of his or her acceptance thereof, the Building Commissioner shall
refer all Landscape Plans to the City Beautification Commission for comment.
(b) Exceptions
   (1) Use Not Yet Known
   The Building Commissioner may fully or partially defer the requirement for a
Landscape Site Plan in any instance in which the specific use of the premises,
and therefore the parking, loading, or other factors on which the requirements
herein are based, are not yet determined, such as in the case of a rezoning for
an industrial subdivision the specific future uses within which are not yet
known.
   (2) Only Minor Landscaping Required
   No Site Plan shall be required for uses required by Table 1220B to provide
landscaping or screening in the categories below.  The application shall in
lieu of a Site Plan provide the information specified.
 
                       Information Required
Screen Barrier         Dimensions, colors, materials, & location
Foundation Landscaping Species, sizes, & approximate locations of plantings
Street Trees           Species, caliper, & locations
Lawns                  No information required
 
(c) Plan Contents
The Landscape Site Plan shall conform to:
   (1) the requirements of Table 1320C in Chapter 1320, Approval Procedures,
and
   (2) applicable plans or policies prepared by the City Beautification
Commission and adopted by City Council.
1220.04 Street Trees
(a) Tree Lawns
Tree lawns (devil strips) shall be required as provided in Table 1240B and in
division 1240.09(d)(8).
(b) Street Trees
   (1) Number Required
   Street trees shall be installed so as to achieve a spacing measured along
the right-of-way on each side of the street as provided below.
 
Size of Tree Maximum Mean Average [a] Spacing In Feet [b] [c]
Small [d]    30
Medium [d]   40
Large [d]    50
 
   See also spacing requirements of 1220.05(g)(2).
   [a] Spacing is mean average spacing. Uniform spacing is not required.
   [b] Required maximum spacing shall be calculated along the lot frontage
together with the frontage in the same block face within 50 feet on either side
of the lot.
   [c] Maximum average spacing in C Districts shall be double the table amount.
   [d] As defined in Chapter 1360, Definitions.
   (2) Where Installed
   Street trees shall be planted:
      A. in the tree lawn next to the lot, or
      B. elsewhere in the tree lawn if necessitated by (b)(3) or 1220.05(g)(3),
or
      C. in tree planting areas no less than 16 square feet in area located in
the sidewalk, where sidewalks over 6 feet wide exist but tree lawns do not, as
in the Downtown area, or
      D. in a 10-foot-wide recorded easement abutting the street line in front
and corner side yards if:
      1. there is no tree lawn and no sidewalk, or
      2. the tree lawn is less than 4 feet wide and use of a species suited to
a narrower lawn is not practical in the judgment of the City Beautification
Commission, or
      3. the tree lawn is to be narrowed to less than 4 feet wide or eliminated
by a planned road widening, or
      4. utility lines lie or will lie beneath a tree lawn under 10 feet wide,
or
      5. the property owner prefers and the Planning Commission approves this
lo-cation.
   (3) Required Separations
   Street trees shall be planted and pruned to conform to the distances
provided below.
Minimum Distance in Ft. Distance Measured From
Minimum Distance in Ft.         Distance Measured From
Horizontal Distance from Trunk
20                              street intersection [a]
12                              street light
                                alley intersection [b]
10                              driveway [c]
                                fire hydrant
                                utility pole
2 [d]                           sidewalk
                                curb or street pavement
Vertical Distance from Branches
10                              overhead utility lines
16                              pavement: streets trucks use
12                              pavement: other streets
8                               sidewalks
 
   [a] From right-of-way line.  Except 30 feet on near side, as defined herein.
   [b] 20 feet on near side.
   [c] 20 feet on near side of commercial driveways.
   [d] Or 3 feet for medium trees and 4 feet for large trees, as defined
herein.
   (4) Minimum Caliper
   Caliper of street trees when planted shall be no less than 2.5 inches
measured one foot above ground level.
   (5) Species
   Species specified in Table 1220D shall not be used as street trees.
   Species specified in Table 1220E are recommended for use as street trees. 
Their use is not mandatory.
   In tree lawns, street tree easements, or sidewalk planting areas less than 6
feet wide, only small trees shall be planted.  In such areas that are less than
8 feet wide, only small or medium trees shall be installed.
   (6) Maintenance
   Maintenance of street trees shall be the responsibility of the abutting
property owner. 
   Property owner responsibilities shall include:
      A. watering, spraying, pruning, and
      B. removal of fallen leaves on sidewalks, and
      C. removal of branches or trees that are dead, diseased, fallen, or
hazardous as determined by the Building Commissioner in consultation with the
Beautification Commission.
   Tree planting, removal, and pruning shall be performed only by a
professional landscape contractor or City employee authorized to do such work,
except that a public utility may remove branches interfering with existing
utility lines.
   (7) Street Tree Removal
   No street tree shall be removed without prior approval of City Council. 
Requests for removal shall be referred to the Beautification Commission for a
recommendation. A property owner requesting removal of a street tree shall pay
all costs thereof.
   (8) Street Tree Plan
   All street trees installed after the effective
   date of this section shall conform to any of-ficial citywide or
neighborhood-wide  Street Tree Plan prepared by the Beautification Commission
and adopted by City Council.
   (9) Other Requirements
   Street trees shall conform to the general requirements for all trees in
1220.05(g).
1220.05 Requirements for All Landscaped Areas
(a) Permitted Forms of Screening
Screening required in item 2 of Table 1220C and the Screen Barrier required in
Table 1220B may take the form of:
   (1) a landscaped earthen berm, or
   (2) a finished concrete or finished masonry wall, or
   (3) buildings or architectural features of buildings such as a parapet or
wing wall, or
   (4) a wooden fence, or
   (5) a chain link fence provided with opaque slats of a material and color
approved by the Planning Director, or
   (6) a compact hedge or other live evergreen vegetative barrier, or
   (7) a combination thereof.
Fences and walls used for screening hereunder shall display a finished
decorative face toward the applicable lot lines.  They shall be made of
standard materials commonly used in the judgment of the Building Commissioner
for fencing or walls or of other materials he or she approves.
(b) Types of Materials
Varieties of living landscape materials used shall be:
   (1) healthy, hardy, and drought-resistant, and
   (2) suitable for the climate and environmental influences on the site, such
as exposure to sun, wind, water, heat, automobile exhaust fumes, and road salt,
and
   (3) compatible with the slope of the site, with existing vegetation to be
preserved, and with utility lines above or below ground level, and
   (4) not prone to cause a nuisance outside the lot lines as a result of
dropping fruit or debris other than leaves, and
   (5) consistent with the anticipated capacity and inclination of the property
owner or tenant to maintain the landscaped areas, and
   (6) when used as street trees, not prohibited by Table 1220D.
Where vulnerable to damage, materials shall be protected from pedestrian or
vehicular traffic by grates, pavers, or other measures.
(c) Ground Cover
Sod or other vegetative ground cover shall be planted over all landscaped areas
including earthen faces of berms--except in areas planted in flowers, shrubs,
or trees--so as to present a finished appearance and reasonably complete
coverage within three months after planting. 
Non-living landscaping materials such as sand, stone, rocks, or barks may be
substituted for living cover over a maximum of 30 percent of the landscaped
area or over a greater area if approved as a Special Exception under division
1310.03(b).  No artificial plants or artificial turf shall be used. 
(d) Preservation of Landscaping
   (1)   Mandatory Preservation
      A.   Purpose
      The purpose of this division is to preserve the particular public
benefits of shade, beauty, and other attributes possessed by large mature trees
and to recognize the difficulty in replacing those benefits in light of the
many years it takes trees to reach maturity.
      B.   Preservation of Larger Trees
         Existing trees having a trunk caliper of 10 inches or greater dbh
measured 4.5 feet above grade at the base of the trunk shall not be removed
except as provided in division C.
      C.   Exceptions
      1.   Existing Homes
      Division (d)(1)B shall not apply to any tree on any lot in single- or
two-family use as of the date of effect of this chapter or any single- or two-
family lot for which a Certificate of Occupancy has been issued.
      2.   Commissioner-Approved Removal
      The Building Commissioner shall approve tree removal otherwise prohibited
by division B if he or she finds that:
      a.   the tree to be removed is incurably diseased or is dying or dead, or
      b.   it has been so damaged or impaired that it is likely to become
incurably diseased or die, or
      c.   it presents a safety hazard to an existing structure or to a
proposed structure for which the Commissioner determines an alternative
location is not practical, or
      d.   it presents a safety hazard to pedestrians or to vehicular traffic,
or
      e.   it threatens to disrupt public services, or
      f.   it is of an undesirable species for its location, or
      g.   it is on a site which the Commissioner judges will have sufficient
mature trees to achieve the objectives of this division even with the loss of
the subject tree, or
      h.   its removal is necessary for the health of nearby trees or is
otherwise consistent with good forestry practices, or
      i.   it is within, or within 12 feet of, the ground coverage of proposed
structures for which the Commissioner determines alternative locations are not
practical, or
      j.   it is in the path of, or within 2 feet of, the pavement of a
proposed street, alley, access drive, or driveway for which the Commissioner
determines an alternative alignment is not practical, or
      k.   it is in the path of a proposed drainage or utility installation for
which the Commissioner has determined that an alternative horizontal or
vertical alignment is not practical, or
      l.   any Variance, Special Exception, Conditional Use, or other special
approval authorized by this or any other City Code that would be necessary to
avoid removal of the tree is prohibited or is unlikely to be approved, or
      m.   retention of the tree would preclude any reasonable use of the
property.
      D.   Replacement of Removed Trees
      1.   Legally Removed Trees
      Any tree required to be preserved under division (d)(1)B that is removed
with approval of the Commissioner under division (d)(1)C shall either be:
      a.   moved to another location, or
      b.   replaced with:
      1.   another tree of at least 75 percent of the original caliper, or
      2.   multiple trees the combined calipers of which total no less than 100
percent of the caliper of the removed tree with a 3-inch maximum.
      2. Illegally Removed Trees
      Any tree required to be preserved under division (d)(1)B that is removed
without the approval of the Commissioner under division (d)(1)C shall be
replaced with:
      a. another tree of a caliper no less than 150 percent of the caliper of
the removed tree, or
      b. multiple trees the combined calipers of which total no less than 300
percent of the caliper of the removed tree.
      3. Location of Moved or Replacement Trees
      Trees moved or planted to replace removed trees under division (d)(1)D1
or (d)(1)D2 shall be installed at a location approved by the Commissioner that
is:
      a. on the same lot or building site, or
      b. on another lot or building site within the same development, or
      c. in the street right-of-way abutting the development.
   (2) Credit Toward Requirements
   The Building Commissioner shall credit toward the requirements of Table
1220C healthy trees or shrubs that exist on a site prior to development, that
are located within proposed landscaped areas, and that are proposed to be
preserved.
   Except as provided herein for bonus credits, each preserved tree or shrub
meeting the ap-plicable requirements of Table 1220C shall reduce by one the
number of new trees or shrubs, respectively, required.
   (3) Bonus Credit for Larger Trees
   Larger trees preserved either under division (d)(1) or voluntarily shall
reduce the number of new trees required as follows:
 
Trunk Caliper of Existing Tree to Be Reduction in Number of New Trees Required
Preserved *
4 - 10 inches                        2 trees
11 - 20 inches                       3 trees
Over 20 inches                       4 trees
 
* Measured 1 foot above grade at base.
(e) Berms
Berms used for screening shall be a minimum of 2 feet high at all points.  The
interior face of a berm may be retained by a wall, terrace, or other means
acceptable to the Building Commissioner in lieu of taking the form of an
earthen slope. 
Slopes for earthen faces shall not exceed 33 percent if covered with grass and
50 percent if covered with other vegetative cover.
Earthen berm faces on which ground cover is not yet completely established
shall be protected from erosion by a mulch and/or erosion control net.
(f) Curbing
All landscaped areas located in or abutting parking areas shall be separated on
all sides from the parking surface by curbing consisting of concrete, stone,
brick, asphalt, or other material approved by the Building Commissioner as
having comparable appearance and durability.  Curbing shall be in good
condition upon installation.
The Commissioner may require curbing of a specified height or material adjacent
to vehicular areas commonly used by commercial vehicles of over 9,000 pounds of
curb weight unloaded.
(g) Trees
   (1) Condition
   Trees planted shall be free from disease, fungus, and scales.
   They shall have a straight single trunk.  Except that:
      A. a double-trunk species listed in Table 1220E may be used as a street
tree, and
      B. the Building Commissioner may, in consultation with the Beautification
Commission, otherwise approve use of a double-trunk tree.
   (2) Minimum Spacing
   To allow space for healthy roots and prevent damage caused by root growth,
trees shall not be planted closer to each other than provided below.
 
Size of Tree Minimum Spacing In Feet
Small *      25
Medium *     35
Large *      45
 
   * As defined in Chapter 1360, Definitions.
   (3) Trees and Signs in Commercial Districts
      A. Installation
      New or replacement trees in Commercial Districts shall, consistent with
the health of the tree, be installed and maintained to preserve the visibility
of existing legal business signage to the degree possible in the judgment of
the Building Commissioner consistent with the objectives of tree installation.
      Where practical, spacing of trees shall be varied if necessary to
preserve the visibility of an existing sign.  Or else different species or
varieties of trees shall be selected the width, opacity, or height of the top
or the base of the crown of which allows installation with minimum obstruction
of existing signs.
      B. Pruning
      Trees shall be pruned as necessary to preserve or enhance the visibility
of existing signs to the degree consistent with the health and integrity of the
tree.
      C. Sign-Obstructing Tree Removal
      A business or property owner may request of the City Council the removal
or replacement of a street tree that interferes with the visibility of a legal
sign on his or her premises.  If the Council determines the tree interferes
significantly with the visibility of such sign from the street or sidewalk,
Council may order the tree removed or replaced. 
      Prior to such removal or replacement, the business or property owner
shall pay to the City an amount de-termined by Council to represent the current
market value of the tree.  Such payment shall be used to purchase one or more
trees to be installed where the original tree was removed or, if such location
would also impair sign visibility, at another location in the zoning district.
      Tree removal hereunder shall also conform to division 1220.04(b)(7).
(h) Other Requirements
   (1) Guarantee
   The installer shall guarantee landscaping for one year after planting and
replace any trees that die within such period.  The Building Commissioner may
require a financial guarantee for this purpose under Section 1350.02.
   (2) Other
   Other requirements shall be as provided in Table 1220C.
1220.06 Tree Protection During Construction
(a) Certification Required
An applicant preserving existing trees under division 1220.05(d) shall file
with the Building Commissioner a written statement certifying that all such
trees or shrubs are currently healthy and that the requirements of this section
will be adhered to with respect to the trees to be preserved.
The Commissioner may consult with an arborist or urban forester in determining
compliance herewith.
(b) Mechanical and Chemical Injury 
Because mechanical injuries to trees intended to be preserved can be caused by
soil compaction, unnecessary cutting of roots, fire, collisions with heavy
equipment, carelessness with tools, and girdling with guy wires, and chemical
injury can be caused by solvents, paints, oils, and other materials, protective
barriers are required.
   (1) Enclosure of Drip Line Area
   A fence, roping, flagging, or other protective barrier shall enclose the
area within the drip line(s), and any exposed roots outside of such line(s), of
each tree or group of trees to be preserved.  Such barrier shall be visible
enough to be seen easily by equipment operators.
   Removal of brush and weeds within this barrier shall be performed with hand
tools only.  To avoid chemical damage to trees, equipment shall not be cleaned
within the barrier.
   No equipment materials, fill, or debris shall be stored within the barrier
except as may be necessary for a reasonable time if no other storage area is
available.
   (2) Bark Protection
   Trunks of trees to be preserved that surround the immediate building site
and border access roads shall be wrapped with sections of snow fence or boards
wired together.
   No nails or spikes shall be driven into trees to be preserved, nor shall
such trees be used for signs, fencing, roping, or cables.
(c) Grade Changes
Because changing the grade of the land surrounding a tree can impair the
ability of its roots to obtain necessary amounts of air, water, and land
minerals, protective measures shall be taken as specified herein.
   (1) Raising of Grade
      A. Tree Preservation Measures
      Before the grade of the land around a tree to be preserved is raised by
land filling, the Building Commissioner may, in consultation with an arborist
or urban forester, require the party undertaking the grading to:
      1. relocate the tree if feasible, or
      2. install an aeration system consisting of a dry well around the trunk
together with a layer of gravel and stone and a system of drain tiles over the
root system at the level of the original grade, or
      3. if an aeration system is impractical or financially infeasible, take
other measures to protect the tree.
      Any aeration system shall be config-ured to provide, in the judgment of
the Building Commissioner, adequate air and water circulation and drainage of
water away from the trunk.
      B. Exemption
      Fills are exempt from the provisions of division (c)1A if they:
      1. are 6 inches or less in depth, and
      2. do not contain clay, marl, or oth-er heavy, impervious fills of any
depth in the judgment of the Building Commissioner, and
      3. consist only of porous, loamy, or gravelly soil high in organic
matter.
   (2) Lowering of Grade
   To protect trees intended to be preserved from removal of or damage to
feeder roots or changes to the water table, the area with-in the drip line
shall not be lowered but shall be separated from a lowered grade by either
terracing or, for grade differences of less than 2 feet, construction of a dry
retaining wall.
(d) Excavations
   (1)   Location
   Excavations for utility pipelines shall be routed within the drip line of a
tree to be preserved only if in the judgment of the Building Commissioner:
   A.   no route bypassing the root area is practical, and
   B.   tunnelling under the roots with a power-driven soil auger is
impractical or financially infeasible in relation to the value of the tree.
   (2)   Root Protection
   Parties excavating within the root area shall:
   A.   minimize the number of roots cut, especially of large main roots, and
   B.   cleanly cut with proper tools such roots as must be cut and retrim them
after excavation, and
   C.   paint cuts of roots of 1/4-inch diameter or larger with a wound
dressing like orange shellac, and
   D.   backfill the trench as soon after excavation as possible to minimize
the time roots are exposed to the air, and
   E.   leave no pockets of air when backfilling, and
   F.   mix peat moss with fill soil to promote new growth.
(e)   Damage Mitigation
Where, despite the foregoing provisions, significant damage has been done to
the roots, the tree shall be fertilized and excess branches that cannot be
supported by the remaining undamaged roots shall be pruned.  Tree limbs damaged
during construction shall be sawed off flush to the trunk.
(f)   Cleanup
   (1)   Disposal of Debris
      Debris shall not be burned on-site but shall be hauled away to an
approved disposal site.
   (2)   Removal of Barriers
      Protective fences and barriers around trees shall be removed only as the
final stage of post-construction cleanup.
1220.07 Installation and Maintenance
(a) Assurance of Installation
Before issuing any Certificate of Occupancy for any application to which the
provisions of this chapter apply, the Building Commissioner  shall determine
either:
   (1) that landscaping and screening required hereunder have been fully
installed, or
   (2) if seasonal or weather conditions or other factors preclude such
installation at the time of application, that a financial guarantee has been
submitted to guarantee installation within 9 months of the date of issuance of
the Certificate.  Such guarantee shall comply with the provisions of Section
1350.02.
(b) Installation Procedures
All living landscaping materials shall be installed in conformance with the
most current procedures established by the American Association of Nurserymen
or its successor organization.
(c) Maintenance and Replacement
The owner, occupant, tenant, and agent of each, if any, shall be jointly and
severally responsible for the maintenance, repair, and replacement of all
landscaping, screening, and curbing required by these regulations or specified
in plans approved by the City--whether or not so required--so as to preserve at
least the same quantity, quality, and screening effectiveness as initially
installed.
An existing tree preserved under division 1220.05(d) that dies or is destroyed
shall be replaced by either:
   (1) a replacement tree of equal or greater caliper, or
   (2) if preserved under division 1220.05(d)(2), the trees required by Table
1220C without the bonus credit.
All living and non-living landscaping, including fences, walls, and ornamental
lighting, shall be maintained in a good condition at all times so as to present
a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from refuse and
debris. 
Unhealthy or dead vegetation shall be replaced with healthy live plantings by
the end of the next applicable planting season.
(d) Removal
Installed landscaping and screening may not be removed except temporarily for
replacement or maintenance.  Except that a Transition Buffer may ber removed if
the zoning of an abutting parcel is changed to a district that does not require
the Buffer, and other landscaping or screening may be removed if the condition
that mandates landscaping or screening hereunder no longer applies.
Table 1220A: Uses Requiring Transition Buffer
Zoning Districts or Uses:
Buffer Required Between And Intensity Required *
Zoning Districts or Uses:
Buffer Required Between                  And           Intensity Required *
RS, RT, RA                               RM            Medium
RS, RT,                                  O, C          Medium
RA, RM, RS, RT,                          I-1           Heavy
RA, RM, RS, RT,                          All other I   Maximum
RA, RM, Other RS,  RT, RA, RM           RS-32         Maximum
Oil or gas well site, tank batteries, or Adjacent land Maximum
brine disposal site
 
* See Table 1220C.
A Transition Buffer is a landscaped area established on a lot abutting and
along the length of interior side and rear lot lines that abut or are across an
alley from certain other zoning districts specified in this table with which
the zoning of the subject lot is considered incompatible.
No Transition Buffer is required on parcels devoted entirely to vacant or
agricultural land.
Installation of the Transition Buffer required herein shall be the
responsibility of all new uses irrespective of zoning district.  A new use in
the I-1 District, for example, shall provide a Transition Buffer next to an
existing use in an RM District.  Similarly, a new use in an RM District shall
provide a Transition Buffer next to an existing use in the I-1 District. 
The finished or decorative face of any fence or wall included in the Buffer
shall face toward the district in the first column.
Where Transition Buffers do not exist between two existing uses, both uses
shall be considered nonconforming.  Installation of the Buffer in such case
shall be as provided in Chapter 1340.
Table 1220B: Uses Requiring Other Screening or Landscaping
    Frontage   Landscaped Screen Barrier Foundation   Street Trees
Use Buffer [f] Island     [j]            Landscaping  [i]           Lawns [c]
                                         [b]
             Frontage   Landscaped Screen      Foundation  Street
Use          Buffer [f] Island     Barrier [j] Landscaping Trees [i] Lawns [c]
                                               [b]
1. All
residential  -          -          -           -           X         X
uses
2. All non-
residential  -          -          -           X           X         -
uses
3. Uses in
RM, O, and I -          -          -           -           -         X
Districts
4. Open off-
street
parking
areas:
Of over 15   X          -          -           -           -         -
spaces [a]
Of over 60   X          X [e]      -           -           -         -
spaces [a]
5. Open
sales lots
and service  X          -          -           -           -         -
and filling
stations
7. Outdoor   -          -          X           -           -         -
storage [g]
8. Open
service/
refuse       -          -          X           -           -         -
disposal
areas [g]
9. Open off-
street       -          -          X           -           -         -
loading
space
10. Junk/
wrecking     -          -          X           -           -         -
yards
11.
Manufactured
home bottled -          -          X           -           -         -
gas tanks
stored in
the open
12.
Residential
abutting     -          -          X           -           -         -
arterial
street [h]
13.
Electrical/
mechanical   -          -          X           -           -         -
equipment
[k]
14. Utility  X          -          X           -           -         -
stations [d]
 
Notes for Table 1220B
Note:  Uses shall meet all applicable requirements of this table.
See also Table 1220A for uses requiring a Transition Buffer.
[a] A minimum of 10 percent of the parking area shall be landscaped.  Frontage
Buffers, Landscaped Islands, and Transition Buffers abutting off-street parking
areas shall be credited toward this requirement.
[b] Foundation Landscaping
Foundation landscaping is required abutting exterior walls of principal
buildings except walls facing rear yards. It shall meet the Medium Intensity
requirement for shrubs in Table 1220C.
[c] Lawns
Required in actual street (OR ALL YARDS?) yards only.
Except in vehicular areas, swimming pool areas, and the like, lawns shall be
seeded, sodded, or provided with an alternative vegetative ground cover
approved by the Building Commissioner.
[d] Utility Stations
Electric substations, communications  towers, telephone exchanges, and similar
utility uses, except in I Districts.
[e] Landscaped Islands
Landscaped Islands are small landscaped areas in the interior of an open off-
street parking area, often located at the ends of parking rows. 
They shall have a minimum area of 100 square feet each and shall be separated
by no more than 100 feet measured along the row of spaces.  Each Island shall
have no less than one deciduous tree of a minimum caliper at one foot above
ground level of 2.5 inches.
[f] Frontage Buffers
A Frontage Buffer is a landscaped area on a lot abutting and along the length
of street lines in street yards accommodating the uses specified.
Intensity shall be as provided below.
 
Utility stations   Maximum
Off-street parking Medium
Open sales lots    Light
Service stations
 
[g] Does not apply to such areas that serve individual single- and two-family
and townhouse dwellings.
[h] Residential Abutting Arterial Street
A Screen Barrier no less than 5 feet in fence height shall be required along
the rear lot line abutting an arterial street on lots accommodating single- and
two-family and townhouse dwellings.
[i] See 1220.04(b).
[j] Screen Barrier
A Screen Barrier is a vertical barrier to visibility such as a fence, wall, or
hedge. 
Minimum year-round Screen Barrier opacity shall be 75 percent.  Except as
otherwise provided herein, minimum height shall be the lesser of:
   1. the height of the use to be screened, or
   2. a height sufficient in the judgment of the Building Commissioner to
conceal the use specified from view from any point less than 6 feet above the
ground floor level on adjoining lots or building sites and on any abutting
street.
[k] Electrical/Mechanical Equipment
Equipment such as transformers, air conditioners, or satellite dish antennas
located:
   1. in the open on the ground but protruding above grade, or
   2. on a roof
if in either such location they will be visible from a street abutting the lot
or from an abutting lot in an RS, RT, or RA District. 
For receiving antennas, the required minimum height of the Screen Barrier shall
not exceed the greatest height that will clear the reception window, as defined
herein.
Table 1220C: Screening Intensity
 Screening Intensity
 Light Medium Heavy Maximum
                                      Screening Intensity
                                      Light Medium Heavy Maximum
1. Landscaped Area
Minimum Width in feet                 3     5      8     10
2. Screening [h]
a. Minimum Height in feet [d] [e]     -     3      4.5   6
b. Minimum year-round opacity [b] [f] -     50%    75%   75%
3. Trees
a. Maximum Spacing in linear feet [a] -     40     35    30
b. Evergreens: [g] 
Minimum Height in feet [b][d][e]      -     6      8     8
c. Deciduous: [g]
Minimum Caliper in inches [c] [d]     -     2.5    2.5   3.0
4. Shrubs [i]
a. Maximum Spacing in linear feet [a] 3     5      3     3
b. Minimum Height in feet [b] [d] [e] 2.0   2.0    2.5   3.0
 
[a]  Measured along length of landscaped area.Spacing is mean average spacing:
uniform spacing is not required. 
[b] Also subject to provisions concerning Vision Clearance Triangles in 1240.02
(e)(8).
[c]  At 1 foot above grade at base.
[d]  At time of installation. 
[e]  Fence height as defined herein.
[f]  By the end of the second growing season after installation, if screening
composed of landscaping is used.
[g]  Requirement applies only if this type of tree is used.
[h]  May take any form permitted by 1220.05(a). 
[i] A minimum of 2 species of evergreen, flowering, and/or upright shrubs shall
be used where 4 or more shrubs are required on a lot or building site and a
minimum of 3 species where 8 or more shrubs are required.
Please Note: To view the Screening Intensitites Graphic, see page 1220-17 of
the printed version of the Barberton Development Code
Table 1220D: Prohibited Street Trees
Common Name Botanic Name
Common Name                  Botanic Name
The following shall not be used as Street Trees:
Apple                        Malus
Ash, European Mountain       Sorbus aucuparia
Aspen                        Populus
Beech, American              Fagus granifolia
Birch, Paper, Grey European  Betula papyrifera populifolia, alba
Catalpa                      Catalpa speciosa
Elm, American                Ulmus americana
Elm, Siberian                Ulmus pumila
Gingko (female)              Gingko biloba (Fem.)
Hawthorn                     Crataegus
Horse Chestnut (nut bearing) Aesculus hippocastarum
Kentucky Coffee Tree         Gymnocladus dioicus
Locust, Black                Robinia pseudoacacia
Magnolia, Cucumber Tree      Magnolia acuminata
Maple, Box Elder             Acer negundo
Maple, Silver                Acer saccharinum
Mulberry                     Morus
Ohio Buckeye                 Aesculus glabra
Olive, Russian               Elaeagnus angustifolia
Osage Orange                 Maclura pomifera
Poplar                       Populus
Sweetgum                     Liquidambar styraciflua
Sycamore                     Platanus occidentalis
Tuliptree                    Liriodentron tulipifera
Tree of Heaven               Ailanthus altissima
Walnut, Black                Juglans nigra
Willow                       Salix
 
Table 1220E: Recommended Street Trees
Common Name Botanic Name
Common Name                      Botanic Name
Crabapple, Donald Wyman          Malus 'Donald Wyman'
Crabapple, Harvest Gold          Malus 'Harvest Gold'
Crabapple, Japanese Flowering    Malus floribunda
Crabapple, Madonna               Malus 'Madonna'
Crabapple, Spring Snow           Malus 'Spring Snow'
Crabapple, Sugar Tyme            Malus 'Sugar Tyme'
Cherry, Amanogawa Flowering      Prunus serrulata 'Amanogawa'
Cherry, Hally Jolivette          Prunus 'Hally Jolivette'
Cherry, Kwanzan Flowering        Prunus serrulata 'Kwanzan'
Cherry, Okame Flowering          Prunus 'Okame'
Cherry, Rosy Cloud               Prunus serrulata 'Rosy Cloud'
Cherry, Sargent                  Prunus sargenti
Cherry, Sargent, Columnar        Prunus sargenti 'Columnaris'
Lilac, Ivory Silk  Japanese TreeSyringa reticulata 'Ivory Silk'
Lilac, Summer Snow Japanese Tree Syringa reticulata 'Summer Snow'
Magnolia, Royal Star             Stellata 'Royal Star'
Maple, Amur                      Acer ginnala
Serviceberry, Autumn Brilliance  Amelanchier grandiflora
 
Chapter 1230
Sign Regulations
1230.01 General Provisions
(a) Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate commercial and noncommercial signs
and displays designed to be visible outdoors in a manner that:
   (1) recognizes the contribution business signs make to job opportunities for
Barberton residents and development of the City's tax base
   (2) acknowledges the communications  and advertising needs of businesses and
other parties
   (3) enables the public to locate goods, services, and facilities in
Barberton easily
   (4) recognizes that signs constitute a uniquely public form of communication
and advertising that can have adverse effects on the public welfare that more
selective media do not
   (5) helps preserve visibility of competing messages and communications
effectiveness of signs
   (6) protects property values and the character of business districts and
nearby neighborhoods
   (7) creates more attractive business districts
   (8) improves the image of Barberton in the minds of both residents and
visitors
   (9) promotes pedestrian and traffic safety by reducing sign hazards and
obstructions
   (10) provides alternatives for communication by making provision for
multiple types of signs and by establishing varying levels of restriction
   (11) does not directly or indirectly restrict the message content of signs
but only the time, place, and manner of their display.
(b) Applicability
Except as specifically provided otherwise herein, beginning the date of effect
of this chapter no sign, as defined herein, shall be displayed, located,
erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted, replaced, or
altered except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter and after
issuance of a Sign Permit by the City of Barberton.
Except where specifically indicated otherwise, all provisions herein shall
apply both to Permanent Signs and to Temporary Signs.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply retroactively to any sign
legally installed prior to the date of effect of this chapter except for:
   (1) the maintenance provisions of division 1230.04(e), and
   (2) the transition provisions of Section 1230.06.
(c) Regulation by Land Use, Not Zoning
Where the regulations herein vary with land use category, as in Tables 1230B,
1230C, and 1230D, they normally vary with the actual character of the use and
not with the character of the zoning district.
This form of regulation is intended to recognize that:
   (1) different land use categories have different requirements for signage,
with retail uses having the greatest requirement and single- and two-family
residential uses and vacant property the least requirement
   (2) a single zoning district often allows multiple different land use
categories that have such different requirements
   (3) the viability of land uses that are nonconforming can be seriously
jeopardized if they are not allowed the signage appropriate to their actual use
but are instead confined to signage appropriate only to conforming uses.
1230.02 Exempt and Restricted Signs
(a) Displays Not Regulated
The following displays shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter:
   (1) displays that are not signs, as defined herein.
   (2) cornerstone inscriptions or other signs that are part of masonry facades
of older buildings
   (3) signs on motor vehicles, boats, aircraft, and other moving vehicles,
whether such vehicles are in motion or stationary, except vehicle signs, as
defined herein
   (4) signs of less than 1 square foot each in sign area, such as street
numbers on buildings, religious symbols like crucifixes, security system window
or door stickers, identification of store hours, emblems of credit cards
accepted, seals indicating membership in business or trade associations, and
the like
   (5) vending machine signs under a cumulative 20 square feet per lot
   (6) signs accompanying the outdoor display of items for retail sale
totalling less than 10 square feet per display
   (7) signage placed by the manufacturer on merchandise or its packaging
displayed in outdoor sales displays, such as open sales lots or sidewalk sales,
where such displays are permitted under zoning district or Temporary Use
regulations
   (8) signs accessory to juvenile activities, such as a child's lemonade stand
or temporary play-related sidewalk markings
   (9) graffiti
   (10) displays of merchandise or other items inside show windows of stores
   (11) signs of less than 1 square foot each in area that are part of window
merchandise displays and are not affixed to windows
   (12) other signs within buildings that are not attached to a window or door
with messages that are not legible beyond the lot or building site of the
building
   (13) bulletin boards and bulletin board signs, as defined herein
   (14) Government/Utility Signs, as defined herein
   (15) monuments in cemeteries or monument sales lots
   (16) displays officially designated by the City Council as works of art,
such as statuary, murals, or outdoor sculpture
   (17) outdoor storage or display of signs pro-duced or sold by a sign
fabricator, distributor, or installer, where outdoor sales displays or storage
are permitted in the zoning district
   (18) signs on umbrellas at outdoor cafe tables
   (19) distinctive building architectural treatments that may reflect styles,
colors, or the like also used in advertising
   (20) a clock, thermometer, or other meter or measuring instrument, whether
having an analog or digital display
   (21) displays in the interior of roofless build-ings intended to be seen
only from inside such buildings, such as athletic scoreboards or advertising
signs along interior walls of an open stadium
   (22) Landmark Signs, as defined herein
   (23) other signs similar in nature in the judgment of the Building
Commissioner to the above signs.
Such displays may notwithstanding be subject to Design Review under Section
1310.08 if located on properties in the PO Preservation Overlay District.
Displays that have sign areas less than those specified herein but that are
arrayed together to create the effect of a larger sign, are not exempt from the
regulations of this chapter.
Displays that are in the judgment of the Building Commissioner only
incidentally displays exempted herein and are primarily non-exempt signs, shall
be subject to the provisions of this chapter.  A billboard, for example, that
contains a time and temperature display does not thereby become exempt under
division (a)(20).
(b) Signs Exempt from Permit Requirement
The following shall be exempt from the requirement for a Sign Permit under
division 1230.07(a) but shall be subject to all other applicable provisions of
this chapter:
   (1) signs for which no Sign Permit is required under Table 1230B
   (2) copy changes on changeable copy areas, as defined herein
   (3) bill or poster changes on signs consisting of bills or posters attached
to a panel, such as billboards or bulletin board signs
   (4) maintenance, cleaning, or repair or replacement of broken or worn parts
with comparable parts of comparable materials that does not involve removal and
reinstallation of, or repair or alteration of, all or any part of the sign
support structure.
   (5) existing signs for which a Sign Permit was not required prior to the
date of effect of this chapter.
Such actions may notwithstanding require a Certifi-cate of Appropriateness
under Section 1310.08 if located in the PO Preservation Overlay District.
(c) Temporary Signs
The following signs shall be allowed only as Temporary Signs:
   (1) A-frame and similar Ground Signs displayed on sidewalks along frontages
where a principal building is located within 2 feet of the street right-of-way,
such as in the Downtown area
   (2) search and beacon lights, except as required as permanent signs by
government regulation.
Temporary Use signs shall not require a Temporary Use Permit under division
1310.04(a) but shall require a Sign Permit unless exempted therefrom by Table
1230B or other provision herein.
Temporary Signs shall be regulated as provided in division 1230.05(c).
(d) Prohibited Signs
The following signs and displays shall be prohibited as both permanent and
temporary signs for all land uses:
   (1) air-activated signs, as defined herein
   (2) festoons, as defined herein, except during recognized holiday periods or
seasonal festivals or special community events during which the outdoor display
of decorations is encouraged or is customary
   (3) flashing signs, as defined herein, except on Canopy Signs
   (4) moving signs, as defined herein
   (5) vehicle signs, as defined herein
   (6) signs on lighting or utility poles
   (7) signs on trees
   (8) Street Bench Signs, as defined herein
   (9) signs displayed on bus shelters
   (10) cold-air inflatable balloon signs
   (11) signs containing strobe lights visible beyond the property line
   (12) temporary Ground Signs with changeable copy areas
   (13) markings on street pavements, curbs, or sidewalks, except Government/
Utility Signs or child play-related temporary markings.
   (14) signs that violate any City regulation on emission of noise, odor, or
particulate or gaseous matter
   (15) Right-of-Way Signs, as defined herein
   (16) Roof Signs, as defined herein.
1230.03 Sign Classifications
(a) Purpose
Signs have been classified into sign type, sign form, and sign duration
categories herein in order to:
   (1) provide for the various diverse functions of signage, and
   (2) provide flexibility in how, where, and when signs may be displayed, and
   (3) treat signs that are equivalent in their land use impact similarly, and
   (4) refrain from regulating directly or indirectly the message content of
signage.
(b) Sign Types
Signs have been classified into sign type classifica-tions based on their
location on or adjacent to a property or their function.
The classifications are:
   (1) Entrance Signs
   (2) Drive-Through Signs
   (3) Right-of-Way Signs
   (4) Government/Utility Signs
   (5) Other Signs
Government/Utility Signs are not subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(c) Sign Forms
Signs are also classified into sign form categories and subclassifications
based on their positioning on or off a building or projection thereof.
The categories are:
   (1) Facade Signs
      A. Wall Signs
      B. Window Signs
   (2) Ground Signs
   (3) Awning and Canopy Signs
      A. Under Canopy Signs
      B. Other Signs
   (4) Projecting Signs
   (5) Roof Signs.
(d) Sign Duration
All signs are considered either:
   (1) Permanent Signs, as defined herein, or
   (2) Temporary Signs, as also defined herein.
1230.04 Sign Standards
(a) Sign Dimensions
   (1) Sign Height
      A. Maximum Height
      Sign heights of signs shall conform to:
      1. the standards of Table 1230E, and
      2. the regulations for Vision Clearance Triangles in division 1240.02(e)
(8).
      B. Exceptions
      1. Vision Clearance Triangle
      The Planning Director may allow a sign height for a Ground Sign exceeding
that otherwise permitted by Table 1230E if he or she determines that:
      a. it is impractical to locate the Ground Sign outside the Vision
Clearance Triangle, as provided in division 1240.02(e)(8), and
      b. a Ground Sign within the Triangle could not conform to the regulations
of division 1240.02(e)(8) and also to the maximum height of Table 1230E.
      The Director shall allow only the low-est sign that permits a sign of
reasonable size and shape to conform to div-ision 1240.02(e)(8).
      2. Bonuses
      Because the impact of tall signs on their environs may be mitigated if
certain measures are taken, sign heights of Table 1230E may be in-creased as
provided in Table 1230I.
   (2) Sign Area
   Maximum sign area shall be as specified by Table 1230D.
   Because the impact of large signs on their environs may be mitigated if
certain measures are taken, sign areas of Table 1230D may be increased as
provided in Table 1230I.
   Multiple signs arrayed together to create the visual effect of a sign with a
sign area exceeding the maximum allowed hereunder are prohibited.
(b) Location and Placement
   (1) Within Public Right-of-Way
   No sign or associated light fixture shall be located within, project into,
or overhang a public right-of-way, such as a sign upon a utility pole therein
or extending over a sidewalk, except as permitted in Table 1230F, division
1230.02(c)(1), or elsewhere herein.
   (2) Setbacks
      A. Vision Clearance Triangle
      Both permanent and temporary Ground and Projecting Signs shall be set
back from the street pavement as necessary to comply with the restrictions on
obstructions within Vision Clearance Triangles in division 1240.02(e)(8).
      B. Other Setbacks
      Ground Signs shall be set back no less than 5 feet from street lines
except for signs specifically allowed lesser setbacks under division 1230.02(c)
or other provision herein.
      Ground Signs of over 200 square feet in sign area, where permitted, shall
be set back no less than 20 feet from any Residential District.
      Signs mounted on flat or pitched roofs, where permitted, shall be set
back 4 feet or more from all edges of the roof to allow passage around all
sides of the sign.
   (3) Traffic Hazards
   No sign may by reason of location or location and size significantly
obstruct the vision of drivers or obstruct or detract from the visibility or
effectiveness of any traffic signal or control device.
   (4) Obstructions
   No sign may obstruct a fire escape, door, or other entrance or exitway, nor
a window required for ventilation by any City code.
   (5) Architectural Harmony
   Permanent Facade Signs shall not cover or overlap cornices, eaves, columns,
window and door frames, wall corners, and decorative elements of the
architecture of the building.
   (6) Clearance
   All projecting and ground signs shall have a minimum clearance of 8 feet
over pedestrian areas and 15 feet over streets, alleys, and vehicular areas, as
defined herein.
   (7) Overhead Lines
   No sign shall be so located as to interfere with overhead utility lines or
cause any hazard to the public in connection therewith.
   (8) Projection
   Sign projection shall not exceed the standards of Table 1230F.
(c) Illumination
   (1) Area Lighting
   As used herein, sign illumination shall not be construed as referring to any
illumination of signs provided by light sources intended to illuminate an area
in which a sign is located--such as street lights, facade lighting, or parking
lot lighting--rather than specifically to illuminate the sign.
   (2) Bare Bulb Illumination
   Illumination by bare bulbs is prohibited, except for:
      A. neon or similar tubing of any color
      B. shielded external lighting
      C. changing signs, as defined herein
      D. marquees of operating theatres
      E. Landmark Signs.
   (3) External Light Fixtures
   External lighting fixtures shall be concealed wherever possible in the
judgment of the Planning Director except for temporary installations or for
stylized decorative fixtures that constitute part of a design treatment.
   (4) Constant and Even Illumination
   Sign illumination shall be constant in intensity and color, except as
otherwise permitted herein, such as for changing signs.  Illumination shall be
of uniform intensity over the sign face.
   (5) Non-Glaring
   The external lighting for any illuminated sign shall be shaded, shielded, or
directed so as not to cause glare in surrounding properties or in public
streets.
   (6) Traffic Hazards
   No direct or reflected light from a light source for an illuminated sign
shall create a traffic hazard for motor vehicles.
   (7) Illumination Prohibited
      A. Signs Without Permits
      Signs allowed without Sign Permits under Table 1230B shall not be
illuminated.
      B. Projecting Signs
      Projecting signs shall have no internal illumination.
   (8) Decorative Illumination
   Decorative lighting that does not constitute a sign, as defined herein,
shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter but may be sub-ject to
the requirements of other City regulations. 
   Such lighting includes facade illumination, neon accent lighting, backlit
awnings not bearing signs, Christmas lights not bearing signs, and the like.
   Backlit awnings shall conform to Section 1140.01(b)(4).
(d) Construction Standards
   (1) Building and Electrical Codes Apply
   All permanent signs shall conform to the Building and Electrical Codes of
the City of Barberton.
   Required Building or Electrical Permits shall be obtained at the same time
as the Sign Permit. 
   Conductors for illuminated signs shall be en-closed in rigid conduit or
other approved raceways.  All sign circuit conduit shall where possible be
concealed from public view.
   Electric signs shall be listed with Underwriters Laboratories or shall
conform to specifications that are equivalent in the judgment of the Building
Commissioner.
   (2) Framework
   To the extent possible in the judgment of the Planning Director, all
permanent signs shall be designed so that all framework for the support of the
sign, other than supporting poles for a free-standing sign, shall be contained
within or behind the face of the sign, or within the building, so as not to be
visible to public view. 
   This restriction shall not apply to framework that is of stylized design
intended as part of the design treatment.
   (3) Attachments
   All letters, figures, characters, and embellishments on a sign shall be
safely and securely attached to the sign structure.
   (4) Treatment of Wood
   Wood used in sign fabrication that will be exposed to the weather when the
sign is dis-played shall be rated for exterior exposure.
(e) Maintenance and Repair
   (1) Upkeep Required
   The appearance and safety of all signs, including signs installed prior to
the date of effect of this chapter, shall be maintained by the owner thereof at
all times.
      A. Cleaning and Repainting
      Painted and unpainted signs, embellish-ments, and support structures
shall be cleaned as necessary to prevent an un-sightly or blighted appearance.
      Painted signs and support structures shall be repainted as necessary to
prevent excessive peeling paint, faded colors, rust, corrosion, rotting, or
other deterioration in the appearance or structural safety of the sign.
      B. Supports
      All supports, anchors, guys, and braces for a sign shall be maintained in
safe and secure condition.
      C. Illumination
      Any source of illumination shall be kept in safe working order at all
times. 
      D. Debris
      The area on the ground on the same lot within 10 feet in all directions
      from any part of a Ground Sign shall be kept clear of all debris and
refuse.
      E. Landscaping
      Any vegetative landscaping at the base of Ground Signs shall be
maintained in a living and healthy condition free of weeds, bare spots, and
debris, as required in Chapter 1220, Landscaping and Screening.
      F. Other
      Missing characters in the sign message shall be replaced.
      Broken or damaged sign faces, framing, or support structures shall be
repaired, replaced, or removed.
      Mounting and electrical holes for signs that have been removed that are
not used for a replacement sign shall be
      filled or concealed.  Discolorations shall be removed from facades that
create "shadows" of signs or characters that have been removed.
   (2) Maintenance Inspections
   A. At City Initiative
   The Building Commissioner may at any time inspect any sign for conformance
to the maintenance requirements of division (e)(1) and take authorized
enforcement actions.
   B. At Request of Sign Owner
   Apart from such involuntary inspections, a sign owner may, in order to
qualify for benefits under Section 1230.06 or Table 1230I, request a
Maintenance Inspection by the Commissioner. 
   Such a requested inspection shall include all signs on the lot or building
site owned or used by a particular business or other occupant.  It shall be
limited to determining compliance with the requirements of division (e)(1) and
shall not include inspection for compliance with any other provision of this
chapter or of any other City development or building regulations.
   If after such inspection, the Commissioner determines that all requirements
of division (e)(1) have been complied with, he or she shall issue a Maintenance
Certificate so certifying. 
   The Maintenance Certificate shall expire on the earlier of:
   1. one year from the date of issuance, or
   2. the date of a determination by the Commissioner that there has been a
violation of the requirements of division (e)(1) on any sign included in the
Certificate.
   (3) Wall Restoration
Exterior building wall surfaces on which signs have been displayed shall be
either covered with another sign or restored to their previous condition as
determined by the Building Commissioner within 30 days of the date the sign is
removed.
(f) Content
No provision or definition in this chapter shall be interpreted as requiring,
prohibiting, or otherwise regulating, or making regulatory distinctions based
on, the sign content, as defined herein, of any sign except where clearly
indicated otherwise, as in 1230.04(g)(1) or 1230.04(g)(2), for purposes of
public safety or administrative efficiency.
(g) Other Standards
   (1) Resemblance to Traffic Devices
   No sign shall by reason of shape, color, use of lighting, or other factor be
similar in appearance to any traffic signal or traffic sign or railroad sign or
signal in a way that may interfere with traffic movement or safety. 
   (2) Permit Number
   Every sign issued a Sign Permit shall display a City sticker with the Permit
number displayed in a conspicuous place.
   (3) Vegetation Impairing Sign Visibility
   For the purpose of enhancing the visibility of a sign, a tree, shrub, or
other vegetation may be trimmed, removed, damaged, or destroyed only if:
      A. its removal is not prohibited by division 1220.05(d) or other
regulation and its preservation is not required to meet landscaping
requirements of Chapter 1220 or any other requirement or condition under any
City permit or certificate, and
      B. the owner or management of the public or private property on which the
vegetation is located has given express written authorization for the work.
   (4) Design Guidelines
   Parties proposing to display new or remodeled signs are encouraged but not
required to conform to the Design Guidelines in Table 1230K.
   (5) Signs on Private Property
   Signs shall be displayed on private property only with the written
permission of the property owner.
   (6) Signs on Public Property
   Signs shall be displayed in City parks only with the written permission of
the Parks and Recreation Commission.
   Signs shall be displayed in public street rights-of-way only in conformance
with provisions for Right-of-Way Signs herein and other City regulations
governing public street rights-of-way.
   Signs shall be displayed on other public property only with written
permission of the agency owning or managing such property.
   The requirements of this division shall not apply to Government/Utility
Signs, as defined herein.
   (7) Sign Materials
   No permanent sign other than a flag or awning sign shall be fabricated from:
      A. canvas, or
      B. cloth, or
      C. flexible vinyl.
   (8) Other
   Signs shall conform to applicable standards in Tables 1230A, 1230B, 1230C,
1230D, 1230E, 1230F, 1230G, and 1230H.
   Signs shall conform to regulations of the Ohio Department of Transportation
(Chapter 5501:2-2 of the Ohio Administrative Code).  Where ODOT regulations and
the provisions of this chapter conflict with respect to ODOT-Regulated Signs,
as defined herein, the provision that is the more restrictive or that
establishes the higher standard shall govern.
1230.05 Rules for Special Signs
(a) Changeable Copy Areas
   (1) Where Allowed
   Changing signs, as defined herein, shall be allowed only on a single
permanent Entrance Sign per lot. 
   Manual changeable copy areas such as message boards are allowed on all sign
forms without limitation as to number of signs per lot except as provided in
division 1230.02(d).
   (2) Maximum Area
   A changeable copy area, as defined herein, shall be no more than 50 percent
of the sign area of the permanent sign of which it is a part except on canopy
signs.
   (3) Integration into Sign
   Changeable copy areas on permanent signs shall be integrated into the face
of the sign by use of a border or similar treatment that provides a visual
linkage to the rest of the sign.
(b) Ground Signs
Permanent ground signs shall be supported by one or more poles or pylons or
another base or anchor approved by the Building Commissioner that is attached
permanently to the ground and not mounted on trailers or other moveable
supports.
(c) Temporary Signs
   (1) Signs Allowed
      A. Tables 1230B and 1230C
      Temporary Signs are permitted with or without Sign Permits as provided in
Tables 1230B and 1230C.
      B. Substitutes for Permanent Signs
      In addition to the Temporary Signs allowed under Tables 1230B and 1230C,
a Temporary Sign may be displayed in lieu of a Permanent Sign pending delivery
of the Permanent Sign, as with a new business, or during the off-site repair of
such Permanent Sign. 
      Such a Temporary Sign shall conform to all requirements applicable to the
Permanent Sign for which it is substituting except where the Building
Commissioner determines such conformance to be impractical.
      The Commissioner may require submission of a copy of the sales order or
repair order for the Permanent Sign as evidence that a Temporary Sign qualifies
under this provision.
      C. Signs Allowed Only as
      Temporary Signs
      Signs allowed only as Temporary Signs are as specified in division
1230.02(c).
   (2) Temporary Changeable Signs
   No Temporary Sign with a changeable copy area shall be permitted on any lot
or building on which a Permanent Sign containing a changeable copy area is
displayed.
   Temporary Ground Signs with changeable copy areas are prohibited under
division 1230.02(d).
   (3) Time Limits
      A. Signs Without Messages
      Temporary signs shall be removed if at any time they fail to display a
message for over 72 consecutive hours.
      B. Inoperative Temporary Signs
      Temporary Signs not having changeable copy areas shall be removed by the
owner thereof within 10 days after events or the passage of time have in the
judgment of the Building Commissioner rendered the signs no longer operative,
valid, or timely, such as after the end of a yard sale for a sign announcing
the sale, the date of an election for an election campaign sign, the
consummation of the sale or lease of a property for a real estate sign, or the
completion of construction for a construction sign.
      C. Other Temporary Signs
      All other Temporary Signs shall be removed as provided in Table 1230H.
   (4) Financial Guarantee for Removal
   The Building Commissioner shall require a deposit or financial guarantee
under Section 1350.02 in a reasonable amount as determined by City Council to
assure removal of any Temporary Sign requiring a Sign Permit.
   (5) Temporary ODOT-Regulated Signs
   Temporary Signs that are ODOT-regulated signs, as defined herein, shall meet
all requirements of ODOT regulations applicable to permanent signs.
(d) Landmark Signs
Landmark Signs, as defined herein, shall be exempt from the regulations of this
chapter and shall therefore not be considered nonconforming even though not in
compliance with the provisions herein.
Except that the Building Commissioner may require repair or removal within 30
days of his or her order of any Landmark Sign that he or she determines to
constitute an immediate threat to public health or safety.
Alterations to Landmark Signs shall require issuance of a Certificate of
Appropriateness  under Section 1310.08.
(e) Awning and Canopy Signs
Awning and Canopy Signs are subject to the general restrictions on awnings and
canopies of Chapter 1140, Accessory Uses and Yards.
1230.06 Transition to New Code (Repealed)
(EDITOR'S NOTE: Section 1230.06 was repealed by Ordinance 146-2004, passed
October 11, 2004.)
1230.07 Administration
(a) Sign Permits
   (1) Sign Permit Required
   Except as provided in divisions 1230.02(a) and (b), a Sign Permit shall be
required to erect, install, or otherwise display any sign, as defined herein,
or to alter, move, extend, enlarge, or repair a sign.  A currently valid Sign
Permit shall be required at all times during which such signs are displayed.
   (2) Contents of Sign Permit Application
   An application for a Sign Permit shall be made upon forms provided by the
Building Commissioner.  It shall include the applicable information provided
for in Table 1230J except such information as the Building Commissioner may
determine inapplicable to or unnecessary for review of the particular sign
requested.
   (3) Issuance of Sign Permits
   The Commissioner shall issue a Sign Permit for any sign for which a complete
and accurate Sign Permit Application and Permit fee in an amount established by
City Council have been filed if he or she has determined that the proposed sign
is in compliance with this and other applicable City codes.  Permits shall be
issued or denied within 5 days of filing.
   The Permit fee shall be doubled if the sign has been fully or partially
installed prior to issuance of the Permit.
   The Commissioner shall give written notice to the applicant of denial of a
Sign Permit Application together with the reasons therefor.
   A Sign Permit may be assigned to a successor owner of the business or other
organization to which the Permit was issued.
   (4) Permit Revocation
      A. Misstatements
      The Building Commissioner may revoke in writing to the permitee any Sign
Permit issued on the basis of misstatement of fact by the applicant.
      B. Timely Installation
      A Sign Permit shall be automatically revoked if the sign authorized
thereby has not been completely installed or displayed within 6 months of the
date issued, unless the Building Commissioner has granted an extension.
      Such extension shall be applied for before expiration of the initial 6-
month period and shall be limited to a single extension of 6 months. 
      C. Revocation for Non-Compliance
      The Building Commissioner shall revoke a Sign Permit if upon inspecting a
sign at any time after its installation he or she determines that it is not in
compliance with the information provided in the Sign Permit application and
with all applicable requirements of this and other City codes.
      D. Reason for Revocation
      The Building Commissioner shall advise the applicant in writing of the
reasons for any revocation.
   (5) Guarantee Required
   A deposit or financial guarantee under Section 1350.02 in a reasonable
amount as determined by City Council shall accompany all Sign Permit
applications for Permanent Signs.  It shall be returned to the applicant upon
determination by the Building Commissioner that installation and/or initial
display of the sign has complied with all applicable City regulations.
(b) Sign Removal
   (1) Face Removal
   When a sign face of any permanent sign is re-moved, leaving only the cabinet
and/or support structure, the sign owner or owner of the premises shall within
30 days of such removal:
      A. replace the entire face (unless prohibited under Chapter 1340), or
      B. install a weatherproof blank face or face cover no larger than the
original face and made of a material approved by the Building Commissioner, or
      C. remove all remaining components of the sign and its support structure.
   This requirement shall not apply to sign face removal for a maximum period
of 30 days for repair or maintenance.
   (2) Unsafe Signs
   Any sign or portion thereof that the Building Commissioner determines to be
unsafe shall be removed or satisfactorily repaired within 30 days of his or her
order to do so.  If such action is not taken, the Commissioner may have such
removal or repair accomplished at the sign owner's expense.
   The Commissioner may have any sign or portion thereof that he or she
determines to constitute an immediate threat to public health or safety removed
summarily and without notice.
   (3) Nonconforming Signs
   Nonconformities in signs shall be removed as provided under Chapter 1340.
   (4) Temporary Signs
   Temporary Signs shall be removed as provided in division 1230.05(c).
   (5) Signs on Public Property
   Any sign displayed in a public right-of-way or on other public property
contrary to the provi-sions of this chapter shall be forfeited to the public
and be subject to confiscation.
(c) Exceptions
   (1) Variances
   Variances to the requirements of this chapter may be approved as provided in
division 1310.03(a).
   A Variance to the requirements for area, height, location, number of signs,
or sign form may be approved if necessary to make a sign or a use reasonably
visible from the abutting street to which the sign or use is oriented if
without the Variance such visibility would be impaired by topography,
landscaping, or existing development.
   (2) Design Exceptions
   The Planning Commission may approve a Special Exception to one or more
requirements of this chapter when it makes written Findings of Fact that
literal conformance to such requirement(s) would be detrimental to the creation
of a sign display of unusual or outstanding design quality.
   (3) Not in Lieu of Bonuses
   A Variance or Design Exception may be approved only to the extent that the
applicable Review Body finds that the bonus provisions of Table 1230I would be
inapplicable or insufficient to grant the required relief.
   (4) Exceptions for Replicated Historic Signs
   The Design Review Board may allow the display of a new sign designed to
faithfully replicate an historic sign even though such sign does not conform to
the provisions of this chapter.
   Before allowing such display, the Board shall determine based on
documentation provided by the applicant that:
      A. the sign being replicated was once displayed on the property, and
      B. its re-creation would contribute to the preservation or restoration of
the historic character of the premises.
(d) Other Regulations
   (1) Insurance
   A bond or insurance shall be provided as required under Section 1430.04 of
the Building and Housing Code.
   (2) Licensing
   No person shall perform work upon a sign who is not currently licensed by
the City under Chapter 1430, except as exempted therein.
   (3) Nonconformities
   All signs holding Sign Permits or Building Permits issued, or that were
otherwise lawfully existing, prior to the date of effect of this chapter, but
which are not in conformance with applicable regulations herein, may be
continued as Nonconformities.  Such signs shall be subject to the provisions of
Chapter 1340 for the elimination of Nonconformities  except as provided in
Section 1230.06.
   The requirements of this chapter shall not apply retroactively to
nonconforming signs except for the maintenance requirements of division 1230.04
(e) and the transition provisions of Section 1230.06.
1230.08 Sign Definitions
(a) Other Definitions Applicable
The definitions in this section are terms used predominantly in connection with
the regulations of this chapter.  Other definitions applicable to the
provisions of this chapter appear in Chapter 1360.
Definitions of two-word terms, such as "canopy sign," are sometimes listed
herein under the second word.
(b) Definitions
   (1) Changeable Copy Area:
   A sign or part thereof designed for frequent changes of message copy,
including message boards, changing signs, and other signs with electronically-
displayed  messages or removable letters.
   (2) Festoons:
   A string of light bulbs not shaded or hooded to prevent their being visible
at the property line, or of ribbons, tinsel, pinwheels, banners, pennants, or
similar devices that is hung outside a structure.
   (3) Number of Signs:
   The number of display surfaces or display devices containing elements
organized, related, and composed to form a unit, whether displayed on a single
or multiple support structures or facades.
   Signs in separate cabinets shall be considered separate signs.  Elements of
a Facade Sign not in cabinets, such as letters or symbols, shall be considered
separate signs if the distance between them exceeds two times the sum of the
longest dimensions of the elements.
Please Note: To view the Number of Signs Graphic, see page 1230-18 of the
printed version of the Barberton Development Code
   A face of a multiple-sided sign shall be considered a separate sign if at
any point the distance between the back of the face and the back of another
face of the same sign exceeds 10 feet.  The two faces of a double-sided sign
are therefore normally considered to constitute a single sign.
   Where in the judgment of the Planning Director copy and decorative matter
are displayed randomly without an organized relationship of elements, all such
elements shall be considered multiple signs even if they are displayed on a
single structure or facade.
   (4) Parapet:
   That portion of a wall that extends above the level of the roof where it
meets the wall.
   (5) Sign:
   Any visual or graphic device that is designed and/or used to communicate--
primarily  through use of words, numbers, characters, and/or proprietary
symbols, as defined herein--a verbal and/or visual message and that is visible
from ground level beyond the lot or building site in which the sign is
displayed.
   Such a device shall be considered a sign whether or not a message is
currently displayed thereupon.  Sign shells, embellish-ments, and support
structures shall be considered part of the sign. 
   (6) Sign, Air-Activated:
   A sign all or any part of which is designed to be moved by action of the air
for the purpose of attracting attention, including signs with spangles or
moveable colored disks but excluding flags, banner signs, or festoons.
   (7) Sign Area:
   The total exposed surface on the largest single sign face of a sign,
including sign background but excluding purely decorative embellishments and
any supporting structure that does not form part of the sign proper. 
   The area of an internally-illuminated sign shall be the area enclosed within
the cabinet.  The area of a sign consisting solely of individual letters or
symbols presented with no added background or decoration against a building
wall or other surface that does not serve solely or principally as a sign, such
as an awning or canopy, shall be the sum of the areas within rectangular
envelopes completely enclosing each separate letter or symbol, excluding
punctuation, or each attached group thereof. 
   The sign area of a sign that displays messages on more than two faces or on
a single contin-uous surface that wraps around the sign (such as a spherical
sign or balloon) shall include only such sign area as may be visible at any one
time from a point on the ground within 200 feet of the sign.
Please Note: To view the Sign Area Graphic, see page 1230-19 of the printed
version of the Barberton Development Code
   (8) Sign, Awning:
   A sign displayed on an awning.
   (9) Sign, Balloon:
   An inflated figure or object the largest dimension of which exceeds 3 feet.
Balloon signs do not include aircraft such as hot air balloons or dirigibles.
   (10) Sign, Banner:
   A sign displayed on lightweight material, either enclosed or not enclosed in
a rigid frame, and secured or mounted so as to allow movement of the material
caused by movement of the air.
   (11) Sign, Bulletin Board:
   A temporary notice, typically of paper, placed upon a bulletin board or
kiosk designed for temporary display of such notices by the public.
   (12) Sign, Canopy:
   A sign displayed on a canopy.
   (13) Sign, Changing:
   A sign with a message copy or other display that is capable of being
periodically changed electronically or electrically, such as a time and
temperature sign or a multi-prism sign.
   (14) Sign Clearance:
   The smallest vertical distance to grade (or to the surface of the roof in
the case of a sign mounted upon or over a roof) from the low-est edge of a sign
extending over that grade or surface, including embellishments but excluding
any pole or support structure attached to the ground or roof.
   (15) Sign Content
   The advertising, informational, or other message directly conveyed by the
characters and symbols used on a sign.  Messages conveyed indirectly by the
dimensions, media, colors, design, materials, sign form, lighting, positioning,
movement, or similar characteristics of a sign--such as emotional messages or
psychological effects--are not considered sign content as used in these
regulations.
   (16) Sign, Drive-Through:
   A sign adjacent to or otherwise visible from drive-through facilities, as
defined herein, and designed to be read by motorists using the facilities.
   (17) Sign Embellishment:
   Any purely decorative framing or trim attached to or superimposed upon a
sign.  Embellishments include framing, decorative roofing, pole covers, and the
like.
   (18) Sign, Entrance:
   A sign located at or near one or more principal or secondary entrances to a
principal building or at a vehicular or pedestrian entrance from the street to
a lot or building site.  An Entrance Sign is not required to include the word
"entrance," the name of the establishment, or any other content.
   (19) Sign, Facade:
   A sign displayed upon a facade of a building.  Facade Signs are either Wall
Signs or Window Signs, as defined herein.
   (20) Sign Face:
   The surface of a sign upon, against, or through which the message is
displayed.
   (21) Sign, Flashing:
   A sign that displays intermittent or flashing light, whether from internal
or external light sources.  Signs that produce moving or anima-ted messages or
images by use of intermittent light are considered Flashing Signs. 
   Changing Signs, as defined herein, shall not be considered flashing signs if
they are made sub-ject to a written agreement by the sign owner and sign user
that there shall be displayed thereupon only messages and images that are not
animated and that remain illuminated and unchanged for a minimum period of 5
seconds at a time and remain fully extinguished with zero illumination for a
minimum intervening period of 2 seconds.
   (22) Sign, Government/Utility:
   1. A sign or display other than an Entrance Sign maintained by a government
body or public utility, including traffic or parking control devices; traffic
control pavement markings; legal notices; warnings of hazards; city, county, or
state historical markers; veter-ans memorials; directional signs to places of
interest; and similar displays, or
   2. Any sign or exterior display required to be displayed by a private party
by government order or regulations, the numbers, dimensions, and other
characteristics regulated herein of which do not exceed those required for
compli-ance therewith.  Such Government/Utility Signs include construction
signs for governmentassisted projects and signs required by legislation on
access for the disabled.
   (23) Sign, Ground:
   A sign displayed on the ground or on a structure or object thereupon, and
not supported by a building roof or facade, or any part or projection of a
building.
Please Note: To view the Sign Height Graphic, see page 1230-20 of the printed
version of the Barberton Development Code
   (24) Sign Height:
   The vertical distance from the highest part of a sign, including support
structures and embellishments, to:
      A. the mean average grade of the land--or level of the roof in the case
of a roof sign--abutting the base of or directly beneath the sign, for:
      1. Facade Signs, and
      2. Awning and Canopy Signs, and
      3. Roof Signs, and
      4. Projecting Signs, and
      5. Ground Signs more than 50 feet from the edge of a public street
pavement, or
      B. the curb level, as defined herein, of the street from which the sign
is intended to be viewed, for all other Ground Signs; or, in the case of a
      lot abutting more than one street, the mean average of the curb levels of
such streets.
Please Note: To view the Sign Height Graphic (2), see page 1230-21 of the
printed version of the Barberton Development Code
   (25) Sign, Illuminated:
   A sign illuminated by a source of artificial light having the principal
purpose of furnishing illumination for the sign whether or not said source is
part of the structure of the sign.
   (26) Sign, Landmark:
   An older sign designated by the City Council that, by virtue of exhibiting
special design qualities characteristic of an earlier era, merits special
regulatory treatment because of its current rarity or unusual significance.
   (27) Sign, Message Board:
   A sign or part thereof on which letters, numbers, or other characters are
manually changeable.  Also called a copyboard, feature board, or readerboard.
   (28) Sign, Moving:
   A sign other than a Changing Sign, as defined herein, or a flag, banner, or
festoons, that has one or more visible parts designed to move for the purpose
of attracting attention.
   (29) Sign, Multi-Prism:
   A sign the message of which is periodically changed by one or more rotating
panels each containing all or a part of alternate messages.
   (30) Sign, ODOT-Regulated
   A sign regulated by the Ohio Department of Transportation under Chapter 5516
of the Ohio Revised Code, Chapter 5501:2-2 of the Ohio Administrative Code,
both as amended, and/or other applicable statutes and regulations.
   (31) Sign, Painted Wall:
   A sign painted or otherwise applied directly on or into the surface of a
wall that does not serve solely as a sign.  Individual letters of metal,
plastic, wood, or similar substantial material mounted directly upon a wall are
not considered a Painted Wall Sign.
   (32) Sign, Permanent:
   A sign that is not a Temporary Sign, as de-fined herein.
   (33) Sign, Portable:
   Any sign that is moveable and not permanently attached to the ground, a
structure, or another sign.  Portable Signs include trailer signs and A-frame
or sandwich board signs.
   (34) Sign, Projected Image:
   A sign consisting of an illuminated image projected through the air onto or
through a wall or other surface.  The sign shall be considered to be the
surface(s) on which the projected image falls.  A Projected Image Sign may be a
Wall Sign, a Ground Sign, a Canopy Sign, or other form of sign.
   (35) Sign, Projecting:
   A sign other than an Awning Sign or Canopy Sign displayed on or from a wall
of a building or a projection therefrom where the sign or the projection
extends more than one foot from the face of the wall.
   (36) Sign, Right-of-Way:
   A sign established in the right-of-way of a public or private street
(including street pave-ment, tree lawn, and sidewalk areas).  Projecting or
Ground Signs mounted outside a right-of-way but extending over it, where
permitted hereunder, shall not be considered Right-of-Way Signs.
   (37) Sign, Roof:
   Any sign that projects above the parapet or the highest point of the roof,
whichever is higher, of that portion of the building on which it is mounted. 
Signs mounted upon vertical roof surfaces, such as mansard roofs, and signs
displayed on pitched roofs that do not extend higher than the peak, are
considered Wall Signs.
   (38) Sign Setback:
   The shortest horizontal distance between the vertical projection of a lot
line and the closest part or projection of a sign.  If no lot line is
specified, the applicable lot line shall be the street line(s).
Please Note: To view the Sign Setback Graphic, see page 1230-22 of the printed
version of the Barberton Development Code
   (39) Sign Spacing:
   The linear horizontal distance measured along a street right-of-way between
the closest parts or projections of any two signs to which a spacing
requirement applies that are located on the same side of the street and that
are visible by traffic moving in the same direction.
Please Note: To view the Sign Spacing Graphic, see page 1230-22 of the printed
version of the Barberton Development Code
   (40) Sign, Street Bench:
   A sign displayed upon a bench provided for public seating at a bus stop or
other location.
   (41) Sign, Temporary:
   A sign that is displayed for a limited duration as allowed in the
regulations.
   (42) Sign, Trailer:
   A portable sign mounted on a trailer designed for support and movement of
the sign.
   (43) Sign, Under Canopy:
   A sign projecting from and beneath a canopy or awning.
   (44) Sign, Vehicle:
   A sign on or within a motor vehicle, boat, aircraft, recreational vehicle,
manufactured home, or similar vehicle that has been parked for the primary
purpose of displaying the sign.
   Vehicle signs do not include:
      A. trailer signs, as defined herein
      B. lettering permanently painted on or attached to on aircraft, boats, or
com-mercial vehicles, as defined herein, that are operating or parked during
the normal course of business
      C. signs on buses or taxicabs that are operating or parked during the
normal course of business
      D. signs on trailer-housed offices or displays on construction sites
      E. signs on manufactured homes used as dwellings
      F. bumper stickers
      G. signs being transported by a vehicle to an installation site.
   (45) Sign, Vending Machine:
   A permanent sign installed by the manufacturer on a fuel pump, ice
dispenser, telephone booth, or other vending machine, or a replacement therefor
of identical or virtually identical dimensions.
Please Note: To view the Roof and Wall Signs Graphic, see page 1230-22 of the
printed version of the Barberton Development Code
   (46) Sign, Wall:
   A sign other than a Roof Sign displayed upon an outside building wall or
roof that does not project more than 2 feet from the face of the wall or higher
than the roof line or the top of the parapet, whichever is higher, of that
portion of the building on which it is mounted.
   (47) Sign, Window:
   A sign displayed in its entirety inside or upon a window in a wall or door
and visible from outside a building.
   (48) Symbol, Proprietary:
   A graphic, logotype, or other representation
   registered as a trade mark or service mark or otherwise associated in
content or in style, color, or other aspect of its appearance with a particular
organization or a particular product or service identified with or promoted by
an organization. 
   A drawing of a sea shell, for example, would be considered a proprietary
symbol if it were stylized to resemble the logotype of Shell Oil.  A graphic of
an apple would be considered a proprietary symbol if stylized to resemble the
logo of the Apple Computer Company.
1230.09  No Discrimination Against Non-Commercial Signs or Speech
   The owner of any sign which is otherwise allowed under this Chapter 1230 may
substitute non-commercial copy in lieu of any other commercial or non-
commercial copy.  This substitution of copy may be made without any additional
approval or permitting.  The purpose of this provision is to prevent any
inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over non-commercial speech, or
favoring of any particular noncommercial message over any other non-commercial
message.  This provision prevails over any more specific provision to the
contrary.
(Ord. 02-2017.  Passed 1-9-17.)
1230.10  Severability
   If any portion of this Chapter 1230 or any regulation contained herein is
held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, it
is the City of Barberton's specific legislative intent that said portion or
regulation is to be deemed severed from this Chapter 1230 and should in no way
affect or diminish the validity of the remainder of Chapter 1230 or any other
sign regulation set forth herein.
(Ord. 02-2017.  Passed 1-9-17.)
Table 1230A: Examples of Sign Classifications
A. Sign Types 
(See Tables 1230B, 1230C, 1230D, and 1230E)
1. Entrance Signs
   Shopping center entrance signs
   Business park entrance signs
   Apartment building entrance signs
   Signs at rear building entrances
   Secondary driveway entrance signs
   Signs at building entrances from parking lot
2. Drive-Through Signs
   Menu board signs
   Drive-up bank ATM signs
3. Right-of-Way Signs
   Bus shelter advertising signs
   Street banners
   Street bench signs located in street ROW
   Sidewalk A-frame signs
   Signs on sidewalk merchandise displays (e.g., sidewalk sales)
   Advertising signs on telephone booths
4. Government/Utility Signs(See 1230.02(a))
   Signs mandated by government agency (e.g., for government-funded projects)
   Traffic control signs (no parking, speed limit)
   Bus stop signs
5. Other Permanent Signs
   Directional signs ("Acme Drug Left 3 Blocks")
   Memorial signs
   No trespassing signs
   Signs on vending machines
   Seat bench signs outside street right-of-way
   Outdoor advertising signs (billboards)
B. Sign Forms 
(See Tables 1230B, 1230C, 1230D, 1230E, 1230F, 1230G)
1. FACADE SIGNS
a. Wall Signs
   Signs mounted on walls or doors
   Banner signs displayed on walls
   Painted wall signs
   Signs consisting of an image projected on a wall
b.  Window Signs
   Signs lettered on window glass in wall or door
   Paper signs mounted on inside or outside of window glass that are visible
from outside
2. GROUND SIGNS
   Monument signs
   Portable, mobile, or trailer signs
   Pole or pylon signs
   Vehicle signs
3. AWNING AND CANOPY  SIGNS
a. Under Canopy Signs
   Signs under strip shopping center canopy
b. Other Signs
   Illuminated (backlit) awning signs
   Theatre marquee signs
   Signs on service station canopies
4. PROJECTING  SIGNS  (See Table 1230F)
   Flags projecting from a wall
   Banners projecting from a wall
   Wood or metal signs projecting from a wall
5. ROOF SIGNS
   Rooftop billboards
   Rooftop building identification signs
C. Sign Duration
1. Temporary Signs 
(See 1230.02(c), 1230.05(c), and Table 1230H)
   Real estate for sale signs
   Yard sale signs
   Help wanted signs
   Special event signs
   Political campaign signs
   Grand opening signs
   Under construction signs
   Portable (mobile) signs (if temporary)
2. Permanent Signs
Signs listed are illustrative only.  Some listed signs may be prohibited if so
provided in this chapter.
Table 1230B: Signs Allowed Without Sign Permit [a]
                                Maximum   Maximum            Maximum
Land Use [b] &  Sign Duration/ Number of Number   Allowable Sign Area Example
Type                            Signs     Applies  Sign Form in Square
                                          to Each:           Feet
                                         Maximum            Maximum
Land Use [b] &  Sign Duration/ Maximum  Number   Allowable Sign
Type                            Number   Applies  Sign Form Area in Example
                                of Signs to Each:           Square
                                                            Feet
A. Vacant or Agricultural
                                                                    "No
1. Permanent Signs              1        frontage G         12      Dumping"
                                                                    Sign
2. Temporary Signs (all types)  1        frontage G         12      Real Estate
                                                                    Sign
B. Single- & Two-Family Residential
                                                                    Home
1. Permanent Signs              1        DU       F         2       Occupation
                                                                    Sign
2. Temporary Signs (all types)  2        --       G [c]     4       Yard Sale
                                                                    Sign
C. Multi-Family Residential, Institutional, Office, or Industrial
1. Permanent Signs              2        lot      G [c]     8       Directional
                                                                    Sign
2. Temporary Signs (all types)  1        lot      G [c]     12      Special
                                                                    Event Sign
D. Principal Use Off-Street Parking Lots or Structures
1. Permanent Signs              2        lot      G or F    12      Time Limit
                                                                    Sign
2. Temporary Signs (all types)  2        lot      G or F    12      "Lot Full"
                                                                    Sign
E. Retail, Retail Office, &
Personal Service
1. Permanent Signs              2        lot      G [c]     12      Directional
                                                                    Sign
2. Temporary Signs:
                                                                    Price
a. Window Signs                 --       --       F         [c]     Promotion
                                                                    Sign
b. All Other Signs              1        lot      G [c]     12      Help Wanted
                                                                    Sign
                                                                    Grand
                                1        g.f. bus F         12      Opening
                                                                    Sign
 
   Note:  Right-of-Way Signs are prohibited.
         Roof Signs are prohibited.
         Signs not allowed under this table may be allowed under Table 1230C.
        
See notes below.
Table 1230C: Total Number of Signs Allowed [j]
Land Use [b]  Maximum   Maximum Number Allowable Sign Maximum Sign
& Sign        Number of Applies to     Form           Area in Square Example
Duration/Type Signs     Each:                         Feet
Land Use [b]  Maximum   Maximum                   Maximum Sign
& Sign        Number of Number     Allowable Sign Area in Square Example
Duration/Type Signs     Applies to Form           Feet
                        Each:
A. Vacant or Agricultural
1. Entrance   1         lot        G              [d]            "Lot for Sale"
Signs                                                            Sign
2. Other                                                         "No Hunting"
Permanent     1         frontage   G              [d]            Sign
Signs
3. Temporary                                                     Under
Signs (all    1         frontage   G              [d]            Construction
types)                                                           Sign
B. Single- & Two-Family Residential
1. Entrance   1         [f]        G              [d]            Development
Signs [e]                                                        Entry Sign
2. Other                                                         Resident Name
Permanent     1         DU         F              [d]            Sign
Signs
3. Temporary                                                     "It's a Boy"
Signs (all    2         --         G [c]          [d]            Sign
types) 
C. Multi-Family Residential, Institutional, Office, Industrial
1. Entrance   1 [g]     frontage   G [c]          [d]            Business Park
Signs                                                            Sign
                                                                 Bldg.
              1         building   F, A, or P    [d]            Identification
                                                                 Sign
2. Other                                                         Hazard Warning
Permanent     4         lot        G [c]          [d]            Sign
Signs
3. Temporary                                                     Help Wanted
Signs (all    1         lot        G [c]          [d]            Sign
types) 
              1         lot        F              [d]            Political Sign
D. Retail, Retail Office, & Personal Service
1. Entrance   1 [g]     frontage   G [c]          [d]            Retail Mall
Signs                                                            Pole Sign
              1         g.f. bus   F              [d]            Retail Mall
                                                                 Wall Sign
              1         u.s. bus   F              [d]            2nd Floor
                                                                 Office Sign
              1         freeway    G [c]          [d]            Gas Station
                        frontage                                 Pole Sign
2. Drive-                                                        Menu Board
Through Signs 2         lot [i]    G [c]          [d]            Sign
[h]
3. Other                                                         Restricted
Permanent     6         lot        G [c]          [d]            Parking Sign
Signs
4. Temporary
Signs:
a. Window     --        --         F              [d]            Fire Sale Sign
Signs
b. All Other  1         lot        G [c]          [d]            Grand Opening
Signs                                                            Sign
              1         g.f. bus   F              [d]            Founder's Day
                                                                 Sale Sign
E. Principal Use Off-Street Parking Lots or Structures
1. Entrance                                                      Lot
Signs         1 [g]     frontage   G              [d]            Identification
                                                                 Sign
2. Other      4         lot        G              [d]            Directional
Signs                                                            Sign
3. Temporary                                                     Special Event
Signs (all    2         lot        G              [d]            Rate Sign
types)
 
   Note:  Right-of-Way Signs are prohibited.
         Roof Signs are prohibited.
Notes for Table 1230B and 1230C
See Tables 1230D, 1230E, 1230F, 1230G, and 1230H for additional regulations
applicable to signs allowed under this table.
Where more than one entry appears for a given land use and sign type, the use
may display each of the signs indicated.
Examples cited are illustrative only and do not limit the kind of sign that may
be displayed.
Table 1230C includes all signs permitted under Table 1230B.  Signs allowed
under Table 1230C but not also under Table 1230B require Sign Permits.
A: Awning or Canopy Sign
DU or HO: Dwelling unit or home occupation
F:  Facade Sign         G:  Ground Sign
Lot:  Per lot or building site
P:  Projecting Sign      R:  Roof Sign
W:  Window Sign   --   :  No restriction
Freeway Frontage:
Each lot frontage that abuts a freeway right-of-way and lies wholly or
partially within 1,200 feet of any part of the pavement of an off-or on-ramp
measured along the freeway right-of-way.
Frontage:  Each lot frontage on a different street.
G.F. Bus: 
Business or other non-residential occupant on the ground floor or ground floor
space designed for a single occupant, like a storefront or office.  Sign
allowed may identify upper-story businesses.
U.S. Bus: 
Business or other non-residential occupant on an secondor third-story or
secondor third-story space designed for a single occupant, like a storefront or
office.
All Types:
All sign types (see 1230.03(b)) not specifically prohibited.
Number of Signs is as defined herein.
[a]  Signs not conforming to restrictions specified in Table 1230B may be
displayed with issuance of a Sign Permit, subject to the restrictions of Table
1230C.  No Signs allowed without a Sign Permit shall be illuminated.
[b]  Land use refers to the character of the use irrespective of the zoning
district.  See 1230.01(c) and Chapter 1360 use definitions.  "Vacant" refers to
undeveloped or cleared land and not to vacant buildings.  For vacant developed
properties the use shall be considered the least restricted use allowed by the
zoning classification.
[c] Ground Sign Substitution: 
At applicant's option, in lieu of the Ground Sign either of the following may
be displayed:
   1. Facade Sign or Awning or Canopy Sign area of no more than 150 percent of
the maximum for a Ground Sign, or
   2. Projecting Sign area of no more than 33 percent of the maximum for a
Ground Sign.
This additional sign area may be added to a Facade, Awning, Canopy, or
Projecting Sign otherwise allowed or may take the form of an additional sign.
[d]  See Table 1230D for maximum sign area.
[e] Residential Entrance Signs
Single- and two-family Entrance Signs are allowed only at street entrances to
developments, or to existing neighborhoods of 50 or more single- or two-family
buildings.  They are not permitted at entrances to individual home sites.
[f]  Per street entrance to development or neighborhood, not per lot.
[g] Large Frontage Developments
Establishments or developments with frontage on a single street that exceeds
300 feet may have one additional Entrance Sign along that street per 300 feet
or fraction thereof of additional frontage.  The additional sign(s) shall
conform to all the requirements applicable to the first sign.  See Table 1230G
for required spacing between such signs that are ground signs.
[h] Drive-Through Signs shall be located in or face rear yards only.
[i]  Lots or building sites having drive-through facilities only.
[j]  Includes signs allowed without Permit under Table 1230B and signs
requiring a Permit.
Table 1230D: Maximum Sign Area
Land Use, Sign     Allowable Sign              Up to a Maximum of:
Form, & Sign Type  Area in Sq. Ft. Per Foot of Without Bonuses With Bonuses [b]
[a]
                                                        Allowable           Up to a Maximum
                                                        Sign Area Per Foot  of:
Land Use, Sign Form, & Sign Type [a]                    in Sq.    of        Without With
                                                        Ft.                 Bonuses Bonuses
                                                                                    [b]
A. Ground Signs, permanent & temporary
1. Entrance Signs
                                                                  lot
a. Vacant and Agricultural                              0.4       frontage  32      96
                                                                  [c]   
b. Single- & 2-Family    Residential                  --        --        32      96
c. Multi-Family Residential,  Institutional, Office, &           lot
Industrial                                              0.4       frontage  32      96
                                                                  [c]
d. Retail, Retail Office, & Personal Service [d]
1. Freeway Signs [e]                                    --        --        300     300
                                                                  lot
2. Other Signs                                          0.5       frontage  32      96
                                                                  [c]
2. Other Ground Signs:
a. Vacant and Agricultural:
1. Zoned Non-Residential                                --        --        24      72
2. All Other                                            --        --        12      36
b. Single- & 2-Family Residential                       --        --        --      --
c. Multi-Family Residential:
1. Temporary Signs                                   --        --        12      36
2. Permanent Signs                                      --        --        8       24
d. Institutional, Office, Industrial, Retail, Retail
Office, & Personal Service [d]:
Permanent Signs                                         --        --        12      36
Temporary Signs                                         --        --        24      32.4
B. Facade, Awning, Canopy, & Projecting Signs [f], permanent and temporary [g]
1. For Land Uses:
a. Single- and 2-Family Residential                     --        --        2       --
b. Multi-Family Residential                             --        --        8       14.8
c. All Other Uses:
1. Facade Signs for Upper-Story Occupants [h]           --        --        8       14.8
2. Cumulative for All Signs                             1         building  --      --
                                                                  frontage
2. For Sign Forms:
a. Awning and Canopy Signs (except Under Canopy Signs)  --        --        40 %    40 %
                                                                            [i]     [i]
b. Under Canopy Signs and Projecting Signs              --        --        12      12
c. Window Signs                                         --        --        40 %    40 %
                                                                            [j]     [j]
 
Notes for Table 1230D
Uses listed in first column refer to use types, not zoning districts.
Maximum sign area limits in this table may be increased under Table 1230I.
Maximum sign areas for signs exempt from Sign Permits are established in Table
1230B.
--:  No restriction.
[a]  Where allowed under Table 1230C.
[b]  See Table 1230I.  Figures exclude bonus for message board.
[c]  Along the single abutting street, alley, internal circulation drive, or
off-street parking area toward which the sign is principally oriented.
[d]  And principal use off-street parking lots or structures.
[e]  Freeway Signs are Ground Signs serving as additional Entrance Signs
allowed under item D1 of Table 1230C for lots with freeway frontage.
[f]  Of window surface area, cumulative for Permanent and Temporary Signs.
[g]  Maximum sign area for a Temporary Sign shall be 150 percent of maximum
area without bonuses allowed in the table for the same form of Permanent Sign.
[h]  Allowed for secondand third-story non-residential occupants only.
[i]  Maximum for Awning and Canopy Signs is the specified percentage of area of
face of awning, canopy, or bench panel on which sign is displayed.  Maximum
shall not apply to theatre marquees.
Table 1230E: Maximum Sign Height
Sign Form & Type Maximum Sign Height in Feet:
Sign Form & Type                             Maximum Sign Height in Feet:
                                             Without Bonuses With Bonuses [a]
A. Permanent Facade Signs:
1. Wall Signs                                20 [b]          --
2. Window Signs                              --              --
B. Permanent Projecting Signs                20 [b]          --
C. Ground Signs
1. Permanent Entrance Signs:
a. Retail, Retail Office, & Personal Service 12 [d]          23.4 [d]
Uses [c]
b. All Other Uses                            8               15.6
2. Other Ground Signs:
a. Permanent Signs                           6               11.7
b. Temporary Signs                           6 [e]           --
D. Other Permanent Signs:
1. Awning & Canopy Signs                     [f]             --
2. Under Canopy Signs                        --              --
E. Temporary Signs not listed above          [g]             --
 
      [a]  See Table 1230I.  Figures exclude bonus for message board.
      [b]  Or the highest point of the wall or parapet of the wall on which the
sign is displayed (or highest point of the roof, for wall signs displayed on
roofs) or the sill of the second floor window, whichever height is the lowest.
      [c]  And principal use off-street parking lots.
      --:  No restriction
      [d]  Freeway Signs
      Maximum height for Ground Sign serving as additional Entrance Sign
allowed under Table 1230C for lots with freeway frontage shall be 35 feet above
the mean average level of the freeway where it abuts the lot.
      [e]  A temporary Ground Sign with a greater sign height may be approved
as a Conditional Use.
      [f]  Highest point of awning, canopy, or panel on which the sign is
displayed.
      [g] Temporary Signs 
      The Building Commissioner may specify a maximum height for a Temporary
Sign for which no maximum is specified herein if he or she determines such
height necessary to protect pedestrian or motor vehicle visibility or other
aspects of public safety.
Table 1230F: Maximum Sign Projection
 
                Maximum Projection in Feet :
                Horizontal Projection From
Sign Form       Building Wall:                Vertical
                Over Street                   Projection Below Other Projection
                Right-of-Way Other            Canopy

Permanent Wall  2            2                --               [a] [b]
Signs
Permanent Under --           --               1.5              [a]
Canopy Signs
Permanent
Awning and
Other Canopy    4 [c]        --               --               [a] [b]
Signs and
Projecting
Signs
 
   [a]  Shall not project horizontally beyond wall or face of awning, canopy,
or panel on or beneath which it is displayed.
   [b]  Shall not project vertically above or below wall or face of awning,
canopy, or panel on which it is displayed.
   [c]  Or 2/3 of width of the sidewalk beneath the sign, whichever is less.
Table 1230G: Minimum Sign Spacing
 
Sign Form                        Minimum Sign Spacing in Feet [a]
Permanent Ground Signs:
   Over 75 Square feet [b]    200
   All Other               --
Permanent Projecting Signs       15
Off-Premise Advertising Devices [c]
 
   [a]  Where required spacing would deny a lot a sign of the specified sign
form and size to which it is entitled under this chapter, minimum spacing shall
be the greatest distance that conforms to other City regulations and that
allows the sign, as determined by the Planning Director.
   [b]  Where allowed by Table 1230D and/or Table 1230I.
   [c] As defined and regulated by the Ohio Department of Transportation.
Table 1230H: Time Limits for Temporary Signs
 
                                    Maximum Period of Display
                 Earliest Display   [a]:                       Minimum Interval
                 Allowed                        Cumulative Per Between Display
                                    At One Time Calendar Year  Periods

Temporary Signs Allowed Without Sign Permit (See Table 1230B):
A. Single Sign   --                 90 days     90 days        --
B. All           --                 30 days     30 days        --
Additional Signs
Temporary Signs
With Sign        [b]          �[b]�       90 days        30 days
Permit:
 
   [a]  Maximum periods apply separately to each sign allowed by Table 1230B. 
The Building Commissioner may issue a Sign Permit with a time limit of less
than the maximum allowable period if he or she determines such limit is
appropriate to minimize adverse impacts on the environment of the sign.
   [b]  As determined by the Building Commissioner and specified in the Sign
Permit. Sign shall be removed within 10 days of Permit expiration. A sign not
conforming to the provisions of this table, such as many real estate signs, may
be allowed as a permanent sign under Table 1230B or 1230C.
Table 1230I: Sign Bonuses
Number Action Taken Bonus for Action Taken:
                    Bonus in Sign Area Bonus in Sign Height [a]
Number Action Taken            Bonus for Action Taken:
                               Bonus in Sign Area     Bonus in Sign Height [a]
A. FOR GROUND SIGNS ONLY:
       Low Ground Sign: [b]
       Height of permanent     25 % of maximum sign
1      Ground Sign is limited  area allowed           ---
       to 60 % or less of
       maximum height allowed
       Landscaping:
       Landscaped area is
       provided at base of
2      permanent Ground Sign   25 % of maximum sign   15 % of maximum height
       that is no less than 3  area allowed           allowed
       times the sign area and
       is approved by Planning
       Director
       Pole Cover
       Decorative cover        15 % of maximum sign   15 % of maximum height
3      encloses pole(s) or     area allowed           allowed
       other support of a
       Ground Sign
       Other Embellishments
       Sign embellishments, as 50 % of maximum sign   15 % of maximum height
4      defined herein, other   area allowed           allowed
       than pole covers, are
       provided
B. FOR ALL SIGNS:
       Message Board: [c]
4      Inclusion of a message  100 % of area of       100 % of height of
       board board in any      message board provided message board provided
       permanent sign
       Maintenance:
       Premises of sign has
5      been issued Maintenance 15 % of maximum sign   15 % of maximum height
       Certificate every year  area allowed           allowed
       from effective date of
       this chapter
6      Design:
       A. Design of permanent
       sign is prepared by
       professional graphic
       artist and is approved  10 % of maximum sign   10 % of maximum height
       by Planning Director    area allowed           allowed
       [d] as largely
       consistent with Table
       1230K [e]
       B. Sign is custom-
       designed for facility   15 % of maximum sign   10 % of maximum height
       at which it is          area allowed           allowed
       displayed
       External Illumination
7      Sign has external       20 % of maximum sign   ---
       illumination only or no area allowed
       illumination [f]
       Individual Letters
       Sign consists of
       individual characters
8      without internal        25 % of maximum sign   15 % of maximum height
       illumination mounted    area allowed           allowed
       directly on an
       unpainted brick, stone,
       or stained wood surface
 
Notes for Table 1230I
Bonuses may not be used for:
   1. signs 75 square feet or more in sign area without bonuses, or
   2. signs not requiring a Sign Permit
   3. signs for individual single- or two-family residences.
Bonuses are added to maximums otherwise allowed.
All computations shall be based on the sign area or sign height allowed before
any bonuses have been applied.
[a] Height bonuses apply to Ground Signs only.
[b]  See also 1240.02(e)(8), Vision Clearance Triangle, which may prohibit
certain low signs near intersections and driveways.
[c]  Under 1230.05(a)(2) message boards and other changeable copy areas shall
be no more than 50 percent of the sign area of a permanent sign. 
Message Board Bonus may be used on only one sign per establishment.
Under Section 1230.05(c)(2), no temporary Ground Sign or any Temporary Sign
with a changeable copy area is permitted for uses having changeable copy areas
included in permanent signs.
[d]  The Planning Director may at his or her discretion refer such approval to
a City design review body.
[e]  Design Bonus is not available to signs consisting of periodically changed
bills or posters.  Full conformance to all Table 1230K design guide-lines is
not required so long as substantial conformance is achieved.
[f]  Bonus applies only to signs for which internal illumination is otherwise
permitted under 1230.04(c).
Table 1230J: Required Contents of Sign Permit
Application for Permanent Signs
1. Name, address, and phone number of applicant.
2. If a Temporary Sign, the proposed beginning and ending dates of its display.
3. If an electric sign, the Underwriters Laboratories number.
4. Location of property on which sign is to be displayed.
5. Sign Permit fee.
6. A refundable deposit or financial guarantee, as provided in division 1230.05
(c)(4) or 1230.07(a)(5).
7. A description of the use or proposed use of the property to which the sign
is to be accessory.
8. The name, address, and telephone number of the party that is to produce and
erect the sign.
9. A plat of survey or site plan showing the position of the sign in relation
to nearby structures, rights-of-way, and street grade; and locations and sign
areas of all existing signs and other proposed signs on the same premises.
10. Plans and specifications showing:
   A. all dimensions of the sign
   B. proposed sign area, sign height, and other quantitative standards
established in this chapter as such terms are defined herein, together with the
measurements and calculations used to derive the figures claimed
   C. methods of construction and support
   D. illumination type, intensity, & placement
   E. all electrical components.
11. An elevation drawing showing all exposed sign surfaces and all messages or
representations thereupon, accurately depicted as to shape, size, color, and
proportion, and, for signs attached to exterior building surfaces or
projections, the placement of the sign in relation to roof lines, windows,
doors, wall corners, and other architectural features.
12. An affidavit of the party to erect the sign that the sign conforms to all
engineering requirements for safety in City codes. 
13. A written statement of the owner or occupant of the property, if different
from the applicant, granting permission to display the sign.
14. Complete computations for all Table 1230I bonuses claimed accompanied by
documentation that the sign qualifies for each bonus.
15. Any other information the Building Commissioner requires to determine
whether the application conforms to the requirements of City codes.
Note:  These requirements do not apply to signs exempt from Permit requirement
under 1230.02(b) nor to unregulated signs under 1230.02(a).
The Building Commissioner may waive items required herein under 1230.07(a)(2).
Table 1230K: Design Guidelines for Signs
   (The standards in this table are advisory only.)
1. Shape
A single simple, common geometric form such as  rectangle, square, circle, or
oval is often preferable to a more elaborate shape or combination of shapes.
2. Color
Colors used should provide sufficient contrast between the message and the
background of the sign to assure readability. 
Use of no more than 4 colors (including black and white and the background
color of the sign) is preferable. 
Use of bright colors as accents is preferred to their use as dominant colors. 
Dark, subdued hues are preferred to de-emphasize visible support structures
like pylons or projecting sign hangers, especially if such structures are not
ornamental. 
3. Materials
The simple, classic beauty of traditional natural materials like wood, stone,
or brick is often prefer-able if such materials are largely unpainted (but
rated for exterior exposure) so that their natural beauty is exposed.
4. Lettering Size
Lettering on signs intended to be read from the street should be no larger than
required for readability from the street, taking into account the prevalence of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic, traffic speeds, and setback of the sign.  In
most cases, letter heights exceeding 1.5 feet should not be needed for
legibility. 
On signs intended to be read by motorists in the street, lettering too small to
be safely readable at prevailing traffic speeds should be avoided.
Use of no more than two sizes of lettering, excluding lettering on changeable
copy areas, is preferred.
5. Fonts (Type Faces or Styles)
Use of no more than two type fonts on a sign is preferred. 
The number of fonts used for tenant wall signs in multi-tenant properties like
shopping centers should not be excessive, and such signs should share a common
base line.  Use of simpler fonts or highly legible versions of stylized fonts
is preferable for readability.  For longer words and messages, upperand lower-
case letters are more readable than all upper-case.
6. Message
Since motorists have only seconds to absorb and react to a sign's message, the
number of words and symbols should be kept to a minimum on signs designed to be
read by motorists in the street.  Symbols can sometimes be used as substitutes
for words.  The sign should not appear "busy," cluttered, or crowded. 
Signs intended to be read primarily by pedestrians or motorists in stopped or
slowly-moving vehicles may have more extensive messages.
The sign should be oriented around a single dominant symbol, word, or unified
combination of sym-bols and/or words, with all other elements clearly
subordinate.
7. Blank Space
The sign should contain sufficient blank space around the copy for legibility.
8. Supports
Poles or other bases for Ground Signs should be part of the overall sign
design.  They should be ornamental in nature to complement the sign face and of
a material (such as brick, stone, wood, or ironwork) or color and of
proportions that enhance the sign face. 
Supporting structures for Projecting Signs should be ornamental.
Chapter 1240
Other Planning and Improvements Standards
1240.01 General Regulations
(a) Types of Development Affected
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the following actions undertaken
on or after the date of effect of this chapter:
   (1) all applications for subdivision approval within the City of Barberton,
and
   (2) all applications for Site Plan Review approval of site condominiums and
site coopera-tives, as defined herein, within the City, and
   (3) all applications for Site Plan Review appro-val of Planned Unit
Developments within the City, except to the degree that relief is granted as
part of the PUD approval, and
   (4) construction of a new or replacement building on an existing lot within
the City as provided in division 1240.09(a)1B.
(b) Mandatory and Advisory Standards
Standards defined with the word "shall" represent mandatory provisions. 
Standards defined with the words "should," "suggested," or "recommended" are
advisory guidelines for use in plat and plan appro-val as the Planning
Commission deems applicable.  Those defined with the word "may" are permissive.
Where a standard is not clearly defined as either mandatory, advisory, or
permissive, it shall be construed as mandatory.
For convenience, advisory guidelines are italicized.
(c) Party Responsible for Compliance
As used herein, the "developer" shall be the subdivider of a subdivision, the
developer of a site con-dominium or site cooperative, or the owner of a lot on
which a new or replacement building is to be established under division 1240.09
(a)1B.  The developer shall be responsible for compliance with the provisions
of this chapter.
(d) Exceptions
Exceptions to the provisions of a mandatory provi-sion shall be granted only by
means of a Variance, Planned Unit Development approval, Amendment, or similar
action authorized by Chapter 1310.
Exceptions to advisory guidelines may be approved as part of subdivision
approval or Site Plan Review without any special procedure.
(e) Guarantees
The improvements required by this chapter shall be guaranteed as provided in
division 1350.02 if they are not completely installed and accepted:
   (1) for a new subdivision, prior to approval of a Final Plat
   (2) for a Planned Unit Development, prior to approval of a Final Plan
   (3) for a site condominium or site cooperative, prior to approval of a Final
Site Plan
   (4) for improvements within existing subdivisions, site condominiums, or
site cooperatives, prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
(f) Application to All Improvements
Mandatory planning and improvement standards of this chapter shall apply to
streets, sidewalks, utility lines, and other facilities and areas that are
voluntarily installed or established as well as to those that are mandated.
(g) Construction Details
Construction details not specified herein shall be as provided in other City
ordinances or else as provided in standards approved by the City Engineer.
1240.02 Streets and Alleys
(a) Provisions Applicable to All Streets
   (1) Conformity to Official Map
   The street system in a development shall conform to the provisions of the
Official Map and Comprehensive Plan of the City.
   (2) Street Extensions
      A. Extension of New Streets
      New streets shall extend to the boundary lines of the development or
phase thereof being developed to facilitate continuity with future adjacent
developments, except where such extension is undesirable due to topography,
transition to a different land use, use of culs-de-sac, or where the Planning
Commission otherwise finds extension to be impractical or unnecessary.
      B. Extension of Existing Streets
      Developments shall provide for the continuation of existing streets that
temporarily terminate at or near their boundaries  Such extensions shall
conform to all applicable requirements of this chapter even when the existing
street does not.
      Notwithstanding the provisions of Table 1240B, no new street that is a
continuation of an existing street shall have a lesser right-of-way width than
the existing street.
      Subject to Table 1240A, a new street may have a narrower pavement width
than an existing street of which it is a continuation.  It shall in such case
provide a tapered transition approved by the City Engineer.
   (3) Stub Streets
      A. Reservation Strip
      A 2-foot reservation strip shall be provided in the name of the City of
Barberton at the end of all stub streets. 
      B. Temporary Turn-Arounds
      A street stub over 200 feet in length shall be provided with a fully
graveled temporary turn-around on a right-of-way or easement at the stub end
unless there are no developed lots or developed building sites along the stub. 
      When the street is extended and the stub is removed, the developer shall
make provision for the reversion to abutting properties of the turn-around
right-of-way or easement not required for the extension.  When extending the
stub street, the developer shall remove any temporary turn-around and regrade
and reseed the right-of-way as necessary to conform to the requirements of this
chapter for a right-of-way for a continuous street.
      A temporary turn-around on a Minor Street shall conform to the dimensions
required herein of a permanent cul-de-sac.  If the Planning Commission
determines that ex-tension of a stub on a Minor Street is unlikely within 2
years of the date of approval of the Preliminary Plat, Plan, or Site Plan, it
may require a financial guarantee for the conversion of the turn-around into a
permanent cul-de-sac.
      C. Sign Identification
      Entries to stub streets over 200 feet in length shall be identified with
signage indicating the street is not a through street.
      D. Stubs on Minor and Collector Streets
      Stubs on minor and collector streets shall conform to divisions 1240.02
(c)(6) and 1240.02(d)(6).
   (4) Street Classification
   A Site Plan or subdivision plat shall show the proposed classification of
all streets in the development as marginal access or frontage roads, minor
streets, secondary collector streets, primary collector streets, secondary
arterial streets, primary arterial streets, or freeways.
   Classifications shall be based on the Compre-hensive Plan and on expected
traffic volumes on each street.
   (5) Street Naming
   Names of new streets shall not duplicate or be similar in spelling or
pronunciation to names of existing streets in the service area of the Barberton
Post Office that they are not extensions of irrespective of designations as
"street," "avenue," "road," and the like. 
   Street names shall be submitted to the Postmaster and the 911 Coordinator of
the Barber-ton Police Department for review before being approved by the City.
   A new street that is an extension of an existing street shall be given the
name thereof.
   A change in the direction of a street by more than 45 degrees measured from
the center line should be accompanied by a change in street name unless the
original alignment is resumed within a distance of 500 feet.
   The final word of a street name should conform to the designation system
specified below.
 
Predominant Direction Streets Over 1,000 Feet Long Shorter Streets
Straight Streets:
North-South           "Street"                     "Court"
East-West             "Avenue"                     "Place"
Diagonal              "Road"                       "Way"
Curving Streets       "Drive"                      "Lane" or "Circle"
 
   (6) Non-Residential Streets Near Railroads and Freeways
   To improve utilization of the investment in streets, reduce land devoted to
them, create usable lots or building sites, and allow for possible future grade
separation, non-freeway streets in non-residential areas running parallel or
approximately parallel to railroads, freeways, or similar obstacles shall be
separated therefrom by lots no less than 150 feet deep.
   (7) Street Grades
   Whenever practicable, street grades should avoid the necessity for excessive
cuts and fills or undue removal of ground cover and tree growth and steep
grades on driveways and front yards.
   Combinations of steep grades and curves in streets should be avoided.
   (8) Vertical Curves (Changes in Grade)
   All changes in street grade of over 1 percent shall be connected by vertical
curves of a length in feet not less than:
      A. 20 times the algebraic difference between the rates of grade in feet
per hundred, for arterial streets
      B. 15 times this difference, for all other streets.
   (9) Vertical Visibility
   Vertical visibility shall conform to the regula-tions of the Ohio Department
of Transporta-tion in effect on the date of approval of a Preliminary Plat,
Preliminary PUD Plan, or Site Plan.
   (10) Horizontal Curves
   Deflection of a continuous street center line by more than 10 degrees shall
require a circular horizontal curve with a center line radius of curvature not
less than provided for horizontal curves in Table 1240C.
   (11) Horizontal Visibility
   Grading and obstacle removal shall assure that minimum horizontal visibility
at a height of 3 feet above finished street pavement at the center line shall
be the following distances measured along center lines:
      Minor Streets:      300 feet
      Collector Streets:   500 feet
      Arterial Streets:      800 feet.
   (12) Tangents Between Reverse Curves
   On arterial and collector streets, there shall be projected between reverse
curves a tangent no less than:
      A. 300 feet for primary arterial streets
      B. 100 feet for secondary arterials and primary collectors
      C. 50 feet for all other streets.
   (13) Half Streets
   Except where approved by the Planning Commission, half streets shall not be
platted or dedicated except to complete an existing half street.  A developer
shall, however, dedicate the other half of a dedicated or platted half street
that is adjacent to his or her development.
   (14) Private Streets
   Rights-of-way for all streets and alleys shall be dedicated to the public
except where the Planning Commission determines private streets or alleys to be
desirable.
   Private streets and alleys shall conform to all regulations herein
applicable to public streets.
   (15) Street Maintenance Prior to Acceptance
   The developer shall maintain a street segment not yet conveyed to a public
agency or homeowners association in passable condition once any premises along
such segment become occupied.
   (16) Developments Along  Substandard Streets
   A development or portion thereof abutting one or both sides of an existing
street that does not conform to the regulations of this chapter for right-of-
way and pavement width shall along its frontage on that side of the street:
      A. dedicate land to bring the right-of-way width into conformity with
that required for that side of the street, and
      B. construct additional pavement width and new curb and gutter to bring
pavement width into conformity with that required for that side of the street,
and
      C. install storm drainage systems as required herein on that side of the
street.
   The Planning Commission may waive any one or more of these requirements for
developments with less than 300 feet of frontage on the applicable side of the
substandard street if it determines that adjacent segments of the street are
unlikely to be made conforming to such standard.
   (17) Street and Alley Vacations
   Vacations of streets and alleys shall be approved as provided in Table
1320A.
   (18) Improvement Standards
   Streets and alleys shall be constructed to the improvement standards of
division 1240.09(d).
   (19) Sidewalks
   Sidewalks shall conform to the requirements of division 1240.09(e).
   (20) Reservation and Dedication
   Streets and alleys shall be reserved and dedicated as provided in Section
1240.04.
(b) Arterial Streets and Freeways
   (1) Continuity
   Arterial streets should be continuous over long distances with no jogs,
stubs, or T intersections with other arterials.
   (2) Design
   Arterial streets should have straight alignments designed to move large
volumes of traffic at high speeds.
   (3) Parking
   No on-street parking should normally be allowed on arterial streets.  On-
street parking on major streets represents the most costly location for
parking, reduces the capacity of the street, diminishes visibility for cars
entering the arterial, and causes accidents. 
   On-street parking may be allowed as an interim measure until adequate off-
street parking can be provided.  It may also be allowed during non-peak hours
if the arterial's maximum capacity is not needed then.
   (4) Other Standards
   Arterial streets and freeways shall conform to the provisions of Tables
1240A, 1240B, and 1240C.
(c) Collector Streets
   (1) Provision in New Developments
   New developments shall provide access from minor streets to arterial streets
by incorporating new, or extensions of existing, collector streets unless the
development abuts an existing collector or the Planning Commission otherwise
determines that a collector street is not needed for proper traffic flow.
   (2) Continuity
   Collector streets should be continuous between minor streets and arterials. 
   They should not offer straight, continuous pas-sage from one arterial to
another and so encourage traffic to use collectors as bypasses. 
   Collectors on opposite sides of an arterial should not be continuous across
the arterial so as to encourage through traffic. 
   (3) Design
   Particularly in residential areas, collectors should be designed as loops or
with circuitous alignments or with other features to discourage their use as
arterial bypasses.
   (4) Single-Family Driveway Access
   Single- and two-family dwellings in new developments should avoid having
driveways onto collector streets.
   (5) Parking
   On-street parking may be permitted but should be avoided where possible on
collector streets. 
   (6) Stubs
   Stubs should be provided for collector streets in new developments adjacent
to undeveloped land planned for a similar land use so that collectors may be
continuous through multiple developments. 
   Where there is a danger of traffic from businesses using residential
collectors, stubs should not be provided and collectors should be com-plete
within the development.
   (7) Serve Activity Centers
   Collector streets in residential areas should be routed to serve activity
centers such as schools, churches, and shopping areas.
   (8) Other Standards
   Collector streets shall conform to the provisions of Tables 1240A, 1240B,
and 1240C.
(d) Minor Streets and Alleys
   (1) Continuity
   Minor streets should not be continuous for extended distances and should be
designed to carry traffic from a limited number of lots or building sites to a
collector street. 
   To discourage through traffic and speeds over 25 to 30 mph, minor streets
should intersect frequently with collector and other minor streets,
particularly in residential areas. 
   (2) Design
   Minor streets should be designed solely to pro-vide access to the properties
they abut and should not be attractive for use in place of collectors or
arterials for high-speed, non-local through traffic.  Designs such as narrow
pave-ment widths, curved alignments, loop streets, T intersections, eyebrows,
and culs-de-sac should be used to this end. 
   (3) Parking
   Minor Streets may provide on-street parking. In low-density residential
areas or other areas that will not normally require much or any on-street
parking, one or both parking lanes may be eliminated. 
   (4) Spacing
   Spacing of minor streets should be guided by the standards for street jogs
in division 1240.02(e)(7) and maximum block length in Table 1240F.
   (5) Width
   Minor streets should be no wider than required for reasonable convenience
and safety for low volumes of slow-moving traffic and for any parking not
provided off-street.  Especial-ly in residential areas, they should be narrow
enough to discourage high traffic speeds.
   (6) Stubs
   Because they constrain the design of abutting tracts and may remain as stubs
permanently, no stubs of minor streets should be planned in any development
except one that is a phase of a larger development for which a Preliminary Plat
or Site Plan has been approved.
   (7) Depth of Loop Streets
   To avoid backtracking movements, loop streets should not be deeper than 700
feet. 
   (8) Alleys
   Alleys may be provided in both residential and non-residential
developments. 
   No alley shall dead-end unless provided with a turn-around approved by the
City Engineer. 
   No alley shall connect directly to an arterial street.
   (9) Cul-de-Sac Streets
   Special regulations for cul-de-sac streets shall be as provided in Table
1240D.
   (10) Traffic in Residential Areas
   The design of minor streets serving extensive areas of multi-family
residential or non-resi-dential development should not encourage traffic
generated by this development to use minor streets in single- and two-family
areas.
   (11) Other Standards
   Minor streets and alleys shall conform to the standards of Tables 1240A,
1240B, 1240C, and 1240D.
(e) Intersections
   (1) Multi-Leg Intersections
   Intersections with more than four legs--such as can be created by diagonal
streets--should be avoided, especially on arterial streets.
   (2) Angle of Intersection
   Intersections should be at right angles or as close as possible thereto. 
   Streets shall not intersect at angles of less than 70 degrees or more than
110 degrees.
   Streets shall remain in the angle of intersection for at least 100 feet
beyond the point of inter-section of street pavements.
   (3) Classification of Intersecting Streets
   To enhance safety and facilitate traffic movement, arterials should be
intersected only by freeways, other arterials, collectors, and frontage or
marginal access roads.  Minor streets other than frontage and marginal access
roads should intersect only other minor streets and collectors. 
   Culs-de-sac should not intersect other culs-de-sac but should intersect only
relatively continuous minor or collector streets.
   Alleys shall not intersect arterial streets.
   (4) T Intersections
   Three-way or T intersections between two minor streets and between minor
streets and collectors should be used when possible in lieu of cross or four-
way intersections because of their greater efficiency and safety. 
   (5) Spacing
   Distance between intersections on arterial streets should not be less than
1,000 feet.
   To avoid conflicts and allow for future grade separation, intersections on
all streets should where possible be at least 150 feet from an at-grade
intersection with a railroad.
   (6) Intersection Right-of-Way Lines
   Street right-of-way lines at intersections shall be:
      A. rounded with a minimum radius as follows:
 
Alleys:              20 feet
Culs-de-Sac          25 feet
Other Minor Streets: 25 feet
Collector Streets:   25 feet
Arterial Streets:    30 feet
 
      B. cut off by a straight line through the points of tangency of an arc
with such a radius.
   Where streets of different classifications inter-sect, the larger of the
specified radii shall be used.
   (7) Jogs at Intersections
      A. Minor and Collector Streets
      To avoid hazardous traffic movements, the center lines of two minor or
collector streets intersecting oppo-site sides of a third street that is an
arterial or collector street shall be:
      1. aligned with each other, or
      2. separated by no less than 125 feet between center lines.
      B. Exception
      The requirements of division (7)A shall not apply to intersections on a
divided thoroughfare if there are no median breaks at either intersection.
      C. Arterial Streets
      The center lines of two arterial streets intersecting opposite sides of a
third street of any classification within 1,000 feet of each other shall be
aligned with each other.
   (8) Vision Clearance Triangle
      A. Definition
      The Vision Clearance Triangle is the triangular area formed by:
      1. the right-of-way lines of streets and/or railroads and/or boundaries
of internal access driveways between:
      a. their at-grade intersection, and
Please Note: To view the Vision Clearance Triangle Graphic, see page 1240-9 of
the printed version of the Barberton Development Code
      b. two points at the distances specified in the table below from such
intersection along each such line, and
      2. a straight line connecting these two points.
Intersection Between Distance in Feet
Intersection Between             Distance in Feet
Street & street                  20
Street & railroad                20
Street & alley                   10
Street & driveway:
Single- and two-family driveways 5
All other driveways              10
Driveway & internal access drive 10
 
      B. Regulations
      Within this Triangle, there shall be permitted:
      1. no fence, hedge, wall, screening, low free-standing sign, or other
solid obstruction that:
      a. has a fence height, as defined herein, of over 4.5 feet, or
      b. has an opacity, as defined herein, of over 25 percent above a fence
height level of 2.5 feet, and
      2. no overhanging object, such as a tree branch or pole sign or
projectting sign, with a clearance of less than 8 feet above the level of the
surface of the street, drive, or railroad where the center lines intersect.
      Height and clearance shall be as measured from the street curb or, where
no curb exists, from the pavement edge closest to the obstruction.
      These restrictions take precedence over any other requirements of this
Code with which they may conflict.
Please Note: To view the Obstructions in Vision Clearance Triangle Graphic, see
page 1240-9 of the printed version of the Barberton Development Code
      C. Exceptions
      The following obstructions shall be exempt from these provisions:
      1. trunks of trees existing on the effective date of this provision
      2. utility poles
      3. poles, pylons, and support structures, such as for signs, and similar
structures not exceeding a cumulative 1 foot in width or diameter for each
structure
      4. Permitted Public Uses, as defined in Group 3 of Table 1130G
      5. all obstructions in the C-D Downtown Commercial District.
   (9) Grade at Intersections
   Street grades close to intersections shall be as provided in note [b] of
Table 1240C.
   (10) Ramps
   Ramps for wheelchairs and other vehicles shall be installed at intersections
as provided in division 1240.09(e)(8).
(f) Curb Cuts and Driveways
   (1) Standards
   Driveways shall conform to the standards of Table 1240E.
   (2) Abandoned Driveways
   The owner of a lot or building site abutting a curb cut that is no longer in
use shall restore the area bounded by the edges of the curb cut, the edge of
the street pavement (excluding curb and gutter), and the property line to a
condition conforming to Section 1240.09 and other current City standards for
curbs, sidewalks, and tree lawns.
   (3) Downtown Driveways
   To control hazards and inconveniences to pedestrian circulation, in the CD
Downtown Commercial District driveways across public sidewalks shall be a
Conditional Use.
   (4) Driveways for Single-Family Uses on Arterials
      A. Arterial Drives Prohibited
      To avoid hazardous backing movements onto arterial streets and to
minimize the number of curb cuts, homes in new single- and two-family
developments shall not have driveways onto such streets but only onto:
      1. arterial frontage roads, or
      2. collector or, preferably, minor streets within the development, or
      3. alleys along rear lot lines.
      A plat containing single- or two-family lots or building sites that abut
an arterial street shall contain plat language prohibiting motor vehicle access
thereto from such lot or building sites. 
      Screening shall be provided conform-ing to Chapter 1220 along the lot or
building site line abutting the arterial. Such lots or sites shall have
permanent access from an existing or planned non-arterial street intersecting
or running more or less parallel to the arterial.
      B. Exceptions
      The Planning Director may grant an exception to the requirements of
division (f)(4)A for:
      1. lots or building sites with a mini-mum width of 100 feet and no more
than one curb cut each, or
      2. lots within a largely developed block where many other lots have
direct access to the arterial.
Please Note: To view the Single-Family Residential Along Arterial Streets
Graphic, see page 1240-11 of the printed version of the Barberton Development
Code
      C. Other Standards
      Single- and two-family driveways shall conform to applicable standards of
Table 1240E.
   (5) Driveways for Other Uses on Arterials
   Driveways onto an arterial street of residential and non-residential uses
other than single- and two-family residential shall conform to the requirements
of Table 1240E.
   (6) Exceptions
   The Planning Commission may approve a Special Exception to the provisions of
divisions (f)(4) and (f)(5) where:
      A. left turns in and out of driveways are controlled by driveway
channelization or highway medians, or
      B. other measures reduce the harmful impact of closely-spaced curb cuts
on traffic movement and safety, or
      C. conformity to any of these provi-sions would deny all reasonable vehi-
cular access to the lot or building site, in which case the number and location
of driveways allowed shall be such as come closest to conformi-ty with these
provisions while still allowing such access.
   Separation of a driveway from a street inter-section shall in no case be
less than 15 feet on the near side, as defined herein, and 5 feet on the far
side, as also defined herein.
Table 1240A: Minimum Street and Alley Pavement Width Standards
Classification Driving Lanes Parking Lanes Pavement Width[a]
               Number Width  Number Width
                                           Driving Lanes Parking Lanes Pavement
Classification                             Number Width  Number Width  Width[a]

1.  Alleys:                               1      14     0      --     14
2.  Marginal Access Roads, Frontage Roads 2      11 [c] 0      --     22
[b]
3. Culs-de-Sac & Minor Streets Under 1,000 2      11 [c] 0      --     22
feet long
4. Other Minor Streets:
A.  Parking on Both Sides                 2      10     2      8      36
B. Parking on One Side                     2      10     1      8      28
C. Off-Street Parking Only [d]             2      11     0      --     22
5. Secondary Collector Streets:
A. Parking on Both Sides                   2      11     2      8      38
B. Parking on One Side                     2      11     1      8      30
C. Off-Street Parking Only [d]             2      11     0      --     22
6. Primary Collectors/Secondary Arterials  2      12     2      10     44
7. Primary Arterials                       2      12     2      12 [e] 48 [f]
                                           4      12     2      12 [e] 92 [g]
8. Freeways                                [h]    [h]    [h]    [h]    [h]
9. Streets with Medians                    [i]    [i]    [i]    [i]    [i]
 
Notes for Table 1240A
Except as specifically provided otherwise, all standards in this table are
mandatory.
For pedestrian ways, see Table 1240I.
[a]      Pavement width is sum of widths of driving and parking lanes in
columns to the left.  It includes curbs and gutters.
[b]      A planting strip no less than 20 feet wide and landscaped as approved
by the Planning Director shall be provided between the pavement of a frontage
road and that of the adjacent road.
[c]      May be reduced to 10 feet adjacent to a parking lane.
[d]      These standards shall be used only if the Planning Commission
determines that needs for occupant and visitor parking can be completely met
with off-street spaces.
[e]      Parking lanes to be used for temporary parking for vehicular
breakdowns.  On-street parking should not be permitted on these streets except
possibly during off-peak hours, where volumes during those hours permit.  The
greater width of parking lanes on primary arterial streets is based on their
part-time use for, and ultimate full-time conversion to, driving lanes.
[f]      To allow suitable intersection design, shall be increased by
dedication or as a street easement in the amount of 10 feet above this standard
on each side within 150 feet of the intersection with another primary arterial.
[g]      Includes a 20-foot-wide median.
[h]      Standards for freeways should be based on detailed engineering
studies.
[i]      A street with a median shall conform to the same standards as the
street in this table representing its functional classification with the
addition of a landscaped median 12 feet or 40 feet in width.
Table 1240B:  Minimum Street & Alley Right-Of-Way Width Standards
 
                        
                           
                     -             
                           
                                              Frontage Road:    Right-of-Way
 Pavement Tree    Sidewalk Second   Utilities                   Width:
 [a]      Lawn[b] [c]      Sidewalk ROW[d]    Pavement Planting Highest Lowest
                                              [a]      Strip    Total   Total
                                                                        [e]
                                                                             Frontage Road:    Right-of-Way
                                   Pavement Tree Sidewalk Second   Utilities                   Width:
                                   [a]      Lawn [c]      Sidewalk ROW[d]    Pavement Planting Highest Lowest
                                            [b]                              [a]      Strip    Total   Total
                                                                                                       [e]
1.  Alleys:                       12       --   --       --       --        --       --       12      12
2. Marginal Access & Frontage      22       --   --       --       --        --       --       22      22
Roads [i]
3. Culs-d e-Sac & Minor Streets    22       5 x  0/3/4/5  0/3/4/5  5 x 2     --       --       52      48
Under 1,000 feet long                       2
4. Other Minor Streets :
A. Parking on  Both Sides         36       5 x  0/3/4/5  0/3/4/5  5 x 2     --       --       66      62
                                            2
B. Parking on One Side             28       5 x  0/3/4/5  0/3/4/5  5 x 2     --       --       56      52
                                            2
C. Off-Street Parking Only         22       5 x  0/3/4/5  0/3/4/5  5 x 2     --       --       52      48
                                            2
5. Secondary Collectors:
A. Parking on Both Sides [f]       38       5 x  4/5      4/5      5 x 2     --       --       68      66
                                            2
B. Parking on One Side [f]         30       5 x  4/5      4/5      5 x 2     --       --       60      58
                                            2
C. Off-Street Parking Only         22       5 x  4/5      4/5      5 x 2     --       --       52      50
                                            2
6. Primary Collectors/ Secondary  44       5 x  4/5      4/5      5 x 2     22       20       118 [g] 78
Arterials                                   2
                                   48       5 x  5        5        5 x 2     22       20       122 [g] 82
7.  Primary Arterials                      2
                                   92       5 x  5        5        5 x 2     22       20       166 [g] 126
                                            2
8. Freeways                        [h]      --   --       --       --        [h]      [h]      [h]     [h]
9. Streets with Medians            [j]      [j]  [j]      [j]      [j]       [j]      [j]      [j]     [j]
 
Notes for Table 1240B
Except as specifically provided otherwise, all standards in this table are
mandatory.
Required minimum ROW width is sum of the widths required for facilities in the
columns to the left that are required or otherwise provided in the ROW.
For pedestrian ways, see Table 1240I.
All standards are in feet.
"x 2":  Two provided, one on each side of street
[a]      From Table 1240A.
[b]      Tree lawn that includes utilities ROW shall be 10 feet wide.  See note
[d].  Tree lawn requirements in commercial, office, and industrial areas shall
be as provided in 1240.09(d)(7).  Tree lawns are not required where no
sidewalks or utility ROW's are provided within the street ROW.  In tree lawns
where no trees are to be installed, minimum width of tree lawn shall be 3 feet.
[c]      As provided in Table 1240I.  Multiple figures separated by slashes
represent the most common alternative requirements.
[d]      10-foot-wide utilities ROW coextensive with 5-foot-wide tree lawn; net
of 5 feet over minimum tree lawn width for utilities ROW.  Not required if
utilities are not located in street ROW.  Where no tree lawn is required,
utilities ROW width shall be 10 feet.  The City Engineer may approve a narrower
utilities ROW.
[e]      Lowest total figure applies to residential area.  Total may be even
lower in a commercial, office, or industrial area.  Lowest total figures assume
normal requirements for tree lawns, utilities ROW's, and narrowest allowable
sidewalk on both sides of the street.  Where these facilities are not required,
or where requirements differ on different sides of the street, totals may be
lower.
[f]      Permitted but not normally recommended.
[g]      With frontage road.
[h]      Standards for freeways should be based on detailed engineering
studies.
[i]      Frontage roads are required only when mandated by the Planning
Commission.
[j]      A street with a median shall conform to the same standards as the
street in this table representing its functional classification with the
addition of a landscaped median 12 feet or 40 feet in width and a corresponding
increase in the right-of-way width.
Please Note: To view the Street Cross-Section Graphic, see page 1240-15 of the
printed version of the Barberton Development Code
Table 1240C: Other Street and Alley Standards
                          Centerline Grade:    Crown (Cross-Slope)
               Suggested                       [a]                 Minimum
Classification Spacing in                                          Center Line
               Miles      Minimum  Maximum [b] Minimum Maximum[b]  Radius in
                          [b]                                      Ft.[c]
                          Centerline Grade:    Crown (Cross-Slope)
               Suggested                       [a]                 Minimum
Classification Spacing in                                          Center Line
               Miles      Minimum  Maximum [b] Minimum Maximum[b]  Radius in
                          [b]                                      Ft.[c]

Pedestrian     N/A        0.5 %    12 % [d]    0.25    0.5         --
Ways
Alleys         N/A        0.5 %    10 %        0.25    0.5           100
Culs-de-Sac    N/A        0.5 %    5 %         0.25    0.5           100
[e]
Other Minor    N/A        0.5 %    10 %        0.25    0.5           100
Streets
Collector      1/4 - 1/2  0.5 %    8 %         0.25    0.5           300
Streets
Primary
Collector/
Secondary
Arterial       1/2 - 1    0.5 %    6 %         0.25    0.5           400
Streets
Primary
Arterial       1 - 2      0.5 %    6 %         0.25    0.5           500
Streets
 
Except as specifically provided otherwise, all standards in this table are
mandatory.
[a]  In inches per foot.
[b]  Except where necessitated by unusual topography or other conditions as
approved by the City Engineer.  Minimum grade shall in all cases be 0.25 %. 
Maximum grade within 50 feet of an intersection shall be 5 % for alleys, culs-
de-sac, and minor streets.  Maximum grade within 100 feet of an intersection
shall be 3 % for all other streets.
[c]  For horizontal curves.
[d]  Unless stair steps approved by the Planning Director are provided.
[e]  See Table 1240D for other standards for cul-de-sac streets.
Table 1240D: Other Standards for Cul-de-Sac Streets
Maximum Length of Street            800 feet
(measured to center of turn-around)
Maximum Number of Dwellings Served  15
Circular Turn-Arounds: [a]
   Minimum radius:
      Right-of-way:           [b]
      Pavement:               50 feet
   Minimum pavement width        14 feet
Tor Y-Shaped Turn-Arounds: [a]
   Minimum right-of-way width:   [b]
   Pavement:
      Minimum width:          20 feet
      Minimum length:         60 feet
 
   Entries to culs-de-sac over 200 feet long shall be identified with signage
indicating the street is not a through street.
   The Planning Commission may require a 20-foot-wide easement at the end of a
cul-de-sac to provide for drainage or continuation of utilities to the next
street.
   [a]  Cul-de-sac streets shall have a permanent circular, T-shaped, or Y-
shaped turn-around at the closed end.
   [b]  Sufficient to provide space for installed ROW facilities.  See Table
1240B.
   For other standards for cul-de-sac streets, see Tables 1240A, 1240B, and
1240C.
Table 1240E: Driveway Standards
1. Maximum Number of Driveways onto
Arterial Streets: [a]
A. Lot or building sites with arterial  1
frontage under 150 feet:
B. All other lot or building sites:     2 plus
                                        1 per 50 feet of frontage over 200 feet
2. Minimum Separation of Driveways on
Arterial Streets [a] [b] [c]:
A. From Street Intersection:
1. Driveways leading to Loading Areas   50 feet
2. All Other Driveways                  40 feet
B. From Any Other Driveway on Same Side
of Street:
1. Driveways to Loading Areas           70 feet [d]
2. All Other Driveways                  30 feet [d]
3. Maximum Driveway Grade               10 percent [e]
 
4. Driveway Width:
                                   Driveway Width in Feet [f]:
                                   At ROW Line:    At Curb Line:
                                   Minimum Maximum Minimum Maximum
Single- or Two-Family Residential: 9       24      9       24
All Other Uses:
One-Way                            12      30      12      60
Two-Way                            24      30      24      60
Divided [g]                        24 [h]  30 [h]  --      --
 
[a]  Applies to all uses except single- and two-family residential.  See
1240.02(f)(4) for rules for single- and two-family.
[b]  Measured along the right-of-way from the near edge of the pavement or face
of curb of the intersecting street and from the near edge of the curb cut.
[c]  Two adjacent lots may share a driveway along their common lot line to
comply with this provision.
[d]  This is a minimum standard that should be substantially exceeded wherever
possible.
[e]  Within 10 feet of curb or edge of street pavement.
[f]  Measured at right angles to the angle of a non-perpendicular driveway
entrance.
[g]  Permitted on lots and building sites with no less than 150 feet of
frontage.
[h]  On each side of median.  Median shall have a minimum width of 6 feet.
1240.03 Lots and Blocks
(a) Blocks
   (1) Dimensions
   Blocks shall conform to the dimensions of Table 1240F.
   (2) Orientation of Long Blocks
   Blocks longer than 900 feet should be so oriented that the longer side does
not impair access from residential areas to activity centers such as schools,
parks, houses of worship, and shopping areas.
   Blocks fronting on arterial streets should front the longer side along the
arterial to minimize the number of intersections on the arterial.
   (3) Pedestrian Ways in Long Blocks
   Pedestrian ways shall be provided in long residential blocks as provided in
division 1240.09(e)(5).
   Table 1240F: Required Block Dimensions
 
                        Minimum Maximum
Residential Blocks:
Length in feet [a]      400 [b] 1,800 [c]
Width in feet             [d]  1,800
Non-Residential Blocks: None    None
 
   [a]  Unless other standards are dictated by topography or other unusual
factors.
   [b]  Minimum length of block side abutting arterials should be 1,200 feet.
   [c]  Except in areas with mean average lot areas exceeding 2 acres.
   [d]  Sufficient to provide for 2 tiers of lots or building sites, except
abutting arterial streets, freeways, railroads, water bodies, or abrupt changes
in topography.
(b) Lots and Building Sites
   (1) Street Frontage
   All lots and building sites shall front on an existing or planned public or
approved private street except as otherwise approved through Site Plan Review.
   (2) Size and Shape
   Lots and building sites should be sized and shaped to create functional
building areas appropriate to the particular land use.  Frac-tional lots or
building sites shall not be permitted.
   (3) Abutting Freeways and Railroads
   Residential lots and residential building sites backing up to an existing or
planned railroad or freeway right-of-way shall incorporate a strip no less than
30 feet deep with a restriction lettered on the plat reserving the strip for
plantings and prohibiting buildings thereupon.
   (4) Crossing of Government Lines
   Lines of lots and building sites shall not cross boundary lines of the City
or of a township or other government body.
   (5) Angle of Side Lot Lines
   Although side lines of lots or building sites are traditionally straight
lines positioned at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved
street lines, other side lot line configurations such as on Z-lots are
permitted to encourage better utilization of space, greater privacy, a more
interesting streetscape, or the provision of affordable housing.
   (6) Lots at T Intersections
   The lines of a lot or building site located opposite a T intersection shall
not create a dwelling site directly opposite the intersecting street.
   (7) Through Lots
   Through lots should be platted only where appropriate to the topography or
where desirable to control access onto arterial streets.
   (8) Access to Street
   All lots and building sites shall have frontage of no less than 20 feet on a
public or City-approved private street except where the Planning Commission
approves a flag lot.
   (9) Lot Size
      A. Minimum Size
      All lots shall conform to size requirements established by Chapter 1110
and shall be large enough to accommodate any off-street parking or loading
required by Chapter 1210.
      B. Oversized Lots
      When proposed lots are more than double the minimum area required and are
not proposed for immediate development, the Planning Commission may require
them to be sized and laid out with respect to existing or, where necessary,
future streets in such a way as to facilitate eventual resubdivision into lots
meeting the minimum require-ments of Chapter 1110.
   (10) Maximum Depth
   To avoid waste of land and the need for assemblage or resubdivision to
create usable lots, lot depth shall not exceed 3 times lot width except where
deeper lots are necessary to provide a buffer from an adjacent arterial street,
railroad, or other incompatible land use.
1240.04 Reservations and Dedications
(a) Reservations
   (1) Reservation Required
   The land required for a proposed street or other public area, extension
thereof, or any portion thereof shown on an Official Map or Comprehensive Plan
or element thereof adopt-ed by the City Council shall be reserved for public
acquisition prior to approval by the Planning Commission of a subdivision or
Site Plan for any development within which it is included.
   Except that if the City Council finds that the applicable provision of the
Map or Plan is no longer appropriate because of changed conditions since its
adoption, the Council may relieve the applicant of all or part of the
requirement for reservation.  The Council shall amend such Plan or Map as
necessary within a reasonable time after making such finding.
   (2) Location and Dimensions of Land
   Reserved land shall conform to the locations and dimensions, if any,
specified on the Official Map or Comprehensive Plan and to applicable standards
of this chapter.  In case of conflict, the latter shall govern.
   If the location, dimensions, or alignment of any public land is not
specified precisely in either the Plan or the Map, the Planning Commission
shall determine whether such land is to be included in whole or in part within
the applicant's property.  If any such land is to be so included, the
Commission shall approve a location, alignment, and dimensions therefor.  In
the case of public collector and arterial streets to be dedicated, the Planning
Commission may use suggested spacing guidelines of Table 1240C to make a
determination as to location.
   (3) Types of Lands to Be Reserved
   Proposed public areas for which reservation is required are:
      A. arterial and freeway streets
      B. public parks, playfields, playgrounds, and other public open spaces
      C. public school sites
      D. fire station sites.
   (4) Dedication May Substitute
   The applicant may dedicate all or part of such land to the City or other
applicable public body in lieu of reserving it.  Any part not dedicated shall
be reserved.
   Such dedication shall be credited toward any applicable requirements for
land dedication in division 1240.04(b) provided it meets all requirements
therein.
   (5) Duration of Reservation
   Land to be reserved shall be reserved for:
      A. a period of one year beginning on the date of approval of the
Preliminary Plat, Site Plan, or other applicable initial approval by the City,
or
      B. any lesser or greater period agreed to by the City and property owner.
   (6) Reservation Purchase Price
   Reserved land shall be offered for purchase at undeveloped land costs
comparable to other land in the development.
   (7) Agency for Which Land Is Reserved
   Reserved land or any portion thereof located within the City or within a
property that the property owner or the City has taken action to have annexed
to the City, shall be reserved for purchase by the City of Barberton, the
Barberton Public Schools, Summit County, or the State of Ohio, as applicable.
   (8) Status of Land During Reservation Period
   During the reservation period, no structure shall be erected nor any grading
or tree or topsoil removal done or any other use estab-lished except with prior
approval of the Planning Commission.
(b) Mandatory Dedications
   (1) Streets and Public Facilities
   The developer shall without compensation dedi-cate to the City or other
applicable public body:
      A. all streets and alleys except:
         1. approved private streets and alleys, and
         2. arterial streets, and
         3. freeways, and
      B. sanitary and storm sewers, and
      C. water systems, and
      D. street lighting, and
      E. all appurtenances to all of the foregoing.
   (2) PUD's
   Planned Unit Developments may be required to dedicate land for parks, open
spaces, or other public areas that exceed the kinds and amounts of dedication
required for other developments.
   (3) Acceptance
   Acceptance by the City of dedications shall be as provided in division
1240.09(a)(6).
1240.05 Easements
(a) Utility Easements
The developer shall grant to the applicable utility companies any easements
necessary for the installa-tion, operation, and maintenance of any electric and
communications utility lines.
(b) Drainage Easements
An easement in the name of the City shall be pro-vided for any watercourse or
drainageway channel traversing a development.  The City Engineer shall
determine the location, alignment, and dimensions thereof and required
improvement thereto.
(c) Structures on Easements
No structure shall be located in any utility or drainage easement other than a
fence, tree or other landscaping, and necessary signs approved by the Planning
Director.  The property owner shall be responsible both for maintenance of the
easement area and for repair and replacement of any structures, hard surfaces,
or landscaping thereupon other than those provided by utility companies or
public bodies.  Fences shall at all times allow access to the easement by
maintenance personnel.
(d) Location and Size
Utility easements shall be centered along rear or side lot lines if not within
or abutting a street or alley right-of-way.  All easements shall conform to
Table 1240G.
   Table 1240G: Easement Widths
 
                                 Minimum Easement Width in Feet
1. Rear/side yard easements [a]:
A. For single utility            10
B. For 2 or more utilities       15
2. Drainageway easements         20 [b]
3. Other easements               10
 
[a]  For both underground and above ground utility lines, required width shall
be divided equally between the two abutting lots.  Shall be entirely on subject
lot if there is no easement on adjoining lot.
[b]  Or of sufficient width to provide for the watercourse and space for
maintenance operations as determined by the City Engineer.
1240.06 Open Space
(a) Ownership
Public or common open space provided in a development shall be owned by the
owner of the development, a public agency, a property owners association, the
cooperative owning the development, or a condominium association.
(b) Preservation of Open Space
The current owner of such open space, whether a public or private body, shall
be responsible for retaining common or public open space approved as part of a
subdivision plat or Site Plan in such use in perpetuity unless otherwise
provided as part of the approval or unless the City approves a new or amended
Plan or plat.
(c) Association Covenants
If a property owners or condominium association is to own common open space,
its covenants and restrictions shall provide:
   (1) that the association be established before any properties in the
development are sold, and
   (2) that membership therein be mandatory for all property owners, and
   (3) that the association be responsible for property taxes, liability
insurance, and maintenance of open spaces and recreational facilities within
them and for levying a pro rata assessment on all property owners therefor, and
   (4) that property owners be required to pay such assessments, and that the
assessments can become a lien on each owner's property.
(d) Reservation and Dedication
Parks, playgrounds, and other public open spaces shall be reserved and
dedicated as provided in Section 1240.04. 
Other private or public open space shall be provided on land in the LC District
under division 1110.02(f).
(e) Vacations
Vacations of public parks or other City public spaces shall be as provided in
Table 1320A.
1240.07 Natural Features
(a) Compatibility of Development
Developments should be as compatible as practical, especially outside of
intensively developed neighborhoods, with natural features such as topography,
trees, bodies of water, and flood plains in order to reduce grading; economize
on sewer and stormwater drainage construction; reduce flooding, erosion, and
sedimentation; minimize loss of trees and topsoil; and add character to, and
enhance property values in, the development.
The Planning Commission may disapprove a subdi-vision plat or Site Plan for a
development if:
   1. there are pre-existing conditions such as flooding, steep slopes,
improper drainage, and adverse earth formations that it determines likely to be
harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of occupants or other users of the
development, and
   2. such conditions have not been proposed for satisfactory amelioration in
the development plans.
(b) Tree Preservation
Tree preservation shall be as provided in division 1220.05(d).
(c) Topsoil Preservation
Topsoil moved in construction shall be redistributed so as to provide general
coverage of all disturbed areas of the development.  No topsoil shall be used
as spoil or removed from the property.
As shown on a grading and drainage plan, topsoil shall be stabilized by:
   (1) seeding or planting on slopes of under 10 percent
   (2) sodding on slopes of 10 percent or more
   (3) other ground cover on slopes of 20 percent or more.
Any seeding shall use a grass indigenous to the conditions of the site.
(d) Building in Flood Plains
Building in flood plains shall conform to Chapter 1260.
(e) Water Courses
   (1) Credit Toward Lot Area
   Land under water shall be credited toward a maximum of 25 percent of
required lot area.
   (2) Culvert Required for Street Access
   A culvert or other structure shall be installed where a water course
separates the buildable area of a lot or building site from a street to which
it is to have access.
   (3) Lot Lines Along Water Courses
   Open water bodies or courses and man-made drainageways should be distributed
among the adjacent lots or building sites by placing the boundary lines thereof
along such waterways unless they are part of an area to be devoted to public or
common open space. 
   Open water courses should where practical run roughly along rear lines or
else along side lines of lots or building sites.
1240.08 Other Standards
(a) Development Name
The name of the development, if any, shall not duplicate or be similar in
spelling or pronunciation to that of any other development in the City or
extraterritorial area.
1240.09 Improvements
(a) General Regulations
   (1) Where Required
      A. New Developments
      The improvements specified in this sec-tion shall be installed in all
applicable portions of a development, including along streets bordering the
development.  They shall be either installed or guaranteed prior to the
approval of:
      1. a Final Plat of a subdivision, or
      2. a Final Plan for a Planned Unit Development or Final Site Plan for a
site condominium or site cooperative.
      B. Existing Lots
      The improvements specified in this sec-tion for the following items shall
be installed or guaranteed, if they are required hereunder and have not already
been installed or guaranteed, prior to the issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy for a new or replacement principal building on an existing lot or
building site:
      1. Lot grading
      2. Sidewalks
      3. Driveway approaches, where curbs and gutters have been installed
      4. Street trees.
      C. Extension to Boundaries
      All required improvements shall be ex-tended to the boundaries of the
property or of the phase thereof being developed in order to serve adjacent
undeveloped land, except where the Planning Commission determines such
extension to be unnecessary.
   (2) Capacities
   Sizes and capacities of required improvements not specified in this section
shall be as approved by the City Engineer.
   (3) Cost-Shared Improvements
      A. Where Required
      To plan adequately for future growth, the Planning Commission or City
Engineer may require installation of on- or off-site improvements or of
improvements capacities that will serve properties other than the subject
development. 
      Such improvements or capacities shall be cost-shared as provided herein
if the Commission determines that their funding solely as a municipal
expenditure or by special assessment is not warranted.  Such im-provements may
include the procuring of rights-of-way or easements necessary to extend streets
or sewer or water lines between their present termini and the subject property.
      B. Cost-Sharing Allocations
      1. On-Site Improvements
      The developer shall be responsible for the cost of construction and
installation of:
      a. all alleys, marginal access and frontage roads, minor streets, and
collector streets, and
      b. all on-site improvements of the following diameter dimensions or
smaller:
         Sanitary Sewers       8 inches
         Storm Sewers         24 inches
         Other Drainage Facilities   As determined by City Engineer
         Water Mains          6 inches
      The developer shall not be responsible for the difference between the
cost of these improvements and improvements costs that include any additional
or larger-capacity improvements required by the City.  Except that the
developer shall pay a pro rata share of this difference if estimates approved
by the City Engineer based on Table 1240H determine that usage by the
development will require greater capacities than the foregoing improvements
provide.
      2. Off-Site Improvements
      The developer shall be responsible for only the share of the total
capacity added by a cost-shared off-site improvement that his or her
development will use.
      Capacity of off-site improvements shall be measured as provided in Table
1240H.  The share thereof to be used by a development shall be based on
estimates relating to number of dwellings, floor space, or other appropriate
measure approved by the City Engineer.
      3. Costs Not Paid by Developer
      The portion of cost-shared improvements not paid by the developer shall
be paid as a municipal expenditure or by special assessment of benefitted
properties outside the development.
      C. Deferred Construction
      If construction of an improvement is deferred, the City Council may
require the cost-sharing required of the developer to be financially guaranteed
as provided in division 1350.02. 
      Principal and earnings from a guarantee shall be returned to the
developer if construction of the applicable improvement is not started within 2
years of the date the guarantee is posted.
   (4) Waiver of Required Improvements
   The Planning Commission may defer or waive the provision of any improvement
required herein because of an inadequacy or lack of connecting facilities that
cannot readily be remedied or because it otherwise determines that in the
specific instance omission of such improvements will not adversely affect the
pub-lic health, safety, or welfare.
   If provision of an improvement is deferred, the developer shall provide a
financial guarantee ensuring its later installation.
   (5) Approval of Drawings and Specs
   Drawings and specifications for all required improvements shall be filed
with the City En-gineer.  No improvement shall be installed that is not in
compliance with drawings and specifications approved by the Engineer.
   (6) Time Period for Installation
   All required improvements shall be complete-ly installed within:
      A. 2 years from the date of issuance of the Building Permit or an
extension thereof granted by the Building Commissioner, or
      B. such other period as may be spe-cified in the contract establishing a
financial guarantee for such installation.
   (7) Acceptance of Dedications
   The City Council shall accept dedication of a public improvement or public
area within 30 days of receipt of the offer of dedication.  It shall accept
dedication only if all the conditions to follow have been met.
      A. City Engineer Certification
      The City Engineer has certified that the improvement has been inspected
and found to have been completed as approved under subdivision or Site Plan
approval, as applicable.
      B. Title Insurance
      The developer has submitted a policy of title insurance showing his or
her fee simple ownership of the improve-ment or area free of any liens,
encumbrances, or other restrictions on the improvement not acceptable to the
City.
      C. Maintenance Guarantee
      The City holds a maintenance guarantee as required by division 1350.02
(n).
      D. As-Built Drawings
      The developer has submitted As-Built Drawings of such improvements
prepared by a registered professional engineer or registered land surveyor.
   (8) Public Services and Substandard Improvements
   Neither the City nor any other public service provider shall be obligated to
provide services if improvements provided therefor under this chapter are found
upon inspection not to be in compliance with City approvals.
   (9) Liability Insurance
   The developer shall provide insurance indemnifying and holding harmless the
City of Barberton from any and all liability arising from unimproved conditions
of streets or other public areas being improved as part of development. 
   Such coverage shall not expire prior to the expiration of the maintenance
guarantee for such improvements.  The amount of coverage shall be as determined
by the City Council.
   Table 1240H: Capacity Measures for Improvements
 
                                  Capacity Measure
Sanitary sewer [1]                Flow in gallons per day
Water supply [2]                  Usage in gallons per day
Stormwater drainage [3]           Runoff in cubic feet  per second
Street or bridge improvements [4] Peak-hour traffic flow in vehicles per hour
 
   [1]  Collector, trunk, and interceptor sewers.
   [2]  Mains, hydrants, valves, and similar and related appurtenances.
   [3]  Drains, culverts, catch basins, manholes, riprap, drainage ditch
improvements, and similar and related appurtenances.
   [4]  Street construction and reconstruction, realignment, channelization,
signalization improvements, signage, curbs, sidewalks, right-of-way
improvements, and similar and related appurtenances.
(b) Survey Monuments
   (1) Construction
   Survey monuments shall be of stone or concrete with an iron pin in the
center or shall be of metal as approved by the City Engineer.
   Monuments and pins shall be of a size, length, and shape as specified by the
City Engineer.
   (2) Location
   Survey monuments shall be set so that the top is at the finished grade and
so that the monument will not be removed by frost. 
   They shall mark:
      A. external boundaries of the property, and
      B. street rights-of-way and intersections, and
      C. boundaries of lots.
   Along such lines the monuments shall be located:
      A. at beginning and end points of curves and points where radius or
direction changes, and
      B. at angle points in any line, and
      C. at corners, and
      D. not more than 1,400 feet apart in any straight line, and
      E. at intermediate points as required by the City Engineer.
(c) Grading
   (1) Streets
   The developer shall grade the entire right-of-way of all streets in
accordance with a grading and drainage plan approved by the Planning Commission
and specifications approved by the City Engineer.
   The developer shall grade the roadbed (pavement) area to subgrade.
   Tree lawns shall be graded to a minimum grade of 2 percent and a maximum of
5 percent upward from the curb or street pavement.
   (2) Lots and Building Sites
   Lots and building sites shall be graded, except for lots and building sites
for one- and two-family residential use at least 75 feet in width. 
   Lot and site grading shall conform to the approved grading and drainage
plan, shall assure satisfactory drainage, and where practical eliminate grades
that impair the usability of yards and open spaces.
   As many building sites as possible should be above street grade and as few
as possible significantly below street grade.
   After grading, graded portions of lots and building sites not paved or
covered by buildings shall be covered with soil having no particles over 2
inches in diameter with an average depth of no less than 6 inches.
(d) Streets and Alleys
   (1) Street Construction
   All streets shall have a 6-inch concrete base except where the City Engineer
requires a higher standard because of unusual soil conitions or extraordinary
traffic loads. 
   Other materials shall conform to the standards of the City Engineer, of the
applicable County Engineer, or of the Ohio Department of Transportation,
whichever has jurisdiction.
   (2) Curb and Gutter
      A. Required
      Curbs and gutters are required in order to protect pedestrians, tree
lawns, sidewalks, and front yards from vehicle encroachment, protect edges of
street pavement, and control drainage.
      After installation of all utility and stormwater drainage improvements,
the developer shall construct concrete curbs and gutters to specifications
approved by the City Engineer.  Curbs shall be of straight or rolled design.
      Provision for driveway curb cuts shall wherever possible be made at the
time of construction.
      B. Exemption
      No curbs and gutters shall be required for single-family residential
development having all lots or build-ing sites exceeding 100 feet in lot width
except:
      1. where curbs and gutters exist on abutting properties, or
      2. where the Planning Commission determines them necessary for control of
unusual stormwater problems.
      Where curbs are not required, alternative edge definition and
stabilization shall be required to prevent pavement unravelling.
   (3) Street Lighting
   Street lighting shall be installed at all intersections on arterial streets
in accordance with current standards of the Illuminating Engineering Society or
as otherwise approved by the City Engineer.
   All street lighting wires, conduits, and cables shall be installed under
ground except where they serve infill parcels in developed sections having such
facilities above ground.
   Street lighting shall not be required:
      A. in single- or two-family residential developments with all lot or
building site widths exceeding 100 feet, or
      B. in completely non-residential developments.
   (4) Street Signs
   The developer shall bear the costs of manufac-turing and installing street
name signs conforming to the standards for materials, construction, and
location established by the City Engineer.
   At least one street sign shall be installed at all T intersections and two
signs at all other intersections.  They shall be installed below lamps of
street lights and in locations free of visual obstructions.  They shall be of
uniform size and color as specified by the City Engineer.
   (5) Bridges
   Bridges shall conform to the standards of the City Engineer and of
applicable county and state officials.
   (6) Fire Hydrants
   Where public water service is provided, the developer shall install fire
hydrants and control valves to standards determined by the City Engineer in
consultation with fire officials.
   Hydrants shall be located:
      A. at block corners, and
      B. at other locations so that no point along a street is more than 300
feet from a hydrant.
   (7) Driveway Approaches
   The developer shall construct driveway approaches in conformity with the
specifications of the City Engineer.
   (8) Tree Lawns
   Tree lawns are required in order to provide a buffer between vehicular
traffic and pedestrians on sidewalks, a space for shade tree planting or other
street landscaping, an area for storage of plowed snow, a right-of-way for
utility lines, and a place for temporary storage of trash receptacles awaiting
pick-up.
   The developer shall provide seeded or sodded tree lawns between the sidewalk
and the curb or edge of street pavement on every side of a street right-of-way
where sidewalks are either required by Table 1240I or voluntarily installed.
   Minimum width of tree lawns shall be as provided in Table 1240B.
   Tree lawns shall be completely planted in grass or other vegetative ground
cover except where traversed by sidewalks or driveways.
   No tree lawns shall be required on block faces having over 50 percent of
their ground floor frontage in commercial, office, or industrial use.
   Maintenance of tree lawns shall be the responsibility of the owner of the
abutting property.
   (9) Street Trees
   Tree lawns shall be provided with street trees as provided in Section
1220.04(b).
   (10) Planning Standards
   Streets and alleys shall conform to the standards of Section 1240.02.
(e) Sidewalks and Pedestrian Ways
   (1)   Where Required
      The developer shall construct concrete sidewalks in the street right-of-
way along the full frontage of each lot or building site where required by
Table 1240I in conformity with the specifications thereof and of the City
Engineer.
   (2)   Exception for Non-Continuous Walks
      The Planning Director may waive or defer sidewalk installation if:
      A.   on both sides of the lot or building site along a single street
frontage, the lot or building site abuts developed or undeveloped property
lacking sidewalks for a cumulative continuous frontage in both directions of no
less than 1,000 feet, and
      B.   he or she determines that sidewalk installation along 50 percent or
more of such cumulative frontage is unlikely in the foreseeable future.
      The Director may require a guarantee for the future installation of
deferred sidewalks.
   (3)   Installation in Exempt Locations
      The Planning Commission may require a sidewalk where none is required by
Table 1240I if the Commission determines it necessary:
      A.   for pedestrian safety, or
      B.   for access from residential areas to a school, park, or activity
center, or
      C.   to close a gap in an otherwise continuous sidewalk system.
   (4)   Pedestrian Ways
      In lieu of sidewalks within street rights-of-way, the Planning Director
may approve continuous concrete or asphalt pedestrian ways, as defined herein,
through common or public open space areas.  Such pedestrian ways shall serve
every lot or site otherwise required to have sidewalks.
   (5)   Pedestrian Ways in Long Blocks
      The Planning Commission may require a mid-block pedestrian way meeting
the standards of Table 1240I on blocks longer than 900 feet if it finds it
necessary to improve pedestrian access from residential areas to schools,
parks, shopping areas, or other activity centers.  The location of such
pedestrian way shall be as approved by the Commission.
   (6)   Pedestrian Ways on Culs-de-Sac
      In residential areas the Planning Commission may require a pedestrian way
linking the end of a cul-de-sac to a nearby school, park, shopping area,
playground, or other activity center.
   (7)   Location
      Sidewalks and pedestrian ways should be located where they will not be
obstructed by utility poles, existing trees, and other obstacles.
   (8)   Ramps
      Ramps for wheelchairs, baby carriages, and similar vehicles shall be
installed across curbs:
      A.   where sidewalks or pedestrian ways cross streets, and
      B.   wherever else the Planning Commission determines there will be
significant pedestrian flow between a sidewalk and the street.
   (9)   Other Standards
      Sidewalks and pedestrian ways shall conform to the standards of Table
1240I.
   (10)   Other Exceptions
      The Planning Director may approve exceptions to the requirements of Table
1240I where necessary to preserve mature trees or to conform to unusual
topography.
      He or she shall grant an exception to the requirement for sidewalk
installation on a block face if construction involving sidewalk replacement
therein is to begin within 3 years.
      He or she may approve asphalt sidewalks in locations on non-arterial
streets at which he or she determines there is likely to be little pedestrian
traffic.
(Ord. 148-1995. Passed 12-11-95; Ord. 119-1999. Passed 7-26-99.)
   Table 1240I: Standards for Sidewalks and Pedestrian Ways
 Minimum Width in Feet [a]
                                                      Minimum Width in Feet [a]
A. Pedestrian Ways:
Right-of-Way                                          10
Pavement                                              3
B. Sidewalk Pavement [b]:
1. In C-D Downtown Commercial District:               7
2. In All Other Districts:
a. Along Arterial Streets                             5
b. Along Collector Streets                            4
c. Along Minor Streets:
1. On All-Single- and/or Two-Family Residential Block
Faces:
A. Along culs-de-sac serving under 10 dwellings       None [c]
B. With all lots/building sites over 150 feet lot     None [c]
width
C. With all lots/building sites of 100-150 feet lot   3 [d]
width
D. All other cases                                    3
2. On All-Industrial Block Faces                      None [c]
3. On Any Block Face Where:
A. Diagonally parked cars overhang sidewalk           5
B. Sidewalk abuts driving lane (no tree lawn)         5
4. On All Other Block Faces                           4
 
Sidewalks are required on both sides of all streets except as otherwise
provided herein.
[a]  Minimum width abutting an existing sidewalk segment shall be that of such
segment.
[b]  The Planning Director may reduce required width where necessary to
accommodate an existing mature tree.
[c]  None required except in special cases under 1240.09(e)(3).
[d]  Required on one side of street only.  Shall be installed on north or east
side of street except where the Planning Director requires installation
elsewhere to connect with an existing sidewalk; to better serve a school, house
of worship, or other activity center; or to otherwise better serve pedestrian
traffic.  Where a sidewalk is discontinued on one side of a street other than
at an intersection and resumed on the opposite side of the street, there shall
be a painted crosswalk on the street pavement linking the two sidewalk
segments.
(f) Utilities
   (1) General Rules
      A. When Required
      Underground utilities to be installed in public street rights-of-way
shall be installed prior to dedication and to permanent paving.
      B. Where Required
      The developer shall construct mains and lateral connections to make such
services available to every lot or building site in a development where City
sanitary or storm sewers or water lines are located:
      1. within the applicable distance specified below of the development, or
      2. are programmed to be extended to within such distance within 5 years
of approval of a Final Plat or Final Site Plan, or
      3. where groundwater pollution or poor soil percolation require public
sewer or water to protect health.
Use and Number of Dwelling Units              Distance in Feet
Single- and Two-Family Residential:
1 unit                                        200
2                                             400
3                                             600
4                                             800
5 - 15                                        1,200
All Other Residential & Non-Residential Uses: 1,000
 
      C. When Service Not Yet Available
      If service is not yet available:
      1. Public sewer and water laterals shall be constructed to the street
line and capped, or
      2. the developer shall pay to the City a fee in lieu of such
construction.
   (2) Sanitary Sewers
   Where public sanitary sewers are not provided, the developer shall provide
for adequate private sewage disposal systems--a private community sewer and
treatment system or individual septic tanks--approved by the City Health
Department.
   Where public sanitary sewers are proposed to be extended within 5 years,
these systems shall be designed and approved as interim facilities only. 
   Community systems shall conform to Sections 6111.45 and 6111.46 of the Ohio
Revised Code.
   Lot areas for lot or building sites not served by public sewer shall be as
specifically provided in Chapter 1120, Dimensional Requirements.
   No sanitary sewage shall drain into a storm sewer.  Sanitary sewers shall
not be combined with storm sewers.
   Other standards for public sewers shall be as approved by the City Engineer.
   (3) Water Supply
   Where public water supply is not provided, the developer shall provide for
adequate private water systems--a private community water system or individual
wells--approved by the City Health Department.
   Standards for public water lines shall conform to the standards of the City
Engineer.
   (4) Stormwater Drainage Facilities
   The developer shall construct storm water drainage facilities such as storm
sewers, catch basins and inlets, and open channels to standards approved by the
City Engineer.
   Drainage facilities shall be sized so as to accommodate potential runoff
from their entire upstream drainage area, including areas outside the
development.  The appropriate size shall be determined by the City Engineer. 
Respon-  sibility for the costs of oversized facilities shall be as provided in
division 1240.09(a)(3).
   Where City storm sewers are not available, open ditches may be installed in
lieu thereof for lots and building sites for one- and two-family residential
use less than 75 feet in width.  Side slopes of open ditches shall be sodded or
seeded in grass with curves riprapped to prevent erosion.
   Natural grades should be used wherever practical for drainage so as to avoid
excessive grading and drainage structures.  Lots and building sites shall
provide positive drainage away from all buildings.
   When a planned diversion of storm water flow affects surrounding properties,
the developer shall acquire sufficient drainage easements to provide adequate
disposal of the water.
   Storm water shall not drain into any sanitary sewer.
   Drainage easements shall be as provided in division 1240.05(b).
   (5) Other Utilities
      A. Utilities Required
      The developer shall provide for the installation of facilities to serve
each lot or building site in the development with the following utility
services:
      1. Gas (East Ohio Gas Company)
      2. Electric power (Ohio Edison)
      3. Telephone (Ohio Bell).
      The developer shall not be responsible for the installation of these
improvements, nor shall he or she be required to provide a guarantee therefor.
      B. Underground Installation
      Both main and service connection lines for electric and communications
utilities shall be installed under ground except as provided herein.  This
requirement shall apply equally to utility lines such as cable television that
are not required by this chapter. 
      Transformers,  junction boxes, and similar equipment may be located above
ground if screened as provided in Table 1220B.
      If as a result of development, existing overhead lines must be relocated
or replaced, such lines shall be located under ground.
      C. Above-Ground Utilities
      Utility lines may be installed above ground if the City Engineer
determines that underground installation would impose excessive costs as a
result of bedrock, underground water, or topographic conditions.
      Lot or building sites abutting easements or rights-of-way already having
overhead distribution lines for the applicable utility may be served from
overhead lines, but service connections therefrom shall be installed under
ground.
      Where electric and telephone lines are permitted above ground, they shall
be located in easements along rear lines of lots or building sites.  The
Planning Commission may allow installation along side or front lines where
necessary because of topography, phys-ical barriers, or other exceptional
circumstances.
   (6) Utility Easements
   Utility easements shall be as provided in division 1240.05(a).
(g) Other Improvements
(1) Fencing
The developer shall furnish and install fences to standards of the City
Engineer wherever the Planning Commission determines a hazardous condition to
exist.
(2) Removal of Debris
All debris--including scrap building materials, products of demolition, stumps
and other tree parts, dead or dying trees, rocks, and litter--shall be removed
from development sites upon completion of construction of the development or of
im-provements.  No debris shall be buried on the site.
1240.10 Demolition Standards
(a)   Purpose
The purpose of these standards is to ensure safe demolition practices within
the City, to protect adjoining sites, and the City as a whole, from the
negative impacts of incomplete razing actions. These regulations apply to
owners/contractors performing demolition, razing, grading, site clearance, and
similar operations within the City of Barberton.
(b)   General Regulations
   (1)   Building Permit Required
      A.   In accordance with Chapter 1444 of the City of Barberton Codified
Ordinances, a building permit is required prior to the commencement of any
razing/demolition work.
      B.   The building permit for a demolition shall be valid for ninety (90)
days. Work must be completed within this timeframe. A one-time additional
ninety (90) day extension may be granted provided that a written request is
submitted to the Building Department seven (7) days prior to the expiration of
the original ninety (90) day time allowance.
   (2)   Performance Bond Required
   Owner/applicant is required to post a performance bond with the City of
Barberton in the amount of the contract for the demolition work plus ten (10%)
percent at the time of permit application.
(c)   Standard Requirements for Structural Demolition
   (1)   There shall be no remnants of structural demolition that include
partial walls, beams, projections, partition walls, columns or similar items
that are not specifically designed and engineered to act independently or
support adjoining attachments/structures.
   (2)   Structures to be demolished that contain basements must have floors
broken up into pieces not larger than one (I) square foot so that water cannot
collect. The basement area shall be clean of all wood, combustibles, trash,
spoil, debris, and all other-questionable material. Only clean material may be
used as backfill.
   (3)   All site concrete, including parking areas, driveways, aprons, and
similar areas must be fully removed and restored with proper vegetation. Where
aprons are removed, a curb conforming to City of Barberton Engineering
Department standards shall be installed. Public sidewalk is required to be
protected. Public sidewalk damaged due to demolition activity shall be restored
to City of Barberton Engineering Department standards.
   (4)   Accessory uses no longer in use, such as playgrounds, detached
accessory structures, light poles, vacated utilities, underground storage
tanks, cisterns, associated tank liquids, signs, and sign poles are required to
be removed from the property.
   (5)   Both the sanitary and/or storm sewer leading from the building(s)
being demolished must be sealed at the City right-of-way. It is responsibility
of the owner/contractor to contact the City of Barberton Utilities Department
for an inspection of the sealed sewer lines.
   (6)   It the responsibility of the owner/contractor to ensure that all
utilities have been removed/disconnected at the demolition site. It is also the
owner/contractors responsibility to ensure protection of all surrounding
utilities and utilities that serve other parties. Utility poles and services
that are to be no longer in use, whether located in the right-of-way or not are
required to be removed by the owner/contractor.
   (7)   Upon completion of the demolition, sufficient grading and filling
shall be done to bring the area up to an elevation that matches the immediate
surrounding area. Should such backfill jeopardize the structural integrity of
surrounding structures, an engineered design shall be required for backfill.
   (8)   Dead trees and brush shall be required to be removed from the
demolition site.
   (9)   Walls over ten feet high of any length shall not remain standing after
work hours unless adequate lateral support is provided.
   (10)   Where open excavations are left unfilled at the end of the work day,
the owner/contractor shall be responsible for fencing that adequately
barricades the open excavation.
   (11)   The contractor shall take whatever steps necessary to control dust
during demolition and removal of any debris falling on the haul road or public
streets and keep said streets clean and free of dirt and debris, protect storm
water and keep all inlets free of debris.
   (12)   The burning of combustible material at any time during demolition is
strictly prohibited.
   (13)   The entire demolition site shall be cleared of all trash, junk,
debris, rubbish, wood, spoil, fill, solid waste, hazardous waste, tires,
furniture, toys equipment, and miscellaneous similar items at completion of
site demolition.
   (14)   The owner/contractor is responsible for maintaining all traffic flow
during demolition activities. Any attempts to alter traffic flow must be
approved by the City of Barberton Safety Director.
   (15)   Salvage demolition or partial demolition shall not leave wholly or
partially exposed structures unless a building permit has been issued for
immediate construction repair or redevelopment at the site that affects the
partially demolished structure.
   (16)   Construction, excavation, repair, demolition, or alteration of any
building or street or operation of any construction machinery or equipment
other than Monday through Saturday 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. is prohibited.
   (17)   Proof of proper/legal disposal may be required by the City of
Barberton by submittal of disposal tickets from a landfill, transfer station,
or other accepted facility.
   (18)   A final inspection is required to be performed by the Building
Department upon completion of all demolition/final grading at the site.
(Ord. 58-2012.  Passed 4-9-12.)
Chapter 1250
Special Use Regulations
1250.01 Home Occupations
(a) Purpose
The regulations governing home occupations in this section are intended to
accomplish the following objectives:
   (1) To protect residential areas from undue adverse environmental
influences, excessive traffic, and depreciation of property values by
controlling adverse effects of business activity
   (2) To recognize changes in technology and lifestyles that have enhanced the
practicability and desirability of home-based work
   (3) To strengthen the economy of the City by facilitating start-ups of small
businesses that create jobs and income for its residents
   (4) To provide opportunities for both parents of young children to
contribute to the economic support of the household and pursue career interests
without either impairing the care of their children or necessitating the high
costs of day care
   (5) To provide convenient opportunities for the City's senior citizens and
differently abled residents to improve their lives and contribute to the
economy of the City
   (6) To provide convenient opportunities for the retired or unemployed to
increase their incomes and engage in productive activity
   (7) To avoid discrimination against non-profes-sional and lower-paid types
of work or in favor of higher-paid, professional types of work
   (8) To further energy conservation, control of traffic congestion, and
reduction in the need for parking by allowing people to work without commuting
from their homes
   (9) To encourage the provision of affordable home day care and other
necessary neighbor-hood services
   (10) To enhance security by encouraging a daytime population in residential
areas
   (11) To regulate home occupations in a flexible manner that allows those
engaged in them considerable freedom so long as adverse external effects are
controlled
   (12) To minimize the cost and delay to operators of small businesses
associated with compliance with these regulations and the expense to the City
in administering them.
(b) Allowable Activities
The following area allowed as Accessory Uses in  Residential Districts, subject
to any other applicable regulations:
   (1)   Hobbies
   Hobbies that do not produce a profit or only occasionally or incidentally do
so.
   (2)   Volunteer Work
   Volunteer work for non-profit organizations.
   (3)   Door-to-Door Sales
   Marketing or sales activity in a residence by a door-to-door salesperson
whose business is not based therein, including sales-oriented "parties" or
group product demonstrations.
   (4)   Part-Time Home Office
   A home office used only for incidental after-hours clerical, administrative,
or professional work brought home from an off-premises place of work.
   (5)   Address of Convenience
   Activity confined to receipt of mail and/or phone calls and the keeping of
records in connection with any business or occupation.
   (6)   Rooming and Real Estate Rental
   Provision of such rooming or boarding services or rental of a garage or
other portion of the premises as may be permitted as an Accessory Use to a
dwelling by City regulations.
   (7)   Incidental Household Activities
   Incidental low-nuisance money-making activities of household residents other
than yard sales, as defined herein, such as newspaper delivery, babysitting,
children's lemonade stands, or occasional sale of personal possessions of
residents.
   (8)   Other Activities
   Only such other home occupation activities as conform to the requirements of
this Section.
(c)   Prohibited Activities
   (1)   Industrial and Heavy Commercial
      A.  Prohibited Uses
      No business included in:
      1.   Use Group 16, Highway Commercial Uses, or Use Group 16C, Special
Highway Commercial Uses, of Table 1130I, or
      2.   Any Use Group in Table 1130J, Industrial Use Groups shall not be
permitted as a home occupation except as provided in (c)(1)B.
      B.  Exceptions
      The following are permitted as home occupations subject to all other
provisions herein.
      1.   Business machine sales
      2.   Computer sales
      3.   Lawn care services
      4.   Pet grooming and veterinary offices, excluding kennels or animal
boarding
      5.   Repair shops
      6.   Studios, art, music, craft, interior design, or photography.
   (2)   Heavy and Night Traffic
      A.  Number of Visits
      Home occupations that generate more than 6 trips per day by customers,
clients, or suppliers to the premises are prohibited.
      B.  Hours of Visits
      Home occupations shall allow visits to the premises by customers,
clients, or suppliers only between the hours of 8 AM and 6 PM.
   (3)   Larger Employers
      Not more than 2 people who are not residents of the premises shall work
on the premises for the home occupation, whether as employees or as independent
contractors.
   (4)   Garages & Accessory Structures
      The conduct of a home occupation in an attached or detached garage or any
accessory structure is prohibited unless a Conditional Use has been approved
therefor.
   (5)   Previously Legal Occupations
   The continuation after the date of effect of this Code of a home occupation
prohibited hereunder but permitted under the Zoning Code in effect immediately
prior to such date is prohibited and shall not constitute a legal
Nonconformity.
   (6)   Other Prohibited Activities
   Home occupation activities that do not conform to all requirements of this
section are prohibited.
(d)   Traffic
   (1)   Volume
   Pedestrian or vehicular traffic volumes at or near the property attributable
in the judgment of the Building Commissioner to the customers, employees,
suppliers, or any operation of the home occupation shall not perceptibly exceed
that level that would be commonly found at the applicable time of day without
the home occupation.
   The Building Commissioner may use a comparison with other residential uses
in the vicinity to make this determination.
   (2)   Type
   Home occupations shall not include any business that involves regular use of
types or sizes of commercial vehicles to service the premises that do not
normally serve residential areas with comparable frequency.
(e)   Parking
   (1)   Required Spaces
   Off-street parking shall be provided for home occupations as provided in
Table 1210C.
   (2)   Number of Vehicles
   The number of motor vehicles parked on or near the property resulting from
the home occupation shall not exceed the number that in the judgment of the
Building Commissioner would be commonly found at the applicable time of day
without the home occupation.  The Commissioner may use a comparison with other
residential uses in the vicinity to make this determination.
   (3)   Parking in Street Yards
      Parking for home occupations, whether required or voluntarily provided,
shall not be located in an actual front or corner side yard.
   (4)   Commercial and Inoperable Vehicles
      Parking or storage of commercial vehicles in connection with a home
occupation shall conform to division 1210.05(a)(2).
      Parking or storage of dismantled or inoperable vehicles, as defined
herein, shall conform to divisions 1210.05(c) and (d).
(f)   Outdoor Activity and Display
   (1)   Incidental Activity
      Conduct of home occupations may include incidental and occasional
activity outside of structures, such as for day care services.
   (2)   Screening
      Areas utilized for outdoor activity on a regular basis shall be located
in rear yards and shall be screened on any side thereof that is located 20 feet
or less from a lot line bordering another lot in a Residential District.
      Screening shall be by a Screen Barrier as provided in Table 1220B and
shall comply with the fence regulations of Section 1250.07.
   (3)   Nuisances
      No noise or other effect of either occasional or regular outdoor activity
upon other residences, other lots, or public streets shall be produced that
constitutes a nuisance.
   (4)   Outdoor Storage
      There shall be no outdoor storage or display of merchandise, machinery,
tools, parts, or other objects or materials except those commonly associated
with residential uses without home occupations, such as lawn mowers, gardening
supplies, or recreation equipment.
   (5)   Enclosed Structures
      Except as otherwise provided herein, home occupations shall be conducted
entirely within such enclosed structures as are allowed in the applicable
district for residential uses and Accessory Uses thereto.
   (6) Signs
   No additional signs or related displays are permitted for home occupations
beyond those allowed in Chapter 1230 for residential uses without home
occupations.
   (7) Yard Sales
   Yard sales shall conform to 1310.04(a).
   (8) Appearance Change
   There shall be no substantial change in the exterior appearance of the
premises attribu-table to the home occupation except as spec-cifically
permitted hereunder.
(g) Hazards
   (1) Electrical and Fire
   No home occupation shall involve construction features or the use of
electrical or mechanical equipment that would result in electrical interference
or fluctuation in line voltage outside the dwelling or change the fire rating
of the structure or of the fire district.
   (2) Hazardous Materials
   No highly explosive or combustible material or substance producing hazardous
emissions shall be used or stored on the premises except materials and
quantities thereof that are commonly associated with, and permitted by City
regulations for, residential use.
   (3) Waste Discharges
   No home occupation shall introduce into the sanitary sewer system any
substance that in the judgment of the Service Director would adversely affect
the system or would violate any local, state, or federal law or regulation.
(h) Building Alterations
   (1) Separate Entrance
   A separate exterior building entrance for the home occupation may be added.
   (2) Suitability for Residential Use
   No Building Permit shall be issued for any external or internal alteration
to a dwelling to accommodate a home occupation that would render the premises
when vacated no longer suitable for residential use.
(i) Environmental Effects
   (1) No Perceptible Effects
   Except as otherwise specifically permitted or required herein, there shall
result from the conduct of the home occupation none of the environmental
effects specified in division (i)(2) that is clearly visible, audible, or
otherwise perceptible by the average person under typical conditions from:
      A. a location outside the lot or building site in which the occupation is
conducted, in the case of a single-family detached or attached dwelling, or
      B. a location outside the dwelling unit in which the occupation is
conducted, for all other dwellings.
   (2) Applicable Effects
   The effects to which division (i)(1) shall apply are:
      A. noise, or
      B. fumes, or
      C. dust, or
      D. vibration, or
      E. heat, or
      F. odor, or
      G. glare, or 
      H. other adverse environmental effects.
   (3) Exceptions
   Any effect listed in division (i)(2) is permitted if it is of a nature or
degree that is in the judgment of the Building Commissioner commonly associated
at the applicable time of day with residential uses without home occupations
that are permitted in the applicable zoning district.
1250.02 Single- and Two-Family Detached Dwellings
(a) Applicability
   (1) Permanent Dwellings
   The standards of this section shall apply to all permanent single- and two-
family detached dwellings, as defined herein, except as provided in division
(c).
   (2) Temporary Dwellings
   Single- and two-family dwellings of any kind that do not conform to
applicable regulations may be allowed as Temporary Uses for interim or
emergency housing under provisions for Temporary Uses in division 1310.04(a). 
Appli-cability of the provisions of this chapter to such temporary dwellings
shall be as provided in that division.
(b) Standards
   (1) Foundation
   The dwelling shall be permanently set on a properly engineered solid,
enclosed foundation.  Such foundation shall conform to the City Building Code
or, in the case of a manufactured home, as defined herein, to ANSI A225.1,
Standards for Manufactured Home Installations, or the manufacturer's
recommended installation standards.
   (2) Exterior Walls
   The material covering all exterior walls of dwellings and accessory
structures shall be, or be in the judgment of the Planning Director or Building
Commissioner equivalent in appearance to, wood, stucco, brick, stone, or
residential horizontal vinyl or aluminum lap siding having the appearance of
residential wood siding, or other materials commonly found on dwellings located
on individual lots in the City, or in other cities in Ohio or other northern
states. All material shall be uniform in color. The Planning Director or
Building Commissioner may approve an exception to this provision if he or she
finds the particular colors proposed will be compatible with the environs. Wall
siding shall extend either to the ground or to the top of a perimeter wall of
concrete, masonry, or other material approved by the Planning Director or
Building Commissioner.
   (3) Roofs
      A. Slope
      The roof shall be pitched at not less than 5 feet of rise for 12 feet of
horizontal run except:
      1. over porches or attached garages or carports, or
      2. where the Planning Director determines that dwellings located on
individual lots having flat roofs are found in the environs.
      B. Material
      Roofing material shall be of tile; shingles made of fiberglass, shake,
asphalt, metal; or another substance that is, or that the Planning Director or
Building Commissioner judges equivalent in appearance to, materials commonly
found on dwellings located on individual lots in the City, or in other cities
in Ohio or other northern states. Roof material shall be uniform in color. The
Planning Director or Building Commissioner may approve an exception to this
provision if he or she finds the particular roof colors proposed will be
compatible with the environs.
   (4) Orientation
   The longest dimension of the dwelling shall face the street unless the
Planning Director determines that dwellings located on individual lots with the
proposed alternative orientation are common in the environs.
   (5) Floor Level
   The lowest level of the finish first story floor shall not be over 2 feet
above the exterior finish grade of the lot at the front building line unless,
because of architectural style, topography, or other factor, the Planning
Director determines that greater elevations are common among dwellings located
on individual lots in the environs.
   (6) Minimum Width
   The width of the narrowest portion of the main body of the dwelling shall be
not less than 24 feet unless there are 5 or more narrower dwellings on
individual lots within 1/4 mile of the lot.
   (7) Visible Appurtenances
   No wheels, axles, towing mechanism, undercarriage, frame, or chassis of the
dwelling, if any, shall be visible from outside the lot lines.
   (8) Storage Area and Garages
   If there are less than 1,200 square feet of floor area per dwelling unit,
there shall be provided, for exclusive use of each dwelling, area(s) for
storage in basement, cellar, and/or closet areas or in a separate structure. 
The storage area(s) shall equal or exceed the lesser of 100 square feet or 10
percent of the floor area of the remainder of the dwelling.
   Garages shall be required for all new single-and two-family structures. 
Structures under 1,500 square feet shall require a 300 square foot garage;
structures over 1,500 square feet shall require at least a 400 square foot
garage.
   Separate storage buildings shall conform to all City building and
development regulations applicable to such structures.
   (9) Building Regulations
   The dwelling shall conform to the requirements of the Barberton Building
Code or, if the dwelling is a HUD Code manufactured home, as defined herein, to
the HUD Code, as also defined herein.  Any additions to the dwelling shall
conform to the applicable Code.
   (10)  Roof Line
   No roof line facing the street shall extend further than a 30 foot
horizontal run without a break in the roof line.  Such break shall be a dormer,
hip roof or other approved break by the Building Commissioner.
   (11)  Overhang
   All roofs shall have a minimum of a 12-inch overhang of the exterior wall.
(c) Exceptions
   (1) RS-32 District
   The requirements of this section shall not apply to subdivisions, site
condominiums, site cooperatives, or land-lease developments in the RS-32
District or to manufactured home parks where permitted by district regulations.
   (2) Roof Slope and Orientation
   The Planning Commission may approve as a Special Exception departures on
individual lots from the standards herein governing roof slope, roof material,
and orientation if it finds that doing so will make possible innovations in
land planning and design to take advantage of attractive views, to further
energy conservation, or to provide a desirable diversity in housing appearance.
   (3) New Developments
   The Planning Director shall determine that a specified characteristic is
common in the environs of a lot or building site if such lot or site is
proposed as part of a new contiguous development in which no fewer than 25 lots
or building sites will have dwellings that exhibit such characteristic.  In the
case of a phased development, this requirement shall apply to the applicable
phase.
   (4) Planning Director Determinations
   Any determination by the Planning Director made under this Section to decide
the applicability of an exception shall be based on written Findings of Fact
and may be appealed as provided in division 1310.03(c).
(Ord. 49-2001.  Passed 4-23-01; Ord. 36- 2002.  Passed 3-11-02; Ord. 179-2013. 
Passed 12-9-13.)
1250.03 Zero Lot Line
(a) Purpose
This provision is intended to allow more usable and more easily maintained open
spaces on residential and other lots while also protecting privacy and assuring
light, air, and safety.
(b) Yard Reconfiguration
   (1) Elimination of Yard
   Subject to the restrictions of this section, the required width or depth of
a yard may be reduced to between 0.1 feet and zero on lots ac-commodating 
detached principal residential or non-residential buildings. 
   A yard so reduced shall be referred to as a zero yard herein.  An exterior
wall of a principal building abutting a zero yard shall be referred to as a lot
line wall.
   (2) Prohibited Zero Yards
   The following yards shall not be zero yards but shall meet the requirements
of the district:
      A. a front or corner side yard
      B. a yard that abuts an alley
      C. a yard that abuts a lot having conventional siting with no zero yard
unless such lot conforms to division (c)(4)
      D. a yard that abuts a zero yard on an adjacent lot.
   Building siting disallowed under division (b)(2)D is allowed without zero
lot line siting in the C-D District and as single-family attached dwellings in
RA and RM Districts.
   (3) Enlargement of Opposite Yards
   If an interior side yard is a zero yard, the remaining interior or corner
side yard on the lot shall have a minimum width equal to the sum of the
normally required widths of both side yards.
   If a rear yard is a zero yard, the front yard on the lot shall have a
minimum depth equal to the sum of the normally required depths of both the
front and rear yards.
(c) Other Regulations
   (1) Wall Openings
   No window, door, ventilator fan, air conditioning unit, or other opening
shall be located on a lot line wall or in a portion of a pitched or mansard
roof above a lot line wall.
   (2) Required Easement
   A perpetual easement shall be provided in every yard that abuts a lot line
wall on an abutting lot.
   The easement shall be in favor of the owner of the abutting lot.  It shall
allow encroach-ment of building projections and storm water drainage as
provided herein as well as access for purposes of maintenance or repair of the
lot line wall or for use by fire fighting equipment.
   The easement shall be no less than 5 feet in width. It shall extend along
the lot line from the street to the far end of the lot line wall.
   The easement shall be shown on the recorded plat and incorporated into each
deed transferring title to the property.  Approval of such easement by the
Director of Law and proof of its recording shall be submitted to the Building
Commissioner prior to issuance of a Building Permit.
   (3) Encroachments
   Within the easement required in division (c)(2), there shall be no
obstruction otherwise permitted in the applicable yard by Chapter 1140 if in
the judgment of the Building Commissioner it would impede access to the lot
line wall for painting, cleaning, maintenance, repair, or emergency services.
   Roof overhangs shall not project more than 1 foot into the easement on the
abutting lot.  The roof and gutters shall be so designed that water runoff is
confined to the same lot and/or to the easement on the abutting lot.
   (4) Double-Size Yard
   A yard on a conventionally-sited lot that abuts a zero yard on an adjacent
lot shall be at least twice the minimum yard width or depth required in the
applicable zoning district.  No zero yard shall be established on a lot unless
the adjacent lot conforms to this provision.
   (5) Fire-Rated Construction
   Provisions adopted in Chapters 1402 and 1406 of the Codified Ordinances and
established in the CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code and Ohio Basic
Building Code require fire-rated construction for an exterior wall a specified
distance or less from a lot line.  These provisions shall be varied as provided
herein in the case of a lot line wall.
   Such construction shall be required only if the distance between such wall
and the nearest building wall on the adjacent lot is less than twice the
distance from the lot line specified in the applicable Code.
Please Note: To view the Zero Lot Line Graphic, see page 1250-8 of the printed
version of the Barberton Development Code
1250.04 Oil and Gas Wells
(a) Purpose
This section is intended to allow oil and gas well drilling in a manner that is
safe, environmentally sound, and compatible with land uses nearby.
(b) Environmental Protection
   (1) Protection of Water Supply
   The operator shall seal all gas and oil wells to protect fresh water wells
from salt water or other contamination in accordance with good practice.
   Both the operator and his driller shall estab-lish contingency plans for the
immediate furnishing of potable water to affected residents for such period as
may be required to re-es-tablish potability of any contaminated well. 
   In case of contamination, the permittee and the driller shall be jointly and
severally responsible for providing potable water, without cost to affected
water users, including the cost of drilling new wells or any extension of City
water service, including tap-in fees.
   (2) Prohibited Drainage
   No waste, sludge, water, or effluent of any kind from an oil or gas well
shall be emptied or drained into any storm or sanitary sewer, lake, pond, or
stream. 
   Sludge, water, and effluent shall not run off and pollute any area outside
of the dike required in division (d)(2).  Such wastes shall be removed from the
site in trucks, tanks, or sim-ilar vehicles for disposal in suitably licensed
and permitted sites.
(c) Site Development
   (1) Access Roads
   Access roads shall be no less than 12 feet in width.  They shall be
constructed and maintained in a manner that allows access by public safety
vehicles under all climate conditions. The entry roadway shall be graveled.
   (2) Screening
   Screening shall be required around all well sites, tank batteries, and brine
disposal sites as provided in Table 1220A.  All screening shall be completed
within 90 days after setting the storage tanks.
   (3) Culverts
   The applicant shall install a culvert no less than 40 feet long as approved
by the City Engineer at each entrance or exit to provide for a gravel cushion
at road edge to prevent berm and roadway destruction. 
   A steel culvert pipe, a minimum of 30 feet in length, shall be put in the
drainage swale for access to the well site.
   (4) Pipelines
   Off-site pipelines serving the drill site shall be buried at least 3 feet
below ground.
   (5) Fencing
      A. Around Drilling Site
      The permittee shall maintain a fence around the drilling site in
accordance with good oil field practices.
      B. Around Equipment
      All well pumps, tank batteries, sepa-rators, temporary holding pits, and
all other installations of equipment used at oil well installations shall be
surrounded by a fence. 
      The fence shall be a minimum of 8 feet high and of a design and material
specified by the Planning Commission, with locking gates.
      It shall be maintained in a state of repair satisfactory to the Building
Commissioner.
(d) Storage Tanks
   (1) Grouping
   Where more than one well is to be drilled, storage tanks for all wells shall
be grouped together.
   (2) Diking
   All oil well storage tanks or groups of tanks shall be diked, or other
suitable measures shall be taken to prevent discharge of liquid from
endangering adjoining property or reaching waterways. 
   All dikes shall be constructed of earth, clay, steel, masonry, or reinforced
concrete so constructed as to be watertight and shall be properly reinforced
and have footings below the frost line.
   (3) Pits
   All pits used for storage or disposal of sludge or lime shall be lined with
plastic or comparable material to prevent leaching and shall be of sufficient
size to contain all effluents.
(e) Equipment
   (1) Rotary Equipment
   The preparation used in wells drilled with rotary equipment shall be capable
of preventing blowouts and flows of salt or fresh water in accordance with good
practices.
   (2) Cable Tools
   Wells drilled with cable tools shall have the innermost string of casing
equipped with a high pressure master gate valve and control head and oil saver
securely anchored by con-crete prior to drilling any formation likely to
contain oil or gas.
   (3) Condition of Equipment
   Equipment used shall be in good condition.
   (4) Electric Well Pumps
      A. Motors
      All well pumps shall be operated by explosion-proof electric motors only
unless otherwise approved by the Building Commissioner.
      B. Locks
      Locking devices used on all gates, valves, or other secured apparatus in
conjunction with any well or tank battery operated by a permittee shall be
keyed alike so that one key will provide access to any such secured apparatus.
      A copy of such key shall be provided to the Barberton Fire Department and
Police Department.
      C. Painting of Shut-Off Valves
      All shut-off valves shall be painted a conspicuous common color.
      D. Conduit
      Electrical underground power service in schedule 40 plastic conduit
buried to a minimum 24 inches is required.
   (5) Training of Crews
   All crews shall be trained in the operation of the blowout preventer,
control head and related equipment.
(f) Operations
   (1) Noise
   Drilling operations shall be controlled by double exhausts or other means so
that the noise level of drilling does not at any time exceed 75 db(A) at any
point within a 500-foot radius.
   (2) Lighting
   No lighting during drilling or on a producing well shall constitute a
nuisance to surrounding properties.
   (3) Routing of Trucks
   No vehicle transporting brine or crude oil derived from oil or gas wells in
the City shall travel over segments of minor streets that pass through
predominantly residential areas.
   (4) Mud on Site or Streets
   All permittees shall keep the area around the drilling site free of mud that
could be carried onto public streets by any vehicle or other equipment used.
   Should any mud be carried onto public streets from a drilling site, the
permittee shall clean up the public streets to the satisfaction of the Building
Commissioner.
(g) Brine Hauling and Disposal
   (1) Prohibited Disposal
   The following methods of brine disposal are prohibited:
      A. annular disposal
      B. earthen pit storage (sludge and holding pits) during the drilling pro-
cess or the production life of the well
      C. road application or any other surface application
      D. deep well injection.
   (2) Hauling
      A. Permit
      Any person owning or leasing a truck for the purpose of hauling brine
from oil or gas wells within the City shall secure an annual permit issued by
the Safety Director.
      A fee shall be charged for the permit and each renewal thereof in an
amount determined from time to time by City Council.
      B. Manifest
      Each truck hauling brine from an oil or gas well shall maintain a cumula-
tive manifest one calendar year in duration. 
      The manifest shall include the following information on each load of
brine hauled:
         1. source of brine collected
         2. volume of brine collected
         3. time of day brine collected
         4. disposal site of brine
         5. time of day brine disposed of.
(h) Abandoned Wells
   (1)   Notification
   The owner or lessee of a well or deep well injection site shall notify the
Safety Director of proposed abandonment before the well has been abandoned and
the equipment removed.
   A well shall be considered abandoned when it is in a condition in which it
is incapable of functioning for 30 consecutive days.
   (2)   Pulling and Plugging
   All permittees shall be required to pull and/or plug a well site upon
abandonment, to remove all above-ground appurtenances, and to return the ground
to its original grade and condition.
   Any other rules or regulations promulgated by any department or division of
the state relative to pulling, plugging, and abandoning oil or gas wells shall
also be complied with.
   All such efforts shall be completed within 6 months of abandonment.
   (3)   Preservation of Landscaping
   Landscaping shall be preserved at the time of abandonment.
(i)   Other Regulations
   (1)   Maintenance
      The well site shall be maintained in the manner approved in the
Conditional Use Permit required in Chapter 1130.
   (2)   Site Clean-Up
      Immediately upon completion of drilling, the permittee shall restore to
their former condition streets, sidewalks, and other public places damaged or
destroyed in the operation of drilling or preparing to drill.
      The permittee shall clear the area of all litter, rubbish, machinery,
derricks, buildings, oil, or other substances used in drilling or producing
operations.
   (3)   Construction Near Wells or Tanks
      No Building Permit shall be issued for the construction of any building
designed for human occupancy or use located:
      A.   within 100 feet of any oil or gas well until such time as the well
has been plugged, or
      B.   within 100 feet of any oil or gas well storage tank.
   (4)   Drilling of New Wells
      No well shall be drilled nearer than 200 feet to any building designed
for human occupancy.
(j) Administration
   (1) Site Plan
   A Site Plan of the well area shall be submitted with the application for a
Conditional Use Permit.  It shall include all information specified by the
Planning Director in consulta-tion with the City Engineer.
   Wells, tank batteries, and access roads shall be located as shown on the
approved Plan.
   (2) Required Information
      A. For Producing Wells
      An applicant who has realized a producing well shall submit to the
Planning Department:
      1. copies of easements or options for easements for any pipeline crossing
property in another ownership, and
      2. a copy of an agreement or option for any storage tank to be located on
a property in another ownership.
      B. State Permit
      No Conditional Use Permit shall be issued until the applicant presents
evidence of having obtained a permit from the Ohio Department of Natu-ral
Resources, Division of Oil and Gas, bearing a current date.
      C. Emergency Contacts
      The name, address, and telephone number of the persons responsible for
the ownership, operation, and all maintenance of each producing well
      shall be furnished to the Service Director and Safety Director in order
that some responsible person may be reached at any time in the event of an
emergency.
      D. Subcontractors
      The applicant shall provide names, addresses, and telephone numbers of
all subcontractors, including the brine disposal subcontractor.
   (3) Financial Guarantee
   Prior to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit for an oil or gas well,
each applicant
   shall deposit with the Service Director a financial guarantee conforming to
Section 1350.02 to guarantee compliance with all provisions of this section. 
   The amount of the guarantee shall be not less than $5,000, plus $20 for each
foot of roadway required to obtain accessibility to the drill site if a road
exist but is unaccessible.  If no road exists, the amount shall be set by the
Service Director. 
   The guarantee shall be held by the City until the well is abandoned and all
equipment is removed and the well is sealed.  Release shall be conditional upon
compliance with this section by the operator and any assignee, employee,
contractor, subcontractor, or other party performing services in connection
with the Permit. The guarantee shall be released when wells and tank batteries
have been removed and premises restored to pre-drilling conditions as
determined by the Service Director.
   (4) Liability
   The permittee shall hold the City harmless from all liability resulting from
the granting of a Permit hereunder.
   (5) Insurance
   Prior to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit for the drilling of an oil
or gas well, the applicant shall provide the City with a policy or certificate
of insurance covering the applicant's liability in an amount of not less than
$500,000 property damage and not less than $1,000,000 personal injury.
   All insurance policies shall include coverage for all items specified in
this section including blowout and cratering.
   (6) Inspection
   Duly authorized representatives of the City-including the Planning, Service,
and Safety Directors, Building Commissioner, and Fire Chief--shall have
authority at any time to enter property where a well is contemplated, being
drilled, or producing for the purpose of inspecting the site, equipment, and
all other items necessary to ensure compliance with this section.
(Ord. 148-1995. Passed 12-11-95; Ord. 87-1999. Passed 5-24-99.)
1250.05 Junk Yards
(a) Junk Yards Prohibited
Junk and wrecking yards are prohibited within the City of Barberton.
The provisions of this section shall apply to existing legal junk and wrecking
yards as provided in Chapter 1340, Nonconformities.
(b) Setbacks
To provide access for fire fighting equipment and create fire breaks, piles of
junk, salvage, or stored material shall be set back no less than the following
distances:
   From buildings:            30 feet
   From processing machinery:      50 feet
   From screening:         10 feet.
(c) Location
Junk and wrecking yards shall be located only on arterial or collector streets
or minor streets that predominantly serve industrial uses.
(d) Screening
Junk and wrecking yards shall be screened as provided in Table 1220B.
No junk, salvage, or stored material shall be placed outside of required
screening.
(e) Other Regulations
   (1) Tire Storage
   To prevent standing water, salvage or stored tires shall be stored under
roof.
   (2) Burning
   No oil, grease, gasoline, tires, or similar materials shall be burned within
a junk or wrecking yard, and no material that can be ignited by an ordinary
match shall be placed less than 10 feet from a screening either required by
Table 1220B or provided voluntarily.  All other burning shall conform to
applicable regulations.
   (3) Height of Pile
   A pile of junk, salvage, or stored material shall not exceed 10 feet in
fence height, as defined herein, on any lot abutting a Residential District.
   (4) Maintenance
   Junk and wrecking yards shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition free from rats, vermin, and other vectors.
   All improvements shall be maintained in a good state of repair.
1250.06 Satellite Dish Antennas
(a) Purpose
The purpose of the regulations herein is to provide special controls on
satellite dish antennas not applicable to other antennas or to Accessory Uses
generally because of the following special characteristics of dish antennas:
   (1) Dish antennas are bulkier and more opaque than other antennas and than
many other accessory uses, giving them greater potential to block views, impair
security, hinder utility or emergency access, pose safety hazards in high wind
conditions, and accumulate weeds and debris underneath.
   (2) Dish antennas can appeal to children as play areas in ways not
characteristic of other antennas or accessory uses.
   (3) Experience in other communities suggests that dish antennas tend to be
more visually objectionable to neighbors than other antennas and many other
accessory uses.
The regulations in this section are intended to mitigate these problems while
also freely allowing satellite communication and permitting City residents and
businesses a free choice between cable and satellite television services.
(b) Location
   (1) Obstruction of Reception Window
   To avoid the expense and inconvenience of relocating a dish antenna, such
antennas shall to the extent possible be initially sited in a location that
will assure a reception window unobstructed by such development on nearby lots
as is allowed under City regulations.
   (2) Other Location Standards
   Dish antennas shall conform to the other location standards of Table 1250A.
(c) Screening
Both groundand roof-mounted antennas shall be screened as provided in Table
1220B.
(d) Other Regulations
   (1) Permanent Mounting
   Dish antennas shall be permanently mounted and grounded in accordance with
the manufacturer's specifications.  Portable or trailermounted antennas may be
used for on-site testing or demonstrations for no more than 2 consecutive days
and no more than 15 days per calendar year.
   (2) Signs and Graphics
   No sign as defined herein--except for a single sign a maximum of 0.5 square
feet that may identify the antenna manufacturer or provide other information--
shall be displayed on any dish antenna except as meets the requirements of
Chapter 1230.
   No graphic or art work shall be displayed on the antenna except as a
permitted sign.
   (3) Wind Load
   Dish antennas shall support without guy wires a wind load of 85 mph if
mounted on a roof and 75 mph if mounted elsewhere.
   (4) Accessory Use Rules Applicable
   Except where this section establishes an additional or a more restrictive
requirement, dish antennas shall be subject to the regulations on accessory
uses and structures in Chapter 1140.
   (5) Maintenance
   The owner and user of a dish antenna shall be jointly and severally
responsible for main-taining the antenna, its appurtenances, and its screening
in good condition and neat appearance.  Grass and other vegetation beneath and
immediately around the antenna shall be trimmed and debris removed frequently
enough to avoid an unsightly appearance.
   (6) Other Codes Applicable
   Dish antennas shall conform to applicable provisions of the City Building
Code. Electrical installations and grounding of dish antennas shall conform to
the Electrical Code.
   (7) Other Requirements
   Dish antennas shall conform to all requirements of Table 1250A.
(e) Administration
   (1) Exceptions
   The Planning Commission shall approve or conditionally approve a Special
Exception to any provision of this section if it makes a finding of fact based
on evidence presented by the applicant that either of the following Approval
Criteria apply.
      A. Necessary for Communication
      The Exception is necessary to allow adequate reception or transmission of
signals through the antenna, and there are no reasonable alternative measures
not requiring an exception that would allow such reception or transmission.
      B. Necessary to Avoid Undue Costs
      The Exception is necessary because without it the regulations would
impose on the owner costs that are excessive in relation to the cost of
purchase and installation of the antenna. 
   The Commission shall approve only the smallest Exception necessary to
conform to the foregoing Criteria.  Any conditions to which an approval is made
subject shall be only those reasonably necessary to mitigate the impact of
allowing the Exception and shall not be in conflict with either of the Approval
Criteria.
   (2) Permits
      A. Permit Required
      No dish antenna shall be installed before a permit has been issued by the
Building Commissioner.
      He or she shall determine that the proposed dish antenna will comply with
all City regulations applicable to dish antennas before issuing a permit.
      B. Contents of Permit Application
      An application for a permit for a dish antenna shall include the
following information:
      1. Name, address, and telephone number of:
      a. The antenna owner, and
      b. The party that will install the an-tenna, if different from the owner
      2. Address of the property where the antenna is to be installed
      3. Written consent for antenna installation from the owner of the
property on which the installation is proposed, if the antenna owner and
property owner are different
      4. Description of:
      a. the kind of antenna proposed (transmitting or receiving)
      b. the kinds of transmissions (video, voice, data, etc.) it will be used
for
      c. the proposed location of the antenna on the property
      d. the proposed anchoring and grounding of the antenna
      e. the proposed screening, as required hereunder, and, for any reduction
in required screening height under note [k] of Table 1220B, a de-scription of
the reception window that justifies such reduction
      f. the diameter of the reflector and proposed fence height of the antenna
when installed
      5. Any Electrical Permit required for the antenna
      6. A permit fee as established by the City Council in an amount that is
not disproportionate to the cost of antenna purchase and installation
      7. Any other information reasonably required to determine compliance with
applicable City regulations.
Table 1250A:  Standards for Satellite Dish Antennas
 Single- and Two-Family Residential and Townhouse Uses All Other Uses
                          Single- and Two-Family
                          Residential and Townhouse All Other Uses
                          Uses
Antenna Allowed as:
Video Transmitting        Prohibited Use            Conditional Use
Antennas:
All Other Transmitting or Permitted Use, as         Permitted Use, as Principal
Receiving Antennas:       Accessory Use only        or Accessory Use
Maximum Number of Dish    1                         No Maximum
Antennas Per Lot:
Permitted Locations:
Mounting Location:
Up to 3 Feet Diameter:    Ground, Roof, or Building Ground, Roof, or Building
                          Projection                Projection
All Other:                Ground                    Ground or Roof
Yards [a]:                Rear                      Rear, Interior Side, or
                                                    Corner Side
Maximum Dimensions:
Diameter:                 12 feet                   No maximum
Height [b]:
Ground-mounted:           15 feet                   Maximum building height [c]
Roof-mounted or Building  15 feet                   Maximum building height [c]
Projection:
Minimum Setback:
From Lot Lines:
Adjacent to RS or RA      5 feet                    10 feet
District:
All Other Cases:          [d]                       [d]
From Power Lines [e]:     8 feet                    8 feet
From Utility Easements:   8 feet                    8 feet
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------
   [a] Actual yards, as defined herein
   [b] Fence height, as defined herein.
   [c] Maximum building height allowed in applicable district.
   [d] Only the setback required for accessory structures in Chapter 1140.
   [e] Vertical setback from overhead lines carrying over 250 volts.
1250.07 Fences
(a) Purpose
The regulations in this Section are intended to promote safety and security,
protect neighborhood character and property values, and preserve the visual
appearance of the City.
(b) Height and Opacity
All fences, as defined herein, in the City shall con-form to the standards for
height and opacity of Table 1250B.
(c) Location
   (1) On Easements
   Fences may be located on easements at the fence owner's risk subject to the
other requirements herein.
   (2) Entirely Within Lot
   All parts of a fence must be fully inside property lines, except that gates
may swing open over public sidewalks, alleys, and internal drives.
(d) Materials and Construction
   (1) Dangerous Fences
   No fence shall have an electric charge.
   The barbs of a chain link fence shall face toward the ground.
   Fences for industrial uses listed in Group 19 or Group 19C may have barbed
wire on the top provided that:
      A. no more than 3 strands of barbed wire are used, and
      B. the lowest strand has a fence height of no less than 8 feet, and the
vertical supports for the strands slant away from the nearest property line at
an angle from the vertical of not less than 45 degrees if located less than 4
feet from a sidewalk, and
      C. the fence is located on the inside of any Frontage Buffer or
Transition Buffer required by Chapter 1220, Landscaping and Screening.
   Fences with barbed wire that conform to the foregoing requirements may be
approved for other uses as a Conditional Use under division 1310.03(b).
   (2) Permitted Materials
   Fences may be made of the following materials:
      A. Wood, either naturally resistant to decay or chemically treated,
except plywood or other composite wood
      B. Concrete or concrete block
      C. Stone
      D. Masonry
      E. Cast or wrought iron or ornamental aluminum or tubular steel having
the appearance of cast or wrought iron
      F. Living landscaping materials
      G. Earth berms completely covered with sod or other vegetative ground
cover that prevents erosion
      H. Wood bollards and metal chains
      I. Galvanized chain link (rear and interior side yards only)
      J. Corrugated or sheet metal, in Industrial Districts only
      K. Other materials not specifically prohibited hereunder if approved by 
the Planning Director after consultation with the City Engineer and Building
Commissioner as consistent with safety, sound construction, and the appearance
of the environs
      L. Any combination of the above.
   (3) Prohibited Materials
   Fences shall not be made of or contain:
      A. Chicken wire
      B. Corrugated or sheet metal, except in Industrial Districts
      C. Scrap materials
      D. Fragile or readily flammable material such as cloth, canvas, or paper
      E. Barbed wire, spikes, broken glass, or other materials intended or
likely to cause bodily harm, except as per-mitted in division (d)(1) of this
section
      F. Materials not commonly used for fences or walls, except when approved
as compatible with safety, sound construction, and appearance of the environs
by the Planning Director.
(e) Appearance
   (1) Uniform Color
   The entirety of each different material used in the construction of a fence
shall display either its natural color(s) or shall be painted or stained a
single tint or shade of a single color. 
   The Planning Director may approve an exception to this provision if he or
she finds the particular fence colors proposed to be compatible with their
environs.
   (2) Ornamental Fences
   Only ornamental fences, as defined herein, shall be installed in actual
front or actual corner side yards of residential uses located in any district.
   (3) Finished Side Out
   Except as otherwise provided in this Code, the finished side of a fence
shall face the nearest lot line.  Posts and supports shall face away from such
line.
(f) Other Regulations
   (1) Residential Swimming Pool Fences
   Fences shall be provided around residential swimming pools as provided in
Table 1140B.
   (2) Vision Clearance Triangle
   Fences shall conform to the provisions on Vision Clearance Triangle in
division 1240.02(e)(8).
   (3) Required Screening Fences
   Fences or equivalent screening shall be installed as required by Chapter
1220.
   (4) Railroad and Utility Security Fences
   An open fence, as defined herein, that meets the requirements in Table 1250B
for Recreation Fences may be installed for security purposes along a railroad
right-of-way or yard or around a public or public utility structure.
   (5) Maintenance Required
   The owner, occupant, or person in custody of a premises on which a fence is
installed shall so maintain and repair the fence that it:
      A. does not encroach upon the property of others, and
      B. does not exist in a condition likely to collapse or to cause personal
injury or damage to the property of others, and
      C. does not display rotting, rusted or corroded, or dented or damaged
materials, dead vegetation, or worn or eroded ground  cover or otherwise become
unsightly and a blighting influence on the vicinity.
   (6) Temporary Fences
   Fences that are Temporary Uses, such as construction fences, shall be
governed by the provisions for Temporary Uses in division 1310.04(a) and shall
not be subject to the provisions of this section.
   (7) Distance From Building
   To allow passage and permit maintenance of building walls, no fence erected
along a building wall on the same or any adjoining lot shall be installed
closer than a horizontal distance of 3 feet at any point to such wall or any
projection thereof.
   (8) Signs on Fences
   No sign shall be displayed upon a fence except:
      A. a sign not exceeding 0.5 square feet in sign area, which may identify
the vendor of the fence and/or provide other information, and
      B. any other sign permitted by Chapter 1230, Sign Regulations.
   (9) Impairment of Drainage
   No fence shall adversely affect drainage or create or significantly
aggravate runoff problems on abutting lots.
   (10) Conflict With Screening Regulations
   In any case in which the regulations of this section and the provisions of
Chapter 1220, Landscaping and Screening, conflict, the provisions of the latter
shall govern.
(g) Permit Process
   (1) Permit Required
   Except as exempted herein, no fence shall be installed before the Building
Commissioner has issued a Building Permit therefor.
   (2) Application Contents
   An applicant for a Building Permit for a fence shall submit with the
application:
      A. Name, address, and telephone number of:
      1. the fence owner, and
      2. the party that will erect the fence, if different from the owner
      B. Street address of the property where the fence is to be erected
      C. Written consent for fence erection from the owner of the property on
which the fence is to be erected, if fence owner and property owner are
different
      D. A plot plan showing the location and extent of the fence and the
locations of gates in relation to all property lines and structures on the
subject property.
      1. A plot plan shall be a pin survey submitted by a licensed surveyor
with a signed, stamped copy of the survey.
      EXEMPTIONS from D.1.:
      (1)   Ornamental fences, as defined herein, with a height not to exceed
4.5 feet;
      (2)   Written approval from all adjoining property owners indicating
knowledge of the location, material, color, and height of the fence.
      E. Information disclosing:
      1. The proposed fence height at all points upon installation, and
      2. the ratio of the areas of the fence surface that are opaque and such
areas that are open, and
      3. the material(s) from which the fence is made and their color(s)
      F. A permit fee in an amount established by City Council, and
      G. Any other information required generally for Building Permits or
otherwise reasonably required by the Building Commissioner to determine
compliance with these and other applicable regulations.
   (3) Exemptions from Permit
   No Permit shall be required hereunder for repairs or replacements for all or
parts of a fence that do not cumulatively exceed 50 percent of the linear
length of the fence during any twelve-month period.  No Permit is required for
a fence such as a construction fence that is a Temporary Use under division
1310.04(a).
(Ord. 51-2001.  Passed 4-23-01; Ord. 67-2011. Passed 6-27-11; Ord. 180-2013. 
Passed 12-9-13.)
Table 1250B: Maximum Fence Height
                   Maximum Fence Height in Feet [a]
                   In Actual Front or Corner Side In Actual Rear or Interior
                   Yard                           Side Yard
                   Solid Fence Open Fence         Solid Fence Open Fence
A. Within Vision
Clearance Triangle 2.5         4.5                2.5         4.5
[b]:
B. In All Other
Locations:
1. Industrial Uses 4.5         4.5                10          10
2. All Other Uses  X           4.5                6.5         6.5
[c]
3. Recreation      X           12                 X           12
Fences
 
X=Prohibited
[a] Except that along a lot line abutting a yard in a different lot where a
less restricted fence height is permitted hereunder, maximum fence height for
the use shall be the same as allowed in such abutting yard.
[b] As provided in Section 1240.02(e)(8).
[c]  As provided in Section 1250.07(e)(2), only ornamental fences are permitted
in actual front or actual corner side yards of residential uses located in any
district.
The maximum fence height allowed for industrial uses shall also apply to a
fence for any use along a lot line that abuts a railroad right-of-way.
A mixed solid and open fence may be a solid fence up to the maximum height
allowed for a solid fence, but shall be an open fence above that height to the
maximum height allowed for an open fence.
See also regulations for Vision Clearance Triangle in 1240.02(e)(8).
(Ord. 52-2001. Passed 4-23-01.)
Please Note: To view the Maximum Fence Height Graphic, see page 1250-22 of the
printed version of the Barberton Development Code
1250.08 Open Sales Lots
(a) Lot Dimensions
Notwithstanding the provisions of Table 1110D, no open sales lot for motor
vehicles, boats, trailers, and/or manufactured homes shall have lot dimensions
less than the following:
   Lot width      100 feet
   Lot area      12,000 square feet.
1250.09  Wireless Telecommunication Facilities
(a) Purpose
These regulations governing wireless telecommunication facilities are
established to provide for the construction, erection, maintenance, extension
and removal of such facilities in certain zoning districts in the City and are
related to certain applications of technology and engineering in the field of
wireless telecommunication.  The purpose of these regulations is to balance the
competing interests created by the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996
(Public Law 104-104) and the interests of the City in regulating wireless
telecommunication towers and related facilities for the following reasons:
   (1) To provide for orderly development within the City
   (2) To protect property values
   (3) To maintain the aesthetic appearance of the City, including, but not
limited to, its residential character, unobstructed open spaces, and attractive
commercial areas
   (4) To protect residential properties, parks, open spaces and the
nonintensive commercial zoning districts which are characteristic of the City
from the adverse effects of towers and related facilities
   (5) To promote collocation of wireless telecommunication facilities in order
to decrease the total number of towers in the City
   (6) To provide for and protect the  residents and visitors of the City.
(b) Definitions
As used in this section:
   (1) "Collocation" means the use of a wireless telecommunication facility by
more than one wireless telecommunication provider.
   (2) "Lattice tower" means a support structure constructed of vertical metal
struts and cross braces forming a triangular or square structure which often
tapers from the foundation.
   (3) "Monopole" means a support structure constructed of a single, self-
supporting hollow metal tube securely anchored to a foundation.
   (4) "Personal wireless services" means commercial mobile services,
unlicensed wireless services and common carrier wireless exchange access
services, as defined by Federal law at 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7).
   (5) "Technically suitable" means that the location of a wireless
telecommunication antenna reasonably serves the purpose for which it is
intended within the bandwidth of frequencies for which the owner or operator of
the antenna has been licensed by the FCC to operate without a significant loss
of communication capability within developed areas of the City.
   (6) "Telecommunication(s)" means the technology which enables information to
be exchanged through the transmission of voice, video or data signals by means
of electrical or magnetic systems and includes the term "personal wireless
services".
   (7) "Wireless telecommunication antenna" means the physical device through
which electromagnetic, wireless telecommunication signals authorized by the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) are transmitted or received.  Antennas
used by amateur radio operators are excluded from this definition.
   (8) "Wireless telecommunication equipment shelter" means the structure or
cabinet in which the electronic receiving and relay equipment for a wireless
telecommunication facility is housed.
   (9) "Wireless telecommunication facility" means a facility consisting of the
equipment, structures, and site improvements, i.e. fencing and landscaping,
involved in receiving telecommunications or radio signals from a mobile radio
communications source and transmitting those signals to a central switching
computer which connects the mobile unit with the land-based telephone lines for
the provision of personal wireless services.
   (10) "Wireless telecommunication tower" means any structure which elevates
the wireless telecommunication antenna and may include accessory transmission
and receiving equipment.
(c) Applicability
No person shall construct, erect, maintain, extend, or remove a wireless
telecommunication facility in the City without compliance with the provisions
of this section.
(d) Minimum Standards for Construction, Erection, Maintenance, Extension and
Removal
All wireless telecommunication facilities shall comply with the following
standards:
   (1) Use Regulations
      A. A wireless telecommunication tower may only be permitted as a
conditional use in the following zoning districts: C-4 Highway Commercial
District; I-1 Light Industrial District; I-2 Medium Industrial District; and I-
3 telecommunication tower is not permitted in any other zoning district in the
City
      B. The installation of a wireless telecommunication antenna where the
construction or erection of a tower is not proposed by the applicant shall be
permitted as an accessory use on existing towers or on existing buildings or
structures used for multi-family office, commercial, or industrial purposes,
being a minimum of 5 stories in height from grade and where such towers,
buildings or structures are located in the following zoning districts: all
Multi-Family Residential Districts, all Office Districts, all Commercial
Districts, and all Industrial Districts.  To the extent the remaining standards
of this subsection are applicable to the situation involving the installation
of a wireless telecommunication antenna on an existing tower, building or
structure, such standards shall govern the installation.
   (2) Collocation
      A. All applicants for construction or erection of wireless
telecommunication towers shall be required to construct the tower on a base
tower structure and structure foundation that are designed to be buildable up
to, but not including, 200 feet above grade.  Such structure shall be designed
to have sufficient structural loading capacity to accommodate at least 3
antenna platforms or antenna arrays of equal loading capacity for 3 separate
providers of service to be located on the structure when constructed to the
maximum allowable height.  The wireless telecommunication facility shall also
be designed to show that the applicant has enough space on its site plan for an
equipment shelter large enough to accommodate at least 3 separate users of the
facility.  If an equipment shelter is initially constructed to accommodate only
1 user, space shall be reserved on site for equipment shelter expansions to
accommodate up to at least 3 separate users.  Agreement to the provisions of
this subsection must be included in the applicant's lease with the landowner,
if different from the owner/user of the tower.  Written documentation must be
presented to the Building Commissioner evidencing that the landowner of the
property on which the tower is to be located has agreed to the terms of this
subsection.  As an additional condition of issuing a conditional use permit,
the owner/user shall respond in writing to any inquiries regarding collocation
of another user of the facility within 30 days after receipt of written
inquiry.  Copies of all written requests to collocate and all written responses
shall be sent to the Building Commissioner.
      B. The applicant requesting permission to install a new tower shall
provide:
         1. Evidence that there is no technically suitable space for the
applicant's antenna(s) and related facilities reasonably available on an
existing tower, building or structure within the geographic area to be served;
and
         2. Subject to economic and technical feasibility, evidence that the
most current technology in the field of personal wireless services is being
utilized in the application.
           With its application, the applicant shall also identify the location
of every tower, building or structure that could support the proposed antenna
(s) or the area where it would be technically suitable to locate so as to allow
it to serve its intended function.  As part of its application, the applicant
shall provide a scaled map of all of its existing, proposed or planned antenna
locations within a five-mile radius of the site which is the subject of the
application.
      C. The applicant must demonstrate that a technically suitable location is
not reasonably available on an existing tower, building or structure.  If an
existing tower, building or structure is technically suitable, the applicant
must demonstrate that it has made written request to collocate on the existing
tower, building or structure and the request was rejected by the owner of the
tower, building or structure.  In all circumstances, owners of existing towers
shall promptly respond in writing to requests for collocation, but in no event
shall they respond more than 30 days from the date of receipt of a written
request for collocation.  If another telecommunication tower is technically
suitable, the applicant must further show that it has offered to allow the
owner of that other tower to collocate an antenna on another tower within the
City which is owned or controlled by the applicant, if available, on
commercially reasonable terms and the offer was not accepted.
   (3) Spacing
   There shall be a separation of a minimum of 1/4 mile between wireless
telecommunication towers.
   (4) Height
   The maximum height of a free-standing wireless telecommunication tower,
including its antenna and all appurtenances, shall be less than 200 feet above
grade.  The maximum height of any wireless telecommunication antenna installed
pursuant to paragraph (d)(1)B. hereof, shall be no greater than the height of
the existing tower, building or structure to which it is attached.  The height
of any equipment shelter shall not exceed 15 feet from grade.
   (5) Setbacks
   All wireless telecommunication towers shall be set back from property lines
of residentially-zoned or used properties a distance of at least 110 percent of
the height of the tower.  Otherwise, the tower and related facilities shall be
a minimum of 40 feet from the front, rear and side property line.  In no event
shall a wireless telecommunication tower or facility be located in front of the
principal building on the lot, if any.
   (6) Design
      A. All wireless telecommunication towers shall be of a monopole design,
as opposed to a lattice design.
      B. All wireless telecommunication facilities shall be subject to review
by the Design Review Board for the purpose of enhancing the compatibility of
the facilities with their surroundings, but subject to the limitations set
forth in Section 1310.08(d).  The color of a wireless telecommunication tower
and/or antenna shall be as determined by the Design Review Board for the
purpose of minimizing its visibility, unless otherwise required by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) or the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
   (7) Landscaping
   A landscaped area constituting a "transition buffer" and "frontage buffer"
of "maximum" intensity, as set forth in Chapter 1220, shall be provided outside
the security fence of the facility.
   (8) Engineering Report
   A report shall be prepared and submitted by a qualified and licensed
professional engineer and shall provide proof of compliance with all applicable
Federal, State, County and City regulations.  The report shall include a
detailed description of the telecommunication tower, antenna(s), equipment
shelter, and appurtenances, and shall certify that radio frequency
(electromagnetic) emissions are in compliance with the regulations of the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
   (9) Maintenance
      A. The applicant shall submit a plan documenting how the wireless
telecommunication facility will be maintained on the site in an ongoing manner
that meets industry standards.
      B. On each biennial anniversary of the issuance of the building permit
for a wireless telecommunication facility, or not more than 90 days prior
thereto, the owner/user shall submit to the City a report prepared by a
licenses professional engineer which shall verify continued compliance of the
facility with all governmental requirements, including, but not limited to, the
structural integrity and stability of any towers or antennas, electrical safety
standards, and auxiliary power source safety standards.
   (10) Lighting Prohibited
   Except as required by law, an antenna or a tower shall not be illuminated
and lighting fixtures or signs shall not be attached to the antenna or tower. 
If lighting is required by Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations,
the most visually nonobtrusive state-of-the-art lighting available shall be
used, unless otherwise required by the FAA.
   (11) Security
      A. A security fence not less than 8 feet in height shall fully enclose
those portions of the wireless telecommunication facility which come in contact
with the ground.  Gates shall be locked at all times.
      B. A permanent warning sign with a minimum size of 2 square feet and a
maximum size of 6 square feet shall be posted on the site, as well as an
emergency telephone number of the owner/user of each set of antennas on the
site.  The owner/user shall also provide the Building Commissioner, the City
Fire Department, and the City Police Department with information on whom to
contact, an address, and a telephone number in event of an emergency.
   (12) Advertising Prohibited
   No advertising signs or devices shall be permitted anywhere on a wireless
telecommunication facility site.
   (13) Outdoor Storage
   There shall be no outdoor storage of equipment or other items on the
wireless telecommunication facility site except during the facility
construction period and to supply emergency power to the facility only during a
power outage.
   (14) Access to Facility
   The access driveway to the wireless telecommunication facility shall,
whenever feasible, be provided along with circulation driveways of the existing
use on the lot, if any.  Where use of an existing driveway is not feasible, the
driveway to the facility shall be a minimum of 18 feet in width with a minimum
overhead clearance of 11 feet and shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from
the nearest side or rear lot line.  This driveway shall meet the load
limitations for fire equipment.  If the access road to the facility is more
than 1,500 feet from the public right-of-way, a turnaround shall be provided
for emergency vehicles at the site and a by-pass, adequate for emergency
vehicles, with an approachable access, shall be provided for each additional
1,500 feet of the driveway.  There shall be a maximum of 1 off-street parking
space on the facility site.
   (15) Accessory Equipment Shelter
   The maximum cumulative total size of all equipment shelters accessory to a
telecommunication tower or antenna on a lot shall be 750 square feet and their
maximum height shall not exceed 15 feet from grade.  Only 1 equipment shelter,
or the configuration of more than 1 shelter to appear that there is 1 shelter,
shall be permitted on a lot.  Where it is technically feasible and reasonably
practical to do so, an existing building or structure on a lot shall be used to
shelter equipment associated with a wireless telecommunication facility.
   (16) Underground Utilities
   All utility lines from the utility source to the wireless telecommunication
facility shall be underground.
   (17) Time Limit for Commencement and Completion
   After issuance of a building permit to construct a wireless
telecommunication facility, the applicant shall commence construction within 6
months and shall complete construction within 1 year or the building permit
shall expire.
   (18) Abandonment and Removal of Facilities
      A. If at any time the use of the wireless telecommunication facility is
discontinued for 180 consecutive days, said facility shall be deemed
abandoned.  The Building Commissioner shall notify the owner/user in writing
and advise such owner/user that the facility must be reactivated within 90 days
or it must be dismantled and removed from the site within that same 90-day
period at the cost of the owner/user.  The owner/user of the wireless
telecommunication facility shall, on no less than an annual basis from the date
of issuance of the building permit, file a declaration with the Building
Commissioner as to the continuing operation of each of its facilities within
the City.
      B. The applicant for the wireless telecommunication facility shall be
required, as a condition of issuance of a building permit, to post a cash or
surety bond acceptable to the Director of Law of not less than $100.00 per
vertical foot from grade of the wireless telecommunication facility, which bond
shall insure that an abandoned, obsolete or destroyed wireless
telecommunication antenna or tower shall be removed within 180 days of
cessation of use or abandonment.  Any successor-in-interest or assignee of the
applicant shall be required to additionally execute such bond, as principal, to
insure that the bond will be in place during the period of time that the
successor-in-interest or assignee occupies the facility.
(e) Exemption of Certain City Property
Regardless of the provisions of this section, a wireless telecommunication
facility may be permitted on any property owned or controlled by the City and
used for public services and shall be constructed, erected, maintained,
extended and removed under such conditions, standards and regulations as
required by the City Council.  The design shall be approved by the Design
Review Board prior to construction.
(Ord. 185-1997.  Passed 12-2-97.)
1250.10  Alternative Energy System Regulations
(a)   Purpose
It is the purpose of this section to regulate the construction, modification
and operation of renewable energy systems in the City, subject to reasonable
conditions that will protect the public health, safety and welfare while
preserving the enjoyment of private property, promoting orderly land use and
development, and allowing the safe, effective and efficient use of renewable
energy systems installed to reduce the on-site consumption of utility supplied
electricity.
(b)   Definitions
   (1)   Applicant: The person or entity filing an application under this
section.
   (2)   Facility owner:  The entity or entities having equity interest in the
wind energy facility, including their respective successors and assigns.
   (3)   Fuel, approved:  Approved fuel for outdoor furnaces shall be natural
wood, corn, or the manufacturer's listed fuels.  Burning of any and all other
materials is prohibited, including but not limited to plastics, naphtha,
leaves, trash, rubbish, garbage, construction materials, treated wood, yard
waste, green wood, pallets, etc.
   (4)   Large wind energy system: A wind energy system which has a rated
capacity of more than 20 kilowatts (kW) and not more than 5 MW and which is
intended to primarily reduce non-residential on-site consumption of utility
supplied electricity.
   (5)   Lattice tower: A tower constructed of vertical metal struts and cross
braces forming a square or triangular structure that tapers from the
foundation.
   (6)   Monopole tower: A tower constructed of a single, self-supporting metal
tube, anchored to a foundation and with controls locked inside the tube.
   (7)   Non-participating landowner: Any landowner except a landowner on whose
property all or a portion of a wind energy system is located pursuant to an
agreement with the wind energy system owner or operator.
   (8)   Operator: The entity responsible for the day-to-day operation and
maintenance of the wind energy system.
   (9)   Occupied building: A residence, school, hospital, church, public
library or other building/structure used for private or public gathering that
is occupied, certificated for occupancy or in use when a permit application is
submitted.
   (10)   Outdoor furnaces: Outdoor furnaces are generally installed outside,
sometimes within a small insulated shed, some distance from the home for the
primary purpose of the combustion of solid fuel (wood or corn) to heat interior
space or water. These are not to be confused with wood-burning stoves and
fireplaces.
   (11)   Renewable energy system:  An energy system powered by a natural
resource such as sunlight, wind or combustion of solid fuel rather than by the
use of a conventional source of energy such as petroleum products, natural gas,
manufactured gas, or electricity produced from a nonrenewable source, and
specifically including a wind energy system, a solar energy system or outdoor
furnace as defined in this section.
   (12)   Rotor: The rotating part of a wind system or turbine, including the
blades.
   (13)   Shadow flicker: The on-and-off flickering effect of a shadow caused
when the sun passes behind the rotor of a wind energy system.
   (14)   Small wind energy system: A wind energy system which has a rated
capacity of not more than 20 kilowatts (kW) and which is intended to primarily
reduce on-site consumption of utility supplied electricity.
   (15)   Solar energy system (active or passive):  The equipment and requisite
hardware that provides and is used for collecting, transferring, converting,
storing, or using incident solar energy for water heating, space heating,
cooling, generating electricity, or other applications that would otherwise
require the use of a conventional source of energy such as petroleum products,
natural gas, manufactured gas, or electricity produced from a nonrenewable
resource.  Such systems include passive solar energy systems that capture the
sun's energy in building design and construction components; solar thermal
energy systems that convert sunlight to heat as in a hot water tank or swimming
pool; and photovoltaic solar energy systems that convert sunlight to
electricity.
   (16)   Wind turbine height: The height from pre-existing natural grade to
the highest point of the wind turbine rotor plane or tip of the turbine blade
at its highest elevation.
   (17)   Wind energy system: An electric generating system, whose main purpose
is to supply electricity, consisting of one or more wind turbines, supporting
structures and other accessory structures, buildings, including substations,
meteorological towers, electrical infrastructure, transmission lines and other
appurtenant structures and systems.
   (18)   Wind energy system owner: The entity or entities having an equity
interest in the wind energy system, including their respective successors and
assigns.
   (19)   Wind turbine: A wind energy conversion system that controls or
converts wind energy into electricity through the use of a generator.
(c)   Applicability
   (1)   No person shall construct, erect, maintain, expand or remove a
renewable energy system in any zoning district, in the City, without compliance
with the provisions of this section.
   (2)   Renewable energy systems constructed prior to the effective date of
this section shall not be required to meet the requirements of this Code;
provided that any physical modification to such pre-existing renewable energy
system that materially alters the size, type or number of wind turbines or
other equipment shall require compliance with this section, including
conditional use approval in the case of wind energy systems.  If any
preexisting renewable energy system is destroyed or damaged to the extent of
more than 50 percent of its fair market value at the time of destruction or
damage, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with this section.
   (3)   Like-kind replacements as determined by the Building Commissioner
shall not require review by the Planning Commission or approval from City
Council.
(d)   Use Regulations
   (1)   Wind Energy Systems:  A wind energy system shall be considered a
conditional use in any zoning district.  No wind energy system shall be
constructed or located within the City unless a conditional use permit is
issued as outlined in Chapter 1320 and a site plan has been recommended for
approval by the Building Commissioner.  Any addition or modification to a wind
energy system that alters the size, type and number of wind turbines or other
equipment shall be subject to additional site plan reviews and reconsideration
of the issued conditional use permit.  In all cases, the applicant must
demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this section and the
requirements of any other applicable section of this Code.
   (2)   Solar Energy Systems:  Solar energy systems shall be considered a
permitted use in any zoning district, subject to the requirements of this
section and the requirements of any other applicable section of this Code.
   (3)   Outdoor Furnaces:  Outdoor furnaces as defined herein are prohibited
for use in any residential district as outlined in Section 1140.01(b)(10) of
the Barberton Development Code.  For all other districts, a conditional use
permit is required as outlined in Chapter 1320 of the Barberton Development
Code.
(e)   Contents of Application
   (1)   Wind Energy System
      A.   An application for a wind energy system shall be approved in
accordance with the conditional use procedures pursuant to Chapter 1320 and in
conformance with the standards and criteria of Chapter 1310.
      B.   In addition to the submission requirements as set forth in Chapter
1320, the following shall be submitted in an application for approval unless
determined by the Planning Director to be inapplicable or unnecessary:
         1.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
         2.   A narrative describing the proposed wind energy system, including
the approximate generating capacity of the project and the number, manufacturer
and model, rotor diameter and composition, height of the wind turbines to be
constructed, their individual generating capacity, and a description of
ancillary systems.
         3.   A site plan to scale of the subject property, which shall include
where applicable, the planned location of each wind turbine, property and
setback lines, adjoining streets, access road and turnout locations, substation
(s), location of electrical cabling from the wind energy system to the
substation(s), proposed and existing ancillary equipment, buildings, and
structures, permanent meteorological towers and associated transmission lines,
the lighting plan, identification and zoning designations of the subject and
adjacent properties, location of any buildings or improvements for the
properties extending 300 feet beyond all property lines with the fall zone of
the proposed wind turbine shown, all above-ground utility lines within a radius
equal to 1.1 times the height of a proposed wind turbine and the location of
all underground utility lines on the wind energy system site and other
information the City may require.
         4.   An affidavit or similar evidence of agreement between the
property owner and the system owner or operator demonstrating that the system
owner or operator has the permission of the property owner to apply for
necessary permits for construction and operation of the wind energy system.
         5.   Evidence of compliance or non-applicability with Federal Aviation
Administration requirements.
         6.   A certification of a Licensed Ohio Professional Engineer that the
foundation and tower design of the wind energy system is within accepted
professional standards, given local soil and climate conditions.
         7.   Certificates of design compliance obtained by the equipment
manufacturers from Underwriters Laboratories, and other similar certifying
organizations to evidence that the design of the wind energy system conforms to
applicable industry standards, including those of the American National
Standards Institute.
         8.   Evidence that the local public electric utility company has been
informed of the customer's intent to install an interconnected customer-owned
generator.  A copy of the power purchase agreement along with the inter-
connectivity agreement shall be provided.
         9.   All documents related to decommissioning per Section
1250.10(i).
         10.   A description of emergency and normal shutdown and start up
procedures.
         11.   Approval by any other applicable agencies deemed necessary by
the Building Commissioner.
   (2)   Solar Energy System
      A.   An application for a solar energy system shall be approved in
conformance with the standards and criteria of this section and shall include:
         1.   A narrative describing the proposed solar energy system,
including the approximate generating capacity of the project and the number,
manufacturer and model, of the solar panels to be installed, their individual
generating capacity, and a description of ancillary systems.
         2.   For ground mounted systems, a site plan to scale of the subject
property showing the planned location of the solar panels, setback lines,
proposed and existing ancillary equipment, buildings, and structures, and other
information the City may require.
         3.   Evidence of compliance or non-applicability with Federal Aviation
Administration requirements.
         4.   Certificates of design compliance obtained by the equipment
manufacturers from Underwriters Laboratories, and other similar certifying
organizations to evidence that the design of the solar energy system conforms
to applicable industry standards, including those of the American National
Standards Institute.
         5.   Evidence that the local public electric utility company has been
informed of the customer's intent to install an interconnected customer-owned
generator.  A copy of the power purchase agreement along with the
interconnectivity agreement shall be provided.
         6.   All systems located on the roof shall provide, as part of their
permit application, evidence of design review and structural certification.
         7.   A description of emergency and normal shutdown procedures.
   (3)   Outdoor Furnaces
      A.   An application for an outdoor furnace energy system shall be
approved in accordance with the conditional use procedures pursuant to Chapter
1320 and in conformance with the standards and criteria of Chapter 1310 and
shall include:
         1.   Outdoor furnaces must be EPA Phase II Program Qualified or
better.
         2.   A site plan showing:
            a.   Location in rear yard.
            b.   Minimum setback to all property lines of 25 feet.
            c.   If located within 100 feet of any residential district a stack
height adjusted to minimize smoke encroaching onto neighboring properties at
human occupied levels.
            d.   The maximum height for the furnace and/or enclosure which
shall not exceed 15 feet, measured from the average grade at the base of the
furnace to the top, not including the stack.
      B.   The property owner is required to obtain all required permits as
they relate to building standards.
(f)   Design and Performance Standards
   (1)   General
      A.   Lighting:  Renewable energy systems shall be lit only if required by
the Federal Aviation Administration or other applicable authority or if it is
determined that doing so repels wildlife migratory patterns.  Lighting of other
parts of the renewable energy system, such as appurtenant structures, shall be
limited to that required for safety and operational purposes, and shall be
reasonably shielded from abutting properties.
      B.   Construction Codes:  To the extent applicable, the renewable energy
system shall comply with the Ohio Building Code and any other applicable local
building codes.
      C.   FAA Regulations:  All renewable energy systems shall comply with all
relevant FAA guidelines.
      D.   Electric Codes: Permit applications for renewable energy systems
shall be accompanied by a schematic drawing of the electrical components, as
supplied by the manufacturer, in sufficient detail to allow for a determination
that the manner of installation conforms to all relevant and applicable local,
state and national codes, including the National Electrical Code UL 174 and
IEEE 1547.  Renewable energy systems shall incorporate back-up technologies
such as surge and lightning arrestors. All renewable energy systems shall be
grounded to reduce lightning strikes. All electrical lines and utility wires
shall be buried underground to the utility disconnect.
      E.   Utility Notification: For all renewable energy systems that shall be
connected to the electric utility grid, permits for renewable energy systems
shall not be issued until evidence has been provided that the utility company
approves the customer's intent to install an interconnected customer-owned
generator. Applicant shall supply the letter of approval from the utility at
the time of application.
      F.   Appearance and Signage: Renewable energy systems shall maintain the
default manufacturer's color.  No appurtenance other than those associated with
the renewable energy system shall be affixed to any renewable energy system. 
The factory or original equipment manufacturer identification and/or logo are
permitted.  Required signage shall be appropriate warning signs (Danger-High
Voltage or Caution-Electrical Shock Hazard or any other recognized safety
precaution signage) installed at the base of the wind turbine or solar array. 
In the case of a wind energy system, a sign, no larger than 2 square feet in
area, shall be affixed to the system and placed no higher than 6 feet from
grade, shall display the owner's, manufacturer's and installer's names and
contact information, and shall be subject to approval as part of the
conditional use permitting process.
      G.   Completion: A renewable energy system installation shall commence
within 6 months of the issuance of the zoning permit and shall be completed and
operational within 1 year from the date of commencement of installation. 
Commencement of installation shall be the date the tower or supporting
structure is placed into position.  If the renewable energy system is not
completed within the stated time period, then the facility owner or operator or
the landowner shall be required, at his or their expense, to complete
decommissioning of the site subject to the requirements of Section 1250.10(i)
within 6 months.
   (2)   Specific to Wind Energy Systems
      A.   Setback: All wind turbines shall set back from all property lines,
occupied buildings, public right-of-ways, and public utility lines a distance
of not less than 1.1 times the wind turbine height and be at least 750 feet in
horizontal distance from the tip of the turbine's nearest blade at 90 degrees
to the exterior of the nearest, habitable, residential structure, if any,
located on adjacent property at the time of certification.  The setback
distance shall be measured from the center of the supporting structure of the
wind turbine at pre-existing ground level.
      B.   Turbine Height: Provided that the total height of the wind turbine
meets sound and setback requirements, there shall be no specific height
limitation, except as imposed by Federal Aviation Administration regulations.
      C.   Tower Design:  The use of guy wires and guy wire anchors are
prohibited.
      D.   Sound: Sound produced by the wind energy system shall not exceed 60
dB(A), under normal operating conditions, as measured at the property line of a
residential zoning district, using normal testing procedures.  Sound levels may
be exceeded during short-term events out of anyone's control such as utility
outages and/or severe wind storms.
      E.   Wind Energy System Equipment:  Small wind energy system equipment
proposed to be installed and/or constructed shall bear an approval from any
wind certification program recognized by the American Wind Energy Association
or any equivalent certifying agency.  Large wind energy system equipment shall
have ANSI Certification IEC 61400-SER series of wind energy system tests (power
performance, safety and function, duration, noise, and power quality) or
certification from another recognized industry standard. The proposed
installation shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations. The City
reserves the right to require additional equipment certification.
      F.   Access: Any climbing foot pegs or rungs below 12 feet of a
freestanding tower shall be removed to prevent unauthorized climbing. All
access doors to wind turbines and electrical equipment shall be locked or
fenced, as appropriate to prevent entry by non-authorized persons.
      G.   Shadow Flicker:  The wind energy system owner and operator shall
make reasonable efforts to minimize shadow flicker to any occupied building on
a non-participating landowner's property.
      H.   Roof mounted: The height of a rooftop or other building-mounted wind
turbine shall not exceed the maximum permitted building height for the property
by more than 20 percent.
   (3)   Specific to Solar Energy Systems
      A.   Solar Access Easements:  Ohio R.C. 5301.63 sets forth the
requirements for solar access easements.  For the purpose of ensuring adequate
access of solar energy collection devices to sunlight, any person may grant a
solar access easement.  Such easements shall be in writing and shall be subject
to the same conveyance and recording requirements as other easements.  Any
instrument creating a solar easement shall be recorded in the Summit County
Recorder's office.
      B.   Solar panels must be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
design and operation standards as well as all local, county, state and federal
guidelines.
      C.   Roof Mounted
         1.   Roof mounted solar energy systems shall be permitted in all
zoning districts provided the roof mounted solar energy system shall not exceed
the maximum building height for the zoning district, shall be installed in
compliance with all applicable local and state fire and building codes. 
Detailed architectural and/or engineered drawings and specifications may be
required by the Building Commissioner to verify that the roof is structurally
designed to support additional loading.  The collectors shall be generally
mounted parallel with the roof pitch.  The distance between the roof and the
uppermost portion of the solar panels shall not exceed 18 inches.  Roof mounted
panels, on a flat roof, shall not project vertically more than 5 feet from the
surface of the roof.
      D.   Ground Mounted
         1.   Solar panels located on the ground or attached to a framework
located on the ground, shall not exceed 8 feet in height above the adjacent
grade.
         2.   All related mechanical equipment, other than the actual
photoelectric panels, shall be fully screened from the adjacent properties by
fencing or a combination of evergreen and deciduous plantings.
         3.   Non-Residential:  Ground mounted solar energy systems shall be
permitted in the front yard, side yard and rear yard of a commercial or
industrial property, but shall not be located within the applicable front yard,
side yard, or rear yard setback of any commercial or industrial property. 
Ground mounted solar energy equipment shall be installed in compliance with the
applicable building code.
         4.   Residential:  Ground mounted solar energy systems shall not be
permitted in the front yard of a residential property.  It shall be permitted
in the side yard of a residential property, but shall not be located within the
applicable side yard setback.  It shall be permitted in the rear yard of a
residential property.  Such equipment shall be subject to the applicable rear
yard coverage regulations and setbacks for accessory structures in residential
districts as set forth in Chapter 1240.
(g)   Insurance
   (1)   Solar Energy System:  The solar energy system shall be listed as an
appurtenant structure on owner's property liability insurance policy.  Policies
shall be made available to the City upon request.  Additional insurance beyond
owners' property liability coverage shall not be required.
   (2)   Small Wind Energy System:  A small wind energy system shall be listed
as an appurtenant structure on owner's property liability insurance policy. 
Policies shall be made available to the City upon request.  Additional
insurance beyond owners' property liability coverage shall not be required.
   (3)   Large Energy Wind System:  There shall be maintained a current general
liability policy naming the City as additional insured covering bodily injury
and property damage with limits of at least $1,000,000 per occurrence and
$1,000,000 in the aggregate.  Policies shall be made available to the City upon
request.
(h)   Maintenance
All structures, buildings, fences and property used in connection with a
renewable energy system shall be maintained in good condition and in safe
working order.  Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to painting,
structural repairs and upkeep of security measures.  Failure to do so shall
require immediate decommissioning under the requirements of this section and
any other applicable governmental regulations.
(i)   Decommissioning of Wind Energy Systems
   (1)   The owner/operator shall be responsible for obtaining an independent
and certified professional engineer for the preparation of an analysis and
report of the cost of removal and site restoration, and be responsible for the
payment of all costs associated with the preparation of the analysis and
report.  At all times the facility owner or operator of the wind energy system
shall maintain decommissioning funds in the form of a performance bond or
equivalent financial instrument sufficient to cover the demolition and removal
of the wind energy system.  Such bond or other instrument shall be sufficient
to guarantee full and faithful performance of the requirements of this section
and shall be satisfactory to the Director of Law.  Proof that the requirement
of this section is met shall be made available to the City upon request.  The
City may invoke use of any or all of the mechanisms to provide for
decommissioning of the wind energy system.  This requirement for a performance
bond or equivalent financial instrument shall not apply in the case of a wind
turbine that does not exceed 35 feet height.
   (2)   The wind energy system owner, operator, or landowner shall, at their
expense, complete decommissioning of the wind energy system within 12 months
after the end of the useful life of the wind energy system following all
applicable Federal, State and local mandates and statutes.
   (3)   The wind energy system will presume to be at the end of its useful
life if no electricity is generated for a continuous period of 12 months.
   (4)   Decommissioning shall include removal of wind energy system including
all wind turbines, structures, buildings, cabling, electrical components,
roads, and foundations to a depth of 36 inches, and any other associated
systems to the state it was prior to application.
   (5)   Disturbed earth shall be graded and re-seeded, unless the landowner
requests in writing that the access roads or other land surface areas not be
restored.
   (6)   If neither the wind energy system owner or operator nor landowner
complete decommissioning within the period prescribed above, the City shall
take such measures as necessary to complete decommissioning of the wind energy
system.  Said costs may be certified to the County Auditor as a lien upon the
property.  The entry into and submission of evidence of a participating
landowner agreement to the City shall constitute agreement and consent of the
parties to the agreement, their respective heirs, successors and assigns that
the City may take such action as necessary to implement the decommissioning
plan.
   (7)   The escrow agent shall release the decommissioning funds when the wind
energy system owner, operator or landowner has demonstrated and the City
concurs that decommissioning has been satisfactorily completed, or upon written
approval of the City in order to implement the decommissioning.
(j)   Remedies
   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to violate
or fail to comply with or take any action which is contrary to the terms of
this section, or any permit issued under this section, or cause another to
violate or fail to comply, or to take any action which is contrary to the terms
of this section or any permit issued under this section.
   (2)   If the City determines that a violation of this section or the permit
has occurred, the Building Commissioner and/or Planning Director shall provide
written notice to any person, firm, or corporation alleged to be in violation
of this section.  If the alleged violation does not pose an immediate threat to
public health or safety, the City and the parties shall engage in good faith
negotiations to resolve the alleged violation.  Such negotiations shall be
conducted within thirty days of the notice of the violation.
   (3)   If after 30 days from the date of the notice of violation the City
determines, at its discretion, that the parties have not resolved the alleged
violation, the City may institute civil enforcement proceedings or any other
remedy at law to ensure compliance with this section or permit.
(Ord. 172-2011.  Passed 11-14-11.)
1250.11   Large Adult Care Facility and Large Group Home
(a)   Applicability
   (1)   All activities, programs and other events shall be directly related to
the conditional use that has been applied for and approved, and any changes
from the approved conditional use shall be reviewed and approved by the
Planning Commission according to the procedures in Chapter 1310.
   (2)   The architectural design and site layout of the residential facility,
and any walls, screens, or fences connected with the residential facility,
shall be compatible with adjoining land uses and the residential character of
the neighborhood.
   (3)   The facility shall meet local fire safety and building code
requirements for the proposed use and level of occupancy.
   (4)   Evidence shall be presented that the proposed facility meets the
certification, licensing or approval requirements of the appropriate state
agency.  Failure to maintain such license, certification or other approval
requirements shall result in immediate revocation of the facility's conditional
use permit.
   (5)   In considering whether to grant the conditional use, the Planning
Commission shall take into consideration the proximity and location of other
such facilities within the neighborhood so as not to change the character of
the area, create undue congestion in the public ways, or otherwise adversely
impact upon a given area with such use.
(Ord. 89-2014.  Passed 9-8-14.)
1250.12   Donation Boxes
(a)   Definitions
   (1)   Contents:  Any items in or on a donation box or any items surrounding
a donation box that appear to be donated or abandoned goods or rubbish.
   (2)   Director:  The Director of the Department of Planning and Community
Development or his/her designee, unless otherwise indicated.
   (3)   Donation box:  Any receptacle designed with a door, slot, or other
opening that is intended to collect and store donated goods, including but not
limited to, clothing, shoes, or household items.  "Donation box" shall not
include any receptacle that is physically attended at all times of collection
by one or more persons, any receptacle that is located inside a building,
receptacles exclusively used to recycle paper or any receptacle owned by a
governmental agency.
   (4)   Donation box license:  A license issued for the operation and
placement of a donation box in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (5)   Lessee:  Any person or entity, other than the owner, in lawful control
of the property.
   (6)   Licensed operator:  The operator listed on the donation box license
application of a validly licensed donation box.
   (7)   Operator:  Any person or entity having actual control over a donation
box, other than the owner, who is primarily responsible for the placing,
emptying, servicing, maintaining, and removing of the donation box.
   (8)   Owner:  A person or entity in whom ownership, dominion, control, or
title is vested.
   (9)   Parcel:  Contiguous parcel or parcels, described in the Summit County
Land Records, under single ownership, developed or used for a single unified
use, including as vacant land.
(b)   General Prohibitions
   (1)   No owner or operator of a donation box shall place or maintain a
donation box on any property in the City of Barberton without first obtaining
and maintaining a valid license for such donation box from the Department of
Planning and Community Development in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter.
   (2)   No owner or operator of a donation box shall fail to service and
maintain any donation box in the City of Barberton in accordance with the
standards and requirements of this chapter.
   (3)   No owner or lessee of property in the City of Barberton shall allow a
donation box to be placed or remain on the property in violation of this
chapter.
(c)   Donation Box License Application; Fee; Issuance; Term
   (1)   Application.  Before placing a donation box on any property in the
City of Barberton, the owner of the donation box shall file a license
application with the Department of Planning and Community Development for each
donation box, on the form provided by the City, which shall contain the
following information:
      A.   If the applicant is a business entity:
         1.   The legal name, business address, daytime phone number, email
address of applicant, and tax identification number of the organization.  A
copy of the current articles of incorporation or other operating or formation
documents for the organization.
         2.   The name, title, address, phone number, and email address of the
operator of the donation box.
      B.   If the applicant is an individual:
         1.   The name, address, daytime phone number, email address of
applicant, and social security number of the individual.
         2.   A copy of a valid form of State or Federal identification for the
owner.
      C.   For all applicants:
         1.   A signed authorization from the owner or lessee of the property
where the donation box will be placed, which shall state the owner or lessee's
consent to have the donation box placed on the property and include the owner
or lessee's name, address, phone number, and email address (if any).
         2.   Current photos of the donation box (taken within 6 months of the
filing of the license application), showing all sides of the donation box,
excluding the bottom, including a readable view of any text displayed on the
donation box.
         3.   A property site plan showing the proposed placement of the
donation box.
         4.   A certificate of liability insurance providing evidence of
liability insurance coverage in an amount determined by the director.
         5.   A $100.00 non-refundable annual license application fee per
donation box, which shall not be prorated based upon the time of year the
license application is filed.
         6.   Such other information as the director shall require.
   (2)   Issuance:
      A.   No donation box license shall be issued unless the applicant files a
valid application as required by this chapter.
      B.   No donation box license shall be issued if the donation box owner or
operator, or the property owner or lessee listed on the application has been
convicted of 3 or more violations of this chapter or is liable for any unpaid
charges under this chapter.
      C.   Prior to issuing a donation box license under this chapter, the
director or his/her designee shall review and approve a property site plan.
         1.   No donation box license shall be issued if the Director of the
Department of Planning and Community Development or his or her designee
determines that the placement of the donation box as shown on the site plan
would violate any provision of the City of Barberton Zoning Code or create a
sight obstruction or other hazard.
         2.   No donation box license shall be issued if, in the determination
of the Director of the Department of Planning and Community Development or his/
her designee, the issuance of a license and the placement of a donation box on
the subject property would create an unreasonable density of donation boxes in
the area relative to the surrounding population and commercial activity.
      D.   No more than 2 donation box licenses shall be issued at any time for
any parcel, unless specifically approved by the director.
      E.   No more than 1 donation box owner may be issued a license for any
individual parcel.
   3.   License Term.  Each license issued under this chapter shall be valid
from the date of issuance until the following December 31st.
   4.   Duty to Update Application.  No applicant shall fail to update its
donation box license application upon any change in the information contained
on the donation box license application at any time, including, but not limited
to, after a donation box license has been issued.
(d)   Standards
   1.   Standards for Display, Service, Maintenance and Repair.  Each donation
box shall be maintained according to the following standards:
      A.   No donation box shall be placed on any property in the City of
Barberton unless such donation box clearly and prominently displays, at all
times, the name, address, and daytime phone number of the owner or licensed
operator of the box.  No donation box shall be placed on any property in the
City of Barberton unless a license sticker, provided by the director upon
issuance of a donation box license, is affixed and maintained prominently on
the exterior of the donation box.  No person shall tamper with, remove, deface,
damage, or destroy any license sticker affixed to any donation box.
      B.   No donation box shall be placed on any surface other than evenly
paved surface.
      C.   No donation box shall be placed in any location other than the
location specified in a site plan approved by the Department of Planning and
Community Development.
      D.   Every donation box shall be regularly emptied, serviced, and
maintained so that the contents of the donation box are not overflowing, over-
packers, exposed to the elements, or otherwise untidy or unsightly.
      E.   Every donation box shall be maintained in a neat, clean, and
attractive condition and in good repair at all times.  Specifically, and
without limiting the foregoing, each donation box shall be serviced and
maintained so that it is free of the following:
         1.   Dirt and grime;
         2.   Chipped, peeling, cracked or faded paint or graffiti;
         3.   Rust or corrosion:
         4.   Cracks or dents; and broken, defective, dangerous, or missing
pieces or components.
   2.   Duty to Service Upon Request.  Each donation box owner or operator
shall service, repair, and/or empty, as appropriate, any donation box within 48
hours of notification by the owner or lessee of the property that the donation
box is full or otherwise in need of maintenance according to the standards set
forth in this chapter.
(e)   Ordering Improper Conditions to be Remedied
   1.   Notice and Order to Comply.  Upon determination of the director that a
donation box has been placed or is being maintained in violation of this
chapter, the director or his/her designee shall issue a notice of the violating
conditions and a written order to correct or remove the conditions within 5
business days of mailing or posting, whichever is first, (a "Notice and Order
to Comply" or "Order").  The notice and order to comply shall be posted on the
donation box and served upon the following interest parties, by personal
service or certified mail:
      A.   The owner of the property, at the address provided in the most
recent donation box license application or at the address where the Summit
County Fiscal Office mails the tax bill for the property; and
      B.   Any lessee of the property, at the property; and
      C.   The owner of the donation box, at the address provided in the most
recent donation box application, or if no application has been filed regarding
the donation box to any address shown on the exterior box; and
      D.   Any licensed operator of the donation box, at the address provided
in the most recent donation box application.
   2.   Emergency Order.  Whenever the director finds that a violation of this
chapter constitutes an emergency, which requires immediate action (within 24
hours) to protect the public health, safety or welfare or to prevent imminent
property damage or injury, the director may, without notice, issue an order to
comply stating the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such
immediate action be taken as he/she deems necessary to abate or remedy the
emergency condition.  Any person to whom the order is directed shall comply
therewith immediately.  Additionally, the director may immediately take any
action that he/she deems necessary to abate or remedy the emergency condition.
(f)   Appeal of the Order to Comply
   1.   Appeal Process.  Because actions of administrative officials and bodies
under City regulation are subject to error or dispute, the Board of Zoning and
Building Appeals may hear appeals of such actions and modify them if the board
finds an error has been made.  The Barberton Development Code Section
1310.03 (c) outlines the appeal procedure.
(g)   Noncompliance; Penalty
If an order has not been complied with at the expiration of the 5 business day
period provided for in the notice and order to comply, the following shall
occur:
   1.   Any donation box license issued for that donation box shall be revoked
by the director without further hearing, notwithstanding the provisions of
Section
1310.03 (c) of this code.
   2.   The director or his/her agent is authorized to remedy the violating
condition, up to and including removing the donation box and its contents from
the property, at the sole expense of the interested parties.
   3.   An administrative penalty shall be imposed upon the interested parties
in the amount of $250.00 per order.
      A.   All interested parties shall be jointly and severally liable for any
administrative penalties imposed and any and all expenses incurred by the City
in remedying the violating condition and/or removing the donation box and its
contents under this chapter (together the "charges").
      B.   All charges incurred shall be reported to the Director of Finance,
who shall mail a statement of the charges to all interested parties at the
addresses provided in the most recent application or tax record, after 30 days,
the charges remains unpaid, the Director of Finance may certify the property
owner's name, the total amount of the property to the Summit County Fiscal
Officer to be entered upon the tax duplicate to be a lien on the land from the
date of entry, to be collected as other taxes and assessments and returned to
the City, pursuant to Ohio Revised Code § 731.54.  Nothing in this section is
intended to limit or restrict in any way the City's authority to take lawful
collection action against any and all interest parties for payment of the
charges.
   4.   Any donation box removed from property pursuant to this section shall
be stored by the City for a period of 30 days, at the sole expense of the
donation box owner.  Donation box owners or licensed operators may retrieve
donation boxes from the City upon payment of all charges incurred, including
the expenses incurred by the City in storing the donation box at a rate of
$25.00 per day.  If a donation box stored by the City is not so retrieved by
the donation box downer or licensed operator within 30 days of removal, the
donation box shall be considered abandoned property, shall become the property
of the City, and may be disposed of or otherwise utilized by the City.
   5.   The contents of any donation box removed by the City under this chapter
shall be considered abandoned property and may be disposed of or otherwise
utilited by the City immediately upon clean-up or removal of the donation box
and/or contents.
(Ord. 102-2016.  Passed 10-10-16.)
Chapter 1260
Flood Management Program
1260.01  Statutory Authorization
   Article XVIII, Section 3, of the Ohio Constitution grants municipalities the
legal authority to adopt land use and control measures for promoting the
health, safety, and general welfare of its citizens. Therefore, the City
Council of Barberton, Ohio, does ordain these regulations as follows in this
chapter.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.02  Findings of fact
   The City has special flood hazard areas that are subject to periodic
inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base.
Additionally, structures that are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or
otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. In
order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes
hereinafter set forth, these regulations are adopted.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.03  Statement of purpose
   It is the purpose of these regulations to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare, and to:
   (a)   Protect human life and health;
   (b)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control
projects;
   (c)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (d)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (e)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
   (f)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the proper use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to protect property and
minimize future flood blight areas;
   (g)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions;
   (h)   Minimize the impact of development on adjacent properties within and
near flood-prone areas;
   (i)   Ensure that the flood storage and conveyance functions of the
floodplain are maintained;
   (j)   Minimize the impact of development on the natural, beneficial values
of the floodplain;
   (k)   Prevent floodplain uses that are either hazardous or environmentally
incompatible; and
   (l)   Meet community participation requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.04  Methods of reducing flood loss
   In order to accomplish its purposes, these regulations include methods and
provisions for:
   (a)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
flood heights or velocities;
   (b)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (c)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood
waters;
   (d)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, excavating, and other
development which may increase flood damage; and
   (e)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers, which
will unnaturally divert flood, waters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.05  Lands to which these regulations apply
   These regulations shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within
the jurisdiction of the City as identified in Section 1260.06, including any
additional areas of special flood hazard annexed by the City.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.06  Basis for establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard
   (a)   For the purposes of these regulations, the following studies and/or
maps are adopted:
      (1)   Flood Insurance Study Summit County, Ohio and Incorporated Areas
and Flood Insurance Rate Map Summit County, Ohio and Incorporated Areas both
effective July 20, 2009.
      (2)   Other studies and/or maps, which may be relied upon for
establishment of the flood protection elevation, delineation of the 100-year
floodplain, floodways or delineation of other areas of special flood hazard.
      (3)   Any hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis authored by a
registered professional engineer in the State of Ohio which has been approved
by the City as required by Section
1260.27, Subdivisions and Large Developments.
   (b)   Any revisions to the aforementioned maps and/or studies are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations. Such maps
and/or studies are on file at the Engineering Department, 576 West Park Avenue.
Barberton, Ohio.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.07  Abrogation and greater restrictions
   These regulations are not intended to repeal any existing ordinances
including subdivision regulations, zoning or building codes. In the event of a
conflict between these regulations and any other ordinance, the more
restrictive shall be followed. These regulations shall not impair any deed
restriction covenant or easement but the land subject to such interests shall
also be governed by the regulations.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.08  Interpretation
   In the interpretation and application of these regulations, all provisions
shall be:
   (a)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (b)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (c)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes. Where a provision of these regulations may be in conflict with
a state or Federal law, such state or Federal law shall take precedence over
these regulations.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.09  Warning and disclaimer of liability
   The degree of flood protection required by these regulations is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by man made or natural causes. These regulations do
not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. These regulations
shall not create liability on the part of the City, any officer or employee
thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damage that
results from reliance on these regulations or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.10  Severability
   Should any section or provision of these regulations be declared by the
courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the regulations as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part
so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.11  Definitions
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in these
regulations shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give these regulations the most reasonable application.
(1)   Accessory structure:
   A structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and
subordinate to, the principal structure.
(2)   Appeal:
   A request for review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any
provision of these regulations or a request for a variance.
(3)   Base flood:
   The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
The base flood may also be referred to as the 1% chance annual flood or 100-
year flood.
(4)   Base (100-Year) flood elevation (BFE):
   The water surface elevation of the base flood in relation to a specified
datum, usually the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 or the North
American Vertical Datum of 1988, and usually expressed in feet mean sea level
(MSL). In Zone AO areas, the base flood elevation is the natural grade
elevation plus the depth number (from one to three feet).
(5)   Basement:
   Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on
all sides.
(6)   Development:
   Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not
limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading,
paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
(7)   Enclosure below the lowest floor:
   See "Lowest Floor."
(8)   Executive Order 11988 (Floodplain Management):
   Issued by President Carter in 1977, this order requires that no Federally-
assisted activities be conducted in or have the potential to affect identified
special flood hazard areas, unless there is no practicable alternative.
(9)   Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA):
   The agency with the overall responsibility for administering the National
Flood Insurance Program.
(10)   Fill:
   A deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.
(11)   Flood or flooding:
   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
   (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters, and/or
   (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
(12)   Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM):
   Usually the initial map, produced by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, or U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, for a community
depicting approximate special flood hazard areas.
(13)   Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM):
   An official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development has delineated the areas of special
flood hazard.
(14)   Flood Insurance Risk Zones:
   Zone designations on FHBMs and FIRMs that indicate the magnitude of the
flood hazard in specific areas of a community. Following are the zone
definitions:
   Zone A:  Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood; base
flood elevations are not determined.
   Zones A1-30 and Zone AE:  Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-
year flood; base flood elevations are determined.
   Zone AO:  Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood; with
flood depths of one to three feet (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain);
average depths are determined.
   Zone AH:  Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood; flood
depths of one to three feet (usually areas of ponding); base flood elevations
are determined.
   Zone A99:  Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood to be
protected from the 100-year flood by a Federal flood protection system under
construction; no base flood elevations are determined.
   Zone B and Zone X (shaded):  Areas of 500-year flood; areas subject to the
100-year flood with average depths of less than one foot or with contributing
drainage area less than one square mile; and areas protected by levees from the
base flood.
   Zone C and Zone X (unshaded):  Areas determined to be outside the 500-year
floodplain.
(15)   Flood Insurance Study (FIS):
   The official report in which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development has provided flood profiles,
floodway boundaries (sometimes shown on Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps), and
the water surface elevations of the base flood.
(16)   Flood protection elevation:
   The flood protection elevation, or FPE, is the base flood elevation plus two
feet of freeboard. In areas where no base flood elevations exist from any
authoritative source, the flood protection elevation can be historical flood
elevations, or base flood elevations determined and/or approved by the
Floodplain Administrator.
(17)   Floodway:
   A floodway is the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that have been reserved in order to pass the base flood discharge. A
floodway is typically determined through a hydraulic and hydrologic engineering
analysis such that the cumulative increase in the water surface elevation of
the base flood discharge is no more than a designated height. In no case shall
the designated height be more than one foot at any point within the community. 
The floodway is an extremely hazardous area, and is usually characterized by
any of the following: Moderate to high velocity flood waters, high potential
for debris and projectile impacts, and moderate to high erosion forces.
(18)   Freeboard:
   A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for the
purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many
unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height
calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave
action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams, and the hydrologic
effect of urbanization in a watershed.
(19)   Historic structure:
   Any structure that is:
   (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listings on the National Register;
   (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   (3)   Individually listed on the State of Ohio's inventory of historic
places maintained by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office; or
   (4)   Individually listed on the inventory of historic places maintained by
City of Barberton's historic preservation program, which program is certified
by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office.
(20)   Hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis:
   An analysis performed by a professional engineer, registered in the State of
Ohio, in accordance with standard engineering practices as accepted by FEMA,
used to determine flood elevations and/or floodway boundaries.
(21)   Letter of Map Change (LOMC):
   A Letter of Map Change is an official FEMA determination, by letter, to
amend or revise effective Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Boundary and
Floodway Maps, and Flood Insurance Studies. LOMCs are broken down into the
following categories:
   Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA):  A revision based on technical data showing
that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard
area. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and
establishes that a specific property is not located in a special flood hazard
area.
   Letter of Map Revision (LOMR):  A revision based on technical data that,
usually due to manmade changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood elevations,
floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. One common type
of LOMR, a LOMR-F, is a determination concerning whether a structure or parcel
has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore,
excluded from the special flood hazard area.
   Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR):
A formal review and comment by FEMA as to whether a proposed project complies
with the minimum National Flood Insurance Program floodplain management
criteria. A CLOMR does not amend or revise effective Flood Insurance Rate Maps,
Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps, or Flood Insurance Studies.
(22)   Lowest floor:
   The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) of a
structure. This definition excludes an "enclosure below the lowest floor" which
is an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area,
provided that such enclosure is built in accordance with the applicable design
requirements specified in these regulations for enclosures below the lowest
floor.
(23)   Manufactured home;
   A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term manufactured home
does not include a recreational vehicle. For the purposes of these regulations,
a manufactured home includes manufactured homes and mobile homes as defined in
Ohio R.C. Chapter 3733.
(24)   Manufactured home park;
   As specified in the Ohio Administrative Code 3701-27-01, a manufactured home
park means any tract of land upon which three or more manufactured homes, used
for habitation are parked, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and
includes any roadway, building, structure, vehicle, or enclosure used or
intended for use as part of the facilities of the park. A tract of land that is
subdivided and the individual lots are not for rent or rented, but are for sale
or sold for the purpose of installation of manufactured homes on the lots, is
not a manufactured home park, even though three or more manufactured homes are
parked thereon, if the roadways are dedicated to the local government
authority.
(25)   National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP):
   The NFIP is a Federal program enabling property owners in participating
communities to purchase insurance protection against losses from flooding. This
insurance is designed to provide an insurance alternative to disaster
assistance to meet the escalating costs of repairing damage to buildings and
their contents caused by floods. Participation in the NFIP is based on an
agreement between local communities and the Federal government that states if a
community will adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations to reduce
future flood risks to all development in special flood hazard areas, the
Federal government will make flood insurance available within the community as
a financial protection against flood loss.
(26)   New construction:
   Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
initial effective date of the City of Barberton Flood Insurance Rate Map,
January 16, 1981, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
(27)   Person:
   Includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership,
association, or any other entity, including state and local governments and
agencies. An agency is further defined in Ohio R.C. 111.15 as any governmental
entity of the State and includes, but is not limited to, any board, department,
division, commission, bureau, society, council, institution, State college or
university, community college district, technical college district, or state
community college. "Agency" does not include the general assembly, the
controlling board, the adjutant general's department, or any court.
(28)   Recreational vehicle:
   A vehicle which is (1) built on a single chassis, (2) 400 square feet or
less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, (3) designed to be
self- propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and (4) designed
primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters
for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
(29)   Registered professional architect:
   A person registered to engage in the practice of architecture under the
provisions of Ohio R.C.  4703.01 to 4703.19.
(30)   Registered professional engineer:
   A person registered as a professional engineer under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4733.
(31)   Registered professional surveyor:
   A person registered as a professional surveyor under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4733.
(32)   Special Flood Hazard Area:
   Also known as "Areas of Special Flood Hazard", it is the land in the
floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
Special flood hazard areas are designated by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency on Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Insurance Studies, Flood Boundary
and Floodway Maps and Flood Hazard Boundary Maps as Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30,
and A99. Special flood hazard areas may also refer to areas that are flood-
prone and designated from other Federal, State or local sources of data
including but not limited to historical flood information reflecting high water
marks, previous flood inundation areas, and flood-prone soils associated with a
watercourse.
(33)   Start of construction:
   The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of a building.
(34)   Structure:
   A walled and roofed building, manufactured home, or gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground.
(35)   Substantial damage:
   Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring
the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
(36)   Substantial improvement:
   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term
includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include:
   (1)   Any improvement to a structure that is considered new construction;
   (2)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified prior to the application for a development permit by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
   (3)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration
would not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
(37)   Variance:
   A grant of relief from the standards of these regulations consistent with
the variance conditions herein.
(38)   Violation:
   The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with
these regulations.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.12  Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
   The Stormwater Manager is hereby appointed to administer and implement these
regulations and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.13  Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
   The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include but are not limited to:
   (a)   Evaluate applications for permits to develop in special flood hazard
areas.
   (b)   Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide flood hazard and flood
protection elevation information.
   (c)   Issue permits to develop in special flood hazard areas when the
provisions of these regulations have been met, or refuse to issue the same in
the event of noncompliance.
   (d)   Inspect buildings and lands to determine whether any violations of
these regulations have been committed.
   (e)   Make and permanently keep all records for public inspection necessary
for the administration of these regulations including Flood Insurance Rate
Maps, Letters of Map Amendment and Revision, records of issuance and denial of
permits to develop in special flood hazard areas, determinations of whether
development is in or out of special flood hazard areas for the purpose of
issuing floodplain development permits, elevation certificates, variances, and
records of enforcement actions taken for violations of these regulations.
   (f)   Enforce the provisions of these regulations.
   (g)   Provide information, testimony, or other evidence as needed during
variance hearings.
   (h)   Coordinate map maintenance activities and FEMA follow-up.
   (i)   Conduct substantial damage determinations to determine whether
existing structures, damaged from any source and in special flood hazard areas
identified by FEMA, must meet the development standards of these regulations.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.14  Floodplain development permits
   It shall be unlawful for any person to begin construction or other
development activity including but not limited to filling; grading;
construction; alteration, remodeling, or expanding any structure; or alteration
of any watercourse wholly within, partially within or in contact with any
identified special flood hazard area, as established in Section
1260.06, until a floodplain development permit is obtained from the Floodplain
Administrator. Such floodplain development permit shall show that the proposed
development activity is in conformity with the provisions of these regulations.
No such permit shall be issued by the Floodplain Administrator until the
requirements of these regulations have been met.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.15  Application required
   An application for a floodplain development permit shall be required for all
development activities located wholly within, partially within, or in contact
with an identified special flood hazard area. Such application shall be made by
the owner of the property or his/her authorized agent, herein referred to as
the applicant, prior to the actual commencement of such construction on a form
furnished for that purpose. Where it is unclear whether a development site is
in a special flood hazard area, the Floodplain Administrator may require an
application for a floodplain development permit to determine the development's
location. Such applications shall include, but not be limited to:
   (a)   Site plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and topography of the area in question; the location of existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location
of the foregoing.
   (b)   Elevation of the existing, natural ground where structures are
proposed.
   (c)   Elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed
structures.
   (d)   Such other material and information as may be requested by the
Floodplain Administrator to determine conformance with, and provide enforcement
of these regulations.
   (e)   Technical analyses conducted by the appropriate design professional
registered in the State of Ohio and submitted with an application for a
floodplain development permit when applicable:
      (1)   Flood-proofing certification for non-residential flood-proofed
structure as required in Section
1260.29.
      (2)   Certification that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a
structure not meeting the design requirements of Section
1260.28(e) are designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces.
      (3)   Description of any watercourse alteration or relocation that the
flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished, and
maintenance assurances as required in Section
1260.33(c).
      (4)   A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis demonstrating that the
cumulative effect of proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one foot in special flood hazard areas
where the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided base flood
elevations but no floodway as required by Section
1260.33(b).
      (5)   A hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis showing impact of
any development on flood heights in an identified floodway as required by
Section
1260.33(a).
      (6)   Generation of base flood elevation(s) for subdivision and large-
scale developments as required by Section
1260.27.
   (f)   A floodplain development permit application fee set by the schedule of
fees adopted by the City.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.16  Review and approval of a floodplain development permit application
   (a)   Review
      (1)   After receipt of a complete application, the Floodplain
Administrator shall review the application to ensure that the standards of
these regulations have been met. No floodplain development permit application
shall be reviewed until all information required in Section
1260.15 has been received by the Floodplain Administrator.
      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator shall review all floodplain
development permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have been
received from those Federal, State or local governmental agencies from which
prior approval is required. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining
such permits as required including permits issued by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act and Section 404 of the
Clean Water Act, and the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency under Section 401
of the Clean Water Act.
   (b)   Approval
   Within 30 days after the receipt of a complete application, the Floodplain
Administrator shall either approve or disapprove the application. If an
application is approved, a floodplain development permit shall be issued. All
floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon the commencement of
work within one year. A floodplain development permit shall expire one year
after issuance unless the permitted activity has been substantially begun and
is thereafter pursued to completion.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.17  Inspections
   The Floodplain Administrator shall make periodic inspections at appropriate
times throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance with
permit conditions.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.18  Post-construction certifications required
   The following as-built certifications are required after a floodplain
development permit has been issued:
   (a)   For new or substantially improved residential structures, or
nonresidential structures that have been elevated, the applicant shall have a
Federal Emergency Management Agency Elevation Certificate completed by a
registered surveyor to record as-built elevation data. For elevated structures
in Zone A and Zone AO areas without a base flood elevation, the elevation
certificate may be completed by the property owner or owner's representative.
   (b)   For all development activities subject to the standards of Section
1260.21(a), a Letter of Map Revision.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.19  Revoking a floodplain development permit
   A floodplain development permit shall be revocable, if among other things,
the actual development activity does not conform to the terms of the
application and permit granted thereon. In the event of the revocation of a
permit, an appeal may be taken to the Appeals Board in accordance with Sections
1260.34 through
1260.39 of these regulations.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.20  Exemption from filing a development permit
   (a)   An application for a floodplain development permit shall not be
required for:
      (1)   Maintenance work such as roofing, painting, and basement sealing,
or for small nonstructural development activities (except for filling and
grading) valued at less than five thousand dollars ($5,000).
      (2)   Development activities in an existing or proposed manufactured home
park that are under the authority of the Ohio Department of Health and subject
to the flood damage reduction provisions of the Ohio Administrative Code
Section 3701.
      (3)   Major utility facilities permitted by the Ohio Power Siting Board
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4906.
      (4)   Hazardous waste disposal facilities permitted by the Hazardous
Waste Siting Board under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3734.
      (5)   Development activities undertaken by a federal agency and which are
subject to Federal Executive Order 11988 - Floodplain Management.
   (b)   Any proposed action exempt from filing for a floodplain development
permit is also exempt from the standards of these regulations.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.21  Map maintenance activities
   To meet National Flood Insurance Program minimum requirements to have flood
data reviewed and approved by FEMA, and to ensure that Barberton's flood maps,
studies and other data identified in Section 1260.06 accurately represent
flooding conditions so appropriate floodplain management criteria are based on
current data, the following map maintenance activities are identified:
   (a)   Requirement to submit new technical data:
      (1)   For all development proposals that impact floodway delineations or
base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that technical data
reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA within six months of the date such
information becomes available. These development proposals include:
         A.   Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood
elevations or alter floodway boundaries;
         B.   Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed structures
where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special flood hazard
area;
         C.   Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or
elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts; and
         D.   Subdivision or large-scale development proposals requiring the
establishment of base flood elevations in accordance with Section
1260.27.
      (2)   It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data,
required in accordance with this division (a), prepared in a format required
for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map Revision, and
submitted to FEMA. Submittal and processing fees for these map revisions shall
be the responsibility of the applicant.
      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator shall require a Conditional Letter of
Map Revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for:
         A.   Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the base flood
elevation; and
         B.   Proposed development which increases the base flood elevation by
more than one foot in areas where FEMA has provided base flood elevations but
no floodway.
      (4)   Floodplain development permits issued by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining a Letter of Map
Revision from FEMA for any development proposal subject to division (a)(1) of
this section.
   (b)   Right to submit new technical data
   The Floodplain Administrator may request changes to any of the information
shown on an effective map that does not impact floodplain or floodway
delineations or base flood elevations, such as labeling or planimetric details.
Such a submission shall include appropriate supporting documentation made in
writing by the Mayor, and may be submitted at any time.
   (c)   Annexation /detachment
   Upon occurrence, the Floodplain Administrator shall notify FEMA in writing
whenever the boundaries of the City have been modified by annexation or the
community has assumed authority over an area, or no longer has authority to
adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for a particular area. In
order that Barberton's Flood Insurance Rate Map accurately represent the City
boundaries, include within such notification a copy of a map of the City
suitable for reproduction, clearly showing the new corporate limits or the new
area for which the City has assumed or relinquished floodplain management
regulatory authority.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.22  Data use and Flood Map interpretation
   The following guidelines shall apply to the use and interpretation of maps
and other data showing areas of special flood hazard:
   (a)   In areas where FEMA has not identified special flood hazard areas, or
in FEMA identified special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and
floodway data have not been identified, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review and reasonably utilize any other flood hazard data available from a
Federal, State, or other source.
   (b)   Base flood elevations and floodway boundaries produced on FEMA flood
maps and studies shall take precedence over base flood elevations and floodway
boundaries by any other source that reflect a reduced floodway width and/or
lower base flood elevations. Other sources of data, showing increased base
flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FEMA flood maps
and studies, shall be reasonably used by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (c)   When Preliminary Flood Insurance Rate Maps and/or Flood Insurance
Study have been provided by FEMA:
      (1)   Upon the issuance of a Letter of Final Determination by the FEMA,
the preliminary flood hazard data shall be used and replace all previously
existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA for the purposes of administering
these regulations.
      (2)   Prior to the issuance of a Letter of Final Determination by FEMA,
the use of preliminary flood hazard data shall only be required where no base
flood elevations and/or floodway areas exist or where the preliminary base
flood elevations or floodway area exceed the base flood elevations and/or
floodway widths in existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA. Such
preliminary data may be subject to change and/or appeal to FEMA.
   (d)   The Floodplain Administrator shall make interpretations, where needed,
as to the exact location of the flood boundaries and areas of special flood
hazard. A person contesting the determination of the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in Sections
1260.34 through
1260.39.
   (e)   Where a map boundary showing an area of special flood hazard and field
elevations disagree, the base flood elevations or flood protection elevations
(as found on an elevation profile, floodway data table, established high water
marks, etc.) shall prevail.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.23  Substantial damage determinations
   (a)   Damages to structures may result from a variety of causes including
flood, tornado, wind, heavy snow, fire, etc. After such a damage event, the
Floodplain Administrator shall:
      (1)   Determine whether damaged structures are located in special flood
hazard areas;
      (2)   Conduct substantial damage determinations for damaged structures
located in special flood hazard areas; and
      (3)   Make reasonable attempt to notify owners of substantially damaged
structures of the need to obtain a floodplain development permit prior to
repair, rehabilitation, or reconstruction.
   (b)   Additionally, the Floodplain Administrator may implement other
measures to assist with the substantial damage determination and subsequent
repair process. These measures include issuing press releases, public service
announcements, and other public information materials related to the floodplain
development permits and repair of damaged structures; coordinating with other
Federal, State, and local agencies to assist with substantial damage
determinations; providing owners of damaged structures materials and other
information related to the proper repair of damaged structures in special flood
hazard areas; and assist owners of substantially damaged structures with
increased cost of compliance insurance claims.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.24  Use and development standards for flood hazard reduction
   The use and development standards in Sections
1260.25 through
1260.33 apply to development wholly within, partially within, or in contact
with any special flood hazard area as established in Section
1260.06 or
1260.22(a).
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.25  Use regulations
   (a)   Permitted uses
   All uses not otherwise prohibited in this section or any other applicable
land use regulation adopted by the City are allowed provided they meet the
provisions of these regulations.
   (b)   Prohibited uses
      (1)   Private water supply systems in all special flood hazard areas
identified by FEMA, permitted under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3701.
      (2)   Infectious waste treatment facilities in all special flood hazard
areas, permitted under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3734.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.26  Water and wastewater systems
   The following standards apply to all water supply, sanitary sewerage and
waste disposal systems not otherwise regulated by the Ohio Revised Code:
   (a)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems;
   (b)   New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and
   (c)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
or contamination from them during flooding.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.27  Subdivisions and large developments
   (a)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage and are subject to all applicable standards in these
regulations;
   (b)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage;
   (c)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
   (d)   In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data
are not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering analysis that generates base flood elevations for all subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments containing at least 50 lots or five 
acres, whichever is less.
   (e)   The applicant shall meet the requirement to submit technical data to
FEMA in Section
1260.21(a)(1)D. when a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis is completed that
generates base flood elevations as required by division (d) of this section.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.28  Residential structures
   (a)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
Where a structure, including its foundation members, is elevated on fill to or
above the base flood elevation, the requirements for anchoring as set forth in
this division (a), and construction materials resistant to flood damage as set
forth in division (b) of this section, are satisfied.
   (b)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with methods and materials resistant to flood damage.
   (c)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
   (d)   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to or above the flood protection elevation. Where flood
protection elevation data are not available, the structure shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least two feet above the highest
adjacent natural grade.
   (e)   New construction and substantial improvements, including manufactured
homes, that do not have basements and that are elevated to the flood protection
elevation using pilings, columns, posts, or solid foundation perimeter walls
with openings sufficient to allow unimpeded movement of flood waters may have
an enclosure below the lowest floor provided the enclosure meets the following
standards:
      (1)   Be used only for the parking of vehicles, building access, or
storage; and
      (2)   Be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls
by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters; or
      (3)   Have a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total
net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area,
and the bottom of all such openings being no higher than one foot above grade.
The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters.
   (f)   Manufactured homes shall be affixed to a permanent foundation and
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over
the top or frame ties to ground anchors.
   (g)   Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination
that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure, shall be exempt
from the development standards of this Section
1260.28.
   (h)   In AO Zones, new construction and substantial improvement shall have
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters
around and away from the structure.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.29  Nonresidential structures
   (a)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall meet the requirements of
Section
1260.28(a) through (c) and (e) through (h).
   (b)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to or above the level of the flood
protection elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall meet all of the following standards:
      (1)   Be dry flood-proofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water to the level of the flood
protection elevation;
      (2)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
      (3)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect,
through the use of a Federal Emergency Management Agency Floodproofing
Certificate, that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
divisions (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section.
   (c)   Where flood protection elevation data are not available, the structure
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least two feet
above the highest adjacent natural grade.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.30  Accessory structures
   Relief to the elevation or dry flood-proofing standards may be granted for
accessory structures containing no more than 600 square feet. Such structures
must meet the following standards:
   (a)   They shall not be used for human habitation;
   (b)   They shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials;
   (c)   They shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of flood waters;
   (d)   They shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
   (e)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be
elevated or flood-proofed to or above the level of the flood protection
elevation; and
   (f)   They shall meet the opening requirements of Section
1260.28(e)(3);
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.31  Recreational vehicles
   Recreational vehicles must meet at least one of the following standards:
   (a)   They shall not be located on sites in special flood hazard areas for
more than 180 days; or
   (b)   They must be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
   (c)   They must meet all standards of Section
1260.28.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.32  Above-ground gas or liquid storage tanks
   All above-ground gas or liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent
flotation or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.33  Assurance of flood-carrying capacity
   Pursuant to the purpose and methods of reducing flood damage stated in these
regulations, the following additional standards are adopted to assure that the
reduction of the flood-carrying capacity of watercourses is minimized:
   (a)   Development in floodways
      (1)   In floodway areas, development shall cause no increase in flood
levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Prior to issuance of
a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and
hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer,
demonstrating that the proposed development would not result in any increase in
the base flood elevation; or
      (2)   Development in floodway areas causing increases in the base flood
elevation may be permitted provided all of the following are completed by the
applicant:
         A.   Meet the requirements to submit technical data in Section
1260.21(a);
         B.   An evaluation of alternatives, which would not result in
increased base flood elevations and an explanation why these alternatives are
not feasible;
         C.   Certification that no structures are located in areas that would
be impacted by the increased base flood elevation;
         D.   Documentation of individual legal notices to all impacted
property owners within and outside the community, explaining the impact of the
proposed action on their property; and
         E.   Concurrence of the Mayor of the City of Barberton and the Chief
Executive Officer of any other communities impacted by the proposed actions.
   (b)   Development in riverine areas with base flood elevations but no
floodways
      (1)   In riverine special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA where
base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been designated,
the cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point.  Prior to issuance of a floodplain
development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer, demonstrating that
this standard has been met; or
      (2)   Development in riverine special flood hazard areas identified by
FEMA where base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been
designated causing more than one foot increase in the base flood elevation may
be permitted provided all of the following are completed by the applicant:
         A.   An evaluation of alternatives which would result in an increase
of one foot or less of the base flood elevation and an explanation why these
alternatives are not feasible;
         B.    Division (a)(2)A. and (a)(2)C. through D. of this section.
   (c)   Alterations of a watercourse
   For the purpose of these regulations, a watercourse is altered when any
change occurs within its banks. The extent of the banks shall be established by
a field determination of the "bankfull stage." The field determination of
"bankfull stage" shall be based on methods presented in Chapter 7 of the USDA
Forest Service General Technical Report RM-245, Stream Channel Reference Sites:
An Illustrated Guide to Field Technique or other applicable publication
available from a Federal, State, or other authoritative source. For all
proposed developments that alter a watercourse, the following standards apply:
      (1)   The bankfull flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse shall not be diminished. Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a description of the
extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development, and certification by a registered professional engineer
that the bankfull flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be
diminished.
      (2)   Adjacent communities, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the
Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of Water, must be notified prior
to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. Evidence of such notification
must be submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
      (3)   The applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary
maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood carrying capacity will not be diminished. The Floodplain
Administrator may require the permit holder to enter into an agreement with the
City specifying the maintenance responsibilities. If an agreement is required,
it shall be made a condition of the floodplain development permit.
      (4)   The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit technical data
in Section
1260.21(a)(1)C. when an alteration of a watercourse results in the relocation
or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.34  Appeals Board established
   (a)   The Board of Zoning and Building Appeals is hereby appointed to serve
as the Appeals Board for these regulations as established by City Code.
   (b)   Records of the Appeals Board shall be kept and filed in the
Engineering Department at 576 West Park Avenue, Barberton, Ohio.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.35  Powers and duties
   (a)   The Appeals Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by
the Floodplain Administrator in the administration or enforcement of these
regulations.
   (b)   Authorize variances in accordance with Section
1260.37 of these regulations.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.36  Appeals
   (a)   Any person affected by any notice and order, or other official action
of the Floodplain Administrator, may request and shall be granted a hearing on
the matter before the Appeals Board provided that such person shall file,
within 20 days of the date of the approval of Council minutes, a brief
statement of the grounds for such hearing or for the mitigation of any item
appearing on any order of the Floodplain Administrator's decision. Such appeal
shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, and be filed with the Floodplain
Administrator. Upon receipt of the appeal, the Floodplain Administrator shall
transmit said notice and all pertinent information on which the Floodplain
Administrator's decision was made to the Appeals Board.
   (b)   Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Appeals Board shall fix a
reasonable time for the appeal, give notice in writing to parties in interest,
and decide the appeal within a reasonable time after it is submitted.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.37  Variances
   Any person believing that the use and development standards of these
regulations would result in unnecessary hardship may file an application for a
variance. The Appeals Board shall have the power to authorize, in specific
cases, such variances from the standards of these regulations, not inconsistent
with Federal regulations, as will not be contrary to the public interest where,
owning to special conditions of the lot or parcel, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of these regulations would result in unnecessary hardship.
   (a)   Application for a variance
      (1)   Any owner, or agent thereof, of property for which a variance is
sought, shall make an application for a variance by filing it with the
Floodplain Administrator, who upon receipt of the variance shall transmit it to
the Appeals Board.
      (2)   Such application at a minimum shall contain the following
information: Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; legal
description of the property; parcel map; description of the existing use;
description of the proposed use; location of the floodplain; description of the
variance sought; and reason for the variance request.
      (3)   All applications for a variance shall be accompanied by a variance
application fee set in the schedule of fees adopted by the City. 
   (b)   Public hearing
      At such hearing the applicant shall present such statements and evidence
as the Appeals Board requires. In considering such variance applications, the
Appeals Board shall consider and make findings of fact on all evaluations, all
relevant factors, and standards specified in other sections of these
regulations and the following factors:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
      (5)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use that
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
      (6)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area.
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site.
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   (c)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
      (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause.
      (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the property.
Increased cost or inconvenience of meeting the requirements of these
regulations does not constitute an exceptional hardship to the applicant.
      (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights beyond that which is allowed in these regulations;
additional threats to public safety; extraordinary public expense, nuisances,
fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws.
      (4)   A determination that the structure or other development is
protected by methods to minimize flood damages.
      (5)   A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   Upon consideration of the above factors and the purposes of these
regulations, the Appeals Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances, as it deems necessary to further the purposes of these regulations.
   (d)   Other conditions for variances
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      (2)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one half acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, providing items in division (b)(1) through (11) of
this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one
half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
      (3)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and the cost of flood insurance will
be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.38  Procedure at hearings
   (a)   All testimony shall be given under oath.
   (b)   A complete record of the proceedings shall be kept, except
confidential deliberations of the Board, but including all documents presented
and a verbatim record of the testimony of all witnesses.
   (b)   The applicant shall proceed first to present evidence and testimony in
support of the appeal or variance.
   (d)   The Administrator may present evidence or testimony in opposition to
the appeal or variance.
   (e)   All witnesses shall be subject to cross- examination by the adverse
party or their counsel.
   (f)   Evidence that is not admitted may be proffered and shall become part
of the record for appeal.
   (g)   The Board shall issue subpoenas upon written request for the
attendance of witnesses. A reasonable deposit to cover the cost of issuance and
service shall be collected in advance.
   (h)   The Board shall prepare conclusions of fact supporting its decision.
The decision may be announced at the conclusion of the hearing and thereafter
issued in writing or the decision may be issued in writing within a reasonable
time after the hearing.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.39  Appeal to the court
   Those aggrieved by the decision of the Appeals Board may appeal such
decision to the Summit County Court of Common Pleas, as provided in Ohio R.C.
Chapter 2506.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.40  Compliance required
   (a)   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, repaired, extended, converted, enlarged or altered without full
compliance with the terms of these regulations and all other applicable
regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of these regulations,
unless specifically exempted from filing for a development permit as stated in
Section
1260.20.
   (b)   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit shall be a violation
of these regulations and shall be punishable in accordance with Section
1260.42.
   (c)   Floodplain development permits issued on the basis of plans and
applications approved by the Floodplain Administrator authorize only the use,
and arrangement, set forth in such approved plans and applications or
amendments thereto. Use, arrangement, or construction contrary to that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and punishable in
accordance with Section
1260.42.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.41  Notice of violation
   Whenever the Floodplain Administrator determines that there has been a
violation of any provision of these regulations, he shall give notice of such
violation to the person responsible therefor and order compliance with these
regulations as hereinafter provided. Such notice and order shall:
   (a)   Be put in writing on an appropriate form;
   (b)   Include a list of violations, referring to the section or sections of
these regulations that have been violated, and order remedial action, which, if
taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of these regulations;
   (c)   Specify a reasonable time for performance;
   (d)   Advise the owner, operator, or occupant of the right to appeal;
   (e)   Be served on the owner, occupant, or agent in person. However, this
notice and order shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner,
occupant, or agent if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to
the person's last known mailing address, residence, or place of business, and/
or a copy is posted in a conspicuous place in or on the dwelling affected.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
1260.42  Violations and penalties
   Violation of the provisions of these regulations or failure to comply with
any of its requirements shall be deemed to be a strict liability offense, and
shall constitute a fourth degree misdemeanor. Any person who violates these
regulations or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon
conviction thereof be fined or imprisoned as provided by the laws of the City
of Barberton. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. The City
shall prosecute any violation of these regulations in accordance with the
penalties stated herein.
(Ord. 72-2009.  Passed 5-26-09.)
Title 4 : Development Administration
Chapter 1310
Development Approvals
1310.01 Rules for All Development Approvals
(a) Types of Approvals
Officers and bodies of the City may approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove applications for the following Development Approvals:
   (1) Amendments
      A. Map Amendments
      B. Text Amendments
   (2) Adjustments
      A. Variances
      B. Conditional Uses and Special Exceptions
      C. Appeals
      D. Changes to Properties With Nonconformities
   (3) Staff Approvals
      A. Temporary Uses
      B. Interpretations
      C. Unlisted Uses Similar to Listed Uses
   (4) Development Plans
      A. Subdivision Plats
         1. Minor Subdivisions
         2. Preliminary Plats
         3. Final Plats
      B. Planned Unit Developments
      C. Site Plan Reviews
   (5) Certificates of Appropriateness
   (6) Mandatory Referrals.
(b) Approval Process
No Development Approval shall be approved, conditionally approved, or
disapproved except in conformance with:
(1) the applicable Approval Criteria in Tables 1310A, 1310C, 1310D, 1310E,
1310F, 1310G, 1310H, 1310I, and 1310J, and.
(2) the applicable approval process provided in this chapter or in Chapter
1320, Approval Procedures, and
(3) other applicable provisions of City regulations.
(c) Existing Uses Exempt
Except as otherwise provided herein, no lawful use that requires a Conditional
Use Permit or other development Approval hereunder shall require such Approval
to continue as it was on the effective date of the regulation making such
requirement.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of the property to
provide evidence of the existence of the use on or prior to such date.
(d) Expansion or Alteration
Any expansion of, addition to, structural alteration of, or change of use of a
use holding a Certificate of Appropriateness or Conditional Use Permit, or
exempted therefrom by division (c) that occurrs after the date of approval of
such permit or certif-ificate or the date of effect of this chapter, whichever
is later, shall require a new Certificate or Permit for such expansion,
addition, alteration, or change.
(e) Responsibility for Action
Advisory Action and Final Action on Development Approvals shall be the
responsibility of the bodies specified in Table 1320A in Chapter 1320, Approval
Procedures.
1310.02 Amendments
(a) Purpose and Applicability
To adapt to new conditions and implement the Comprehensive  Plan in phases,
this Code must be changed from time to time.
The Design Review Board may recommend to the City Council rezonings to the PO
District and may recommend to the Planning Commission amendments to the
regulations for that District.  The City Planning Commission may recommend to
the Council other amendments to these regulations.
(b) Approval Process
The process for approval shall be as provided in Chapter 1320.  Map amendments
(rezonings) shall conform to the Approval Criteria of Table 1310A.
Table 1310A: Approval Criteria for Zoning Map Amendments
1. Support for Classification
   A. Compatible With Environs
   The uses permitted under the proposed district are compatible with existing
uses or zoning in the environs, or
   B. Supported by Trend of Development
   The trend of development, redevelopment, or land use change in the general
area since the original zoning was established supports the proposed zoning
classification, or
   C. Consistent With City Plans
   The proposed classification is in harmony with objectives of the Barberton
Comprehensive Plan and other applicable City plans adopted by City Council as
viewed in light of any changed conditions since adoption.
2. Furthers Public Interest
The proposed zoning classification promotes the public interest and not solely
the interest of the applicant.
3. Public Services Available
Adequate street capacity and public services are anticipated to be available to
support the proposed classification.
(c) Rezonings to PO District
   (1) Purpose
   Barberton has a unique history as a planned industrial community and
experimental farm created by an imaginative entrepreneur.
   As a result, certain properties and areas in the City possess special
character deriving from the presence of historic buildings or sites. When this
character is of sufficient cultural, aesthetic, or economic value, special
controls and review procedures governing design of new construction and
alterations to existing properties are warranted to further the public welfare.
   The PO Preservation Overlay District as provided herein is intended to
establish such controls and procedures without significantly interfering with
the development rights conferred by other City regulations.
   It is therefore the intent of this chapter to establish procedures to guide
change in historic areas.  It seeks to do so by encouraging property owners and
the City government to work out a mutually acceptable balance between
preservation and alteration, between aesthetic and non-aesthetic development
factors, and between the rights of the property owner and the public good.
   Specifically, the PO District is intended to afford special protection to
historic properties and areas that will:
      A. protect and enhance business, cultural, and living environments
      B. stimulate appropriate investment in and improvement of historic
properties and areas by assuring a controlled environment that encourages such
improvement and helps preserve its value
      C. promote business and economic development by preserving the character
of buildings and areas that have a special environment that appeals to
residents and visitors
      D. preserve the existing character and property values of historically
significant parts of Barberton by discouraging incompatible change
      E. recognize the rights and needs of property owners and businesses, and
      F. promote a balance between aesthetic considerations and economic
requirements and between conservation and change.
   The intent of PO zoning is to provide a mech-anism for negotiations between
the public and private sectors that allows the City to make progress while
preserving the best of its past.
   (2) Approval Process
   Rezonings to the PO District shall be in conformance with Approval Criteria
of Table 1310B and other provisions of this section.
   All proposals for rezoning to the PO District shall be accompanied by
documentation of conformance to the Approval Criteria of Table 1310B and shall
clearly identify all primary property and all secondary property.
   (3) Use of PO Zoning
   Because historic character may be confined to a single property or portion
thereof, a single lot or building site or portion thereof, such as a sign, may
be classified in the PO District if consistent with Criterion 3 of Table 1310B.
   A PO classification of a portion of a lot or building site shall be
accompanied by a notation on the Zoning District Map or addendum thereto
indicating what portion of the property is governed by the designation.
   An open site without a building may be classified in the PO District if the
site is of historic significance or otherwise conforms to the Approval Criteria
of Table 1310B.
   (4) Secondary Property
   A PO District may include secondary property, as defined herein, whether
developed or vacant, if City Council finds that their control under these
provisions is necessary for the protection of primary property in its vicinty.
   No more than 33 percent of the land area excluding streets within a
contiguous multi-lot area located in the PO District shall be secondary
property. 
   Except that, in order to provide a protected buffer zone around significant
properties, lots located wholly or partially within 50 feet of a lot on which a
primary property is located shall not be counted in determining the percent of
land in secondary property.
   (5) Moratorium
   The City Council may establish a moratorium on Building Permits, Demolition
Permits, and/or Sign Permits in any area for which a rezoning to the PO
District has been scheduled for consideration.
   No such Permit shall be issued for any property within such area unless:
      A. Final Action has been taken by Council on such rezoning, or 60 days
have passed since the beginning of the moratorium, whichever comes first, or
      B. the Permit application has been voluntarily submitted for the review
required for a Certificate of Appropriateness and such Certificate has been
approved therefor.
   If the rezoning is approved, Permits shall thereafter be issued only after
approval of a Certificate of Appropriateness.
   (6) Design Guidelines
      A. Guidelines Mandatory
      The Design Review Board shall prepare and recommend for adoption as
amendments to this Code specific Design Guidelines for:
      1. any existing or proposed PO District with more than 5 lots, and
      2. multi-lot Districts of 5 or fewer lots that are adjacent or separated
at any point by under 200 feet, which are considered a single District for
purposes of this provision. 
      Such Guidelines shall conform to the requirements of division B herein. 
      No rezoning to the PO District shall be effective prior to adoption of
such Guidelines by City Council.
      PO Districts of more than 5 lots that were Preservation Districts under
previous regulations shall automatically become void if Guidelines therefor
have not been adopted within 120 days of the date of effect of 1310.02(c).
      B. Standards for Guidelines
      All Design Guidelines shall conform to the requirements of this division.
      A set of uniform or model design criteria not related to the specific
character of the PO-zoned area, such as the Secretary of the Interior's Stan-
dards, shall not qualify as Guidelines hereunder, although Guidelines may in-
clude provisions from such criteria.
      1. Findings on Existing Character
      Guidelines shall be based on surveys and specific findings concerning the
visual qualities of the existing historic character of the particular
district.  These findings shall be documented in the Guidelines.
      2. Define Compatibility
      Guidelines shall serve to clearly define the specific nature of the
visual compatibility required of alterations under Table 1310J as related to
that existing character.
      3. Advance Notice to Applicants
      Guidelines shall be sufficiently clear and detailed to convey in advance
to prospective applicants as specifically as possible what the Design Review
Board requires so as to prevent unnecessary delays in approval and unnecessary
revisions to alteration plans.
      4. Period of Significance
      Guidelines for a multi-property PO District shall identify the period of
significance represented by the District.  Such period shall be sufficiently
inclusive to acknowledge the span of time during which District properties were
constructed or achieved significance.
      The period of significance shall be used as a point of reference for
determining visual compatibility within the district.  It shall not be used to
prevent contemporary treatments that may be deemed appropriate within the con-
text of the district as a whole.
      5. Guidelines for Secondary Property
      Guidelines shall be defined for secondary property, as defined herein,
that are appropriately less stringent than those applying to primary property.
      6. Cost-Benefit
      Guidelines shall weigh the benefit to the public of the most historically
appropriate treatments against any additional cost to the property owner
therefor.  They shall favor treatments offering the greatest public benefit in
relation to private cost.
   (7) Removal of PO Zoning
   The City shall rezone a property, area, or portion thereof to remove the PO
District if the characteristics of the property, area, or portion thereof on
which the PO zoning was based have permanently ceased to exist.
   Such rezoning shall not require a request therefor from the owner of the
affected property.  If a valid request is received, the rezoning shall be
adopted by City Council no later than 90 days after receipt by the Planning
Director of the request.
   (8) Property Maintenance
   The Building Commissioner shall give priority in enforcement of the City's
property maintenance regulations to primary properties located in the PO
District, especially those with the most significant violations, in order to
prevent deterioration that would justify or require demolition.  This
requirement shall not apply to secondary properties.
   If the property owner has not performed maintenance work ordered by the
Commissioner within a reasonable period as determined by the Commissioner, the
Commissioner may arrange for such work to be performed and assess the property
owner for the cost thereof.
   (9) Mandatory Referral
   Actions by City government relating to prop-erties in the PO District are
subject to Man-datory Referral, as provided in 1310.09.
   (10) Sunset Provision
   All provisions for the PO Preservation Overlay District shall become null
and void if:
      A. either prior to or within 360 days after the date of effect of
division 1310.02(c) the Design Review Board has not recommended to City Council
the rezoning of private property to such District or to the predecessor
Preservation District, or
      B. either prior to or within 540 days after such date City Council has
not approved any such rezoning.
Table 1310B: Approval Criteria for Rezoning to PO District
1. Significance
The property or area to be rezoned has at least one of the significances
specified below.
   A. Historic Significance
   It has special value associated with a site, person, group, organization,
event, or pattern of events of local, state, or national historic significance.
   For this purpose a pattern of events shall be considered a series of
discrete events that are related both to each other and to the significance of
the property or area and that do not serve merely to identify a historical era
or other period of time or a style of architecture.
   B. Architectural Significance
   It has special value as historic architecture by:
      1. being the work of a historically notable builder, architect, or
designer, or
      2. embodying architectural elements that make it innovative, distinctive,
excellent, uncommon, irreplaceable, or otherwise significant, or
      3. serving to create a special character or atmosphere that is of an
economic value to the City or a portion thereof that justifies its
preservation.
   C. Other Significance
   It has special value resulting from a singular physical characteristic that
is a widely recognized and widely esteemed visual feature or landmark of the
City or of any neighborhood.
"Special value" shall be considered to mean value not commonly exhibited by
other properties or areas in the City.  Such value need not be one-of-a-kind
but shall be sufficiently uncommon to clearly merit special regulatory
protection.
The property or area has further not seen publicly visible alterations to the
original design, or to a successor design established as the compatibility
standard, that are so drastic as to have largely destroyed the significance of
the area or property and that could be reversed only with extraordinary
difficulty.
2. Suitability for Preservation
The property or area exhibits sound structural condition and remains largely
suitable physically for preservation or restoration.
3. Consistent With Adjacent Property or Plan
The placement of the property or area in the PO District is consistent with the
significance of adjacent property or with the Preservation Plan for the City. 
It therefore does not represent an arbitrary imposition only upon certain
properties or areas with such significance.
Note:  This table defines criteria for primary property, as defined herein. 
Individual properties not meeting these criteria may be included in a multi-
property District as secondary property subject to the provisions of 1310.02
(c).
1310.03 Adjustments
(a) Variances
   (1) Purpose and Applicability
   Because of special circumstances affecting particular properties in the
City, the literal application of the provisions of this Code may in certain
instances create unintended hardships or practical difficulties.
   As provided in Table 1320A, the Board of Zoning and Building Appeals and
Planning Commission may accordingly grant Variances from the literal
application of any provision of this Code, or any provision of a Site Plan
approved under Section 1310.07 based on Findings of Fact related to the
Approval Criteria of Table 1310C.
   (2) Approval Process
   The Variance approval process shall be as pro-vided in Chapter 1320.
   (3) Use Variances
   No Variance shall be approved or conditionally approved the effect of which
would be substantially equivalent to a rezoning or Conditional Use approval or
that would otherwise permit any use not allowed as a Permitted or Conditional
Use in the applicable district.
   (4) Non-Variance Relief
   If the Board of Zoning and Building Appeals or Planning Commission finds
that a requested Variance fails to conform to the applicable Approval Criteria
and that a text or map amendment or other Development Approval is necessary to
grant an applicant relief, it shall so advise the applicant.
   A subsequent application for such other Approval shall not be considered a
rehearing under division 1320.02(g)(18).
   (5) Variances and Bonuses
   No Variance shall be approved if a zoning bonus is provided--such as by
Table 1230I or division 1110.02(f)(5)--that would achieve the same result
unless the Board of Zoning and Building Appeals or Planning Commission finds
use of the bonus to be impractical in the particular case.
   (6) Homeowner Variances
      A. Purpose
      The purpose of Homeowner Variance procedures is to reduce the time and
expense to homeowners of obtaining approval of simple Variances that are likely
to have minimal adverse impact.
      B. Eligibility
      The fee owner, contract purchaser, or option holder of a single-family
detached or attached or townhouse dwelling or a two-or three-family dwelling
who wishes to request a Variance for that dwelling or its lot may apply for a
Homeowner Variance.
      An application involving more than one dwelling or more than one lot, as
defined herein, shall not be filed as a Homeowner Variance.
      C. Benefits
      1. Reduced Submissions
      Filing submissions for Homeowner Variances shall be determined on a case-
by-case basis by the Building Commissioner and may be less than required for
other Variances in Table 1320B. 
      2. Lower Filing Fees
      The City Council may establish  fees for Homeowner Variances that are
lower than those for other Variances.
   Other procedures and requirements shall be as provided for all Variances.
Table 1310C: Approval Criteria for Variances
1. Special Circumstances Not Found Elsewhere
Special circumstances, fully described in Findings of Fact, exist that are
peculiar to the property for which the Variance is sought and that do not apply
generally to other properties in the same district or other regulatory
classification.
And these circumstances are not of so general or recurrent a nature as to make
it reasonably practical to provide, in the form of a text amendment to the
applicable regulations, a general regulation to cover them.
2. Hardship or Practical Difficulties
For reasons fully set forth in the written Findings, the literal application of
the applicable provision would result in unnecessary and undue hardship or
practical difficulties for the applicant, as distinguished from mere
inconvenience.
3. Not Resulting from Applicant Action
The special circumstances and practical difficulties or hardship that are the
basis for the Variance have not resulted from any act of the applicant or of
any other party with a present interest in the property undertaken subsequent
to the adoption of the regulation being varied.
Knowingly authorizing or proceeding with any action requiring any Variance,
permit, certificate, or approval under City development regulations prior to
such approval shall be considered such an act and shall not be the basis for
approval of a Variance.
4. Preserves Rights Conferred by District
A Variance is necessary for the applicant to enjoy a substantial property right
possessed by other conforming properties in the same district or other
regulatory classification and does not confer a special privilege ordinarily
denied to such other properties.
5. Necessary for Use of Property
The grant of a Variance is necessary not because it will increase the
applicant's economic return, although it may have this effect, but because
without a Variance the applicant will be deprived of reasonable use or
enjoyment of, or reasonable return, as defined herein, from, the property.
6. Not Alter Local Character
The granting of the Variance will not alter the essential character of the
locality nor substantially impair environmental quality, property values, or
public safety or welfare in the vicinity.
7. Consistent With Ordinance and Plan
The granting of a Variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of the regulations of this Code and of the Barberton Comprehensive Plan
and other applicable adopted plans of the City, as viewed in light of any
changed conditions since their adoption.  It will not serve in effect to
substantially invalidate or nullify any part thereof.
8. Minimum Variance Needed
The Variance approved is the minimum required to provide the applicant with
relief from undue hardship or practical difficulties and with reasonable use
and enjoyment of his or her property.
Please Note: To view the Variances Graphic, see page 1310-7 of the printed
version of the Barberton Development Code
(b) Conditional Uses and Special Exceptions
   (1) Purpose
   Certain uses cannot be allowable generally in a particular zoning district,
or in any zoning district, because of the impact their special character
creates on surrounding areas. 
   Some such uses may, however, be properly allowed under special conditions. 
These uses may be approved as Conditional Uses if speci-fically designated as
such in the applicable zoning district.
   (2) Applicability
   Because a Conditional Use is compatible only under special conditions, no
Certificate of Compliance shall be issued for any use authorized as a
Conditional Use in the applicable district before approval of a Conditional Use
Permit.
   Except as specifically provided otherwise herein, all regulations of the
applicable zoning district, and all other applicable City regulations, shall
apply to Conditional Uses.
   (3) Approval Process
   The process for approval of Conditional Uses shall be as provided in Chapter
1320.  Appro-val Criteria shall be as provided in Table 1310D.
   (4) Review Factors
   In evaluating the suitability of a Conditional Use, the Planning Commission
shall examine, as applicable, the following characteristics of the use and its
structures or components:
      A. Location and orientation
      B. Lot size
      C. Size of facility, including floor area, structure height, design
capacity, and anticipated employment.
      D. Site design and arrangement
      E. Provisions affecting on- and off-site pedestrian and traffic movement,
vehicle storage, and access by emergency vehicles
      F. Appearance
      G. Screening or landscaping
      H. Onor off-site buffering from incompatible uses with open spaces or
transitional uses
      I. Operations factors, such as hours of use or environmental controls,
that affect land use compatibility
      J. Other characteristics of the proposed use pertinent in the judgment of
the Commission to an assessment of the impact of the use on the area.
   (5) Specific Standards
   The Commission may call upon technical ex-perts to determine specific
development standards for particular Conditional Uses or oth-er Special
Exceptions.
   (6) Other Special Exceptions
   Like Conditional Uses, other Special Exceptions to provisions of City
development regu-lations may be approved without the need for an Amendment or
Variance when such Exceptions and the conditions under which they may be
allowed are specifically authorized in this Code.
   Such Exceptions may be approved, condition-ally approved, or disapproved. 
The process for their approval shall be as provided in Chapter 1320.  Approval
Criteria shall be as specified for the particular Exception.
Table 1310D: Approval Criteria for Conditional Uses
On the basis of the review factors cited under in division 1310.03(b)(4), or
changes in such factors required as a condition to approval, the proposed use
will be compatible with its environs in all of the ways indicated herein.
1. Neighborhood Character
The proposed use will fit harmoniously with the character of existing Permitted
Uses in its environs.  Any adverse effects on environmental quality, prop-erty
values, or neighborhood character beyond those normally associated with
Permitted Uses in the district have been minimized.
2. Environmental Nuisance
Any effects of noise, glare, odor, dust, waste disposal, blockage of light or
air, or other adverse environmental effects of a type or degree not
characteristic of Permitted Uses in the district, have been minimized.
3. Traffic
Any adverse impact of types or volumes of traffic flow not otherwise typical of
Permitted Uses in the zoning district has been minimized.
4. Use of Public Services and Facilities
The proposed use will not require existing community facilities or services to
a degree disproportionate to that normally expected of Permitted Uses in the
district, nor generate disproportionate demand for new services or facilities,
in such a way as to place undue burdens upon existing development in the area.
5. Statutory Public Functions
Disapproval or conditional approval of a Conditional Use requested by a public
body will not generally prevent such body from discharging its statutory
functions but will only place reasonable restrictions on how and where those
functions may be performed.
6. Other Factors
The use is in harmony with any other elements of compatibility pertinent to the
Conditional Use in its proposed location.
(c) Appeals
   (1) Purpose
   Because actions of administrative officials and bodies under City
regulations are subject to occasional error, the Board of Zoning and Building
Appeals may hear Appeals of such actions and modify them if it finds an error
has been made.
   (2) Applicability
   Except as otherwise provided herein, any party, including the City itself,
tht is aggrieved by an alleged error in an administrative action--such as an
order, requirement, decision, or determination--made under this Code by the
Building Commissioner, Planning Director, or other authorized administrative
official, board, commission, or department of the City may file an Appeal
thereof with the Board of Zoning and Building Appeals.
   Such actions shall include denial of a Certificate of Compliance,
Certificate of Occupancy, Certificate of Appropriateness, Building Permit, or
other permit or certificate based on noncompliance with the regulations of this
Code.
   The following shall not be subject to appeal to the Board of Zoning and
Building Appeals:
      A. actions of the City Council
      B. actions of the Board of Zoning and Building Appeals
      C. Advisory Action and advisory recommendations  of any committee,
commission, board, official, or staff to another official or body.
   City Council and Board of Zoning and Building Appeals actions may be
appealed to the Court of Common Pleas.
   (3) Approval Process
      A. Notice of Appeal
      1. Filing Deadline
      A Notice of Appeal shall be filed with the Building Commissioner  within
10 days of the date of the action being appealed.
      2. Contents
      The Notice shall contain:
      a. The name, address, and telephone number of the party filing the Appeal
      b. The location of the property affected by the action being appealed 
      c. A numerical citation of the regulation governing the action appealed
      d. A statement of the grounds on which the Appeal is based
      e. The Findings of Fact or reason given by the official or body on which
the action was based
      f. A brief summary of the factual evidence upon which the Appeal is based
      g. A plot plan and verbal description of the use affected by the action
being appealed.
      B. Stay of Proceedings
      The filing of a Notice of Appeal shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed unless the Building Commissioner certifies
to the Board of Zoning and Building Appeals that in his or her judgment a stay
would cause imminent peril to life, health, or property.
      In such case, no proceedings shall be stayed without issuance of a
restrain-ing order by the Board or a court of record.
      C. Action by Board
      The Building Commissioner shall transmit to the Board upon receipt the
Notice of Appeal and the complete record of the decision appealed.  The Board
shall set a reasonable time for a meeting to consider the Appeal.
      Within 30 days of the conclusion of the meeting, the Board shall take
final action on the Appeal in conformance with the Approval Criteria in Table
1310E. 
      The Board may affirm, modify, or reverse the action appealed, subject
only to judicial review.  To this end the Board shall have all the powers of
the party whose action was appealed, including the power to direct the issuance
of a certificate or permit.
Table 1310E: Approval Criteria for Appeals
The Board shall sustain an Appeal and reverse or modify an action appealed only
if it finds that the action was an error not in conformance with applicable
regulations of this Code by virtue of being:
   1. based on erroneous interpretation of those regulations, or
   2. based on an erroneous finding of a fact material to the action taken
under the regulations, or
   3. an abuse of the discretion allowed under the regulations, or
   4. clearly not in conformance with applicable Approval Criteria or other
provisions of the regulations.
If the Board finds that the action appealed was undertaken in full compliance
with applicable regu-lations, it shall sustain the action and deny the Appeal
even if it finds the action or the regulation to be objectionable.
The Board may recommend to the Planning Commission or City Council that the
regulations be amended if it finds certain provisions to be undesirable, but it
shall not sustain an Appeal as an alternative to such amendment.
(d) Changes to Properties With Nonconformities
   (1) Purpose
   In an older city like Barberton in which much development preceded modern
land use regulations, certain determinations of the extent to which
Nonconformities with current regulations should be eliminated can more
equitably be made on the basis of case-by-case review than by an inflexible
general rule.
   (2) Applicability
   When any of the actions specified in Table 1340A of Chapter 1340,
Nonconformities, requires a decision by the Board of Zoning and Building
Appeals on required elimination of Nonconformities, the owner of the affected
property shall file an application with the Board.
   (3) Approval Process
   The process for approval of changes to properties with Nonconformities shall
be as provided in Chapter 1320.  Approval Criteria shall be as provided in
Table 1310F.
   (4) Action by Board
   The Board may require that all Nonconformities be completely eliminated,
that some Nonconformities be completely or partially eliminated, or that no
Nonconformities be reduced or eliminated. 
   The Board may make its approval of a proposed action subject to such
conditions as it deems necessary.
Table 1310F: Approval Criteria for Changes to Properties With Nonconformities
A Nonconformity on a nonconforming property shall be eliminated or reduced to
the extent the Board of Zoning and Building Appeals determines reasonable.
The Board shall base its determination on such of the factors in this table as
may in its judgment apply.
1. Effect on Nonconformity
The extent to which the requested action will reduce or increase the extent of
nonconformity and make the property more nearly conforming or more
nonconforming.
2. Effect on Incompatibility
The extent to which the action will otherwise reduce or increase
incompatibility with the property's surroundings as related to the Approval
Criteria for Conditional Uses in Table 1310D.
3. Prevalence of Nonconformity
The degree to which the Nonconformity is prevalent among properties in the
environs and the extent to which its elimination might make the prop-erty less
rather than more compatible therewith.
4. Perceptible Adverse Effects
The degree to which the Nonconformity is noticeable to the public and produces
significant adverse effects on the environment of the area.
5. Effect on Useful Life
The extent to which the requested action will tend to significantly prolong or
reduce the useful physical or economic life of the Nonconformity or otherwise
delay or accelerate its eventual elimination.
6. Investment in Nonconformity
The amount of investment in the Nonconformity, the normal useful life thereof,
and the amount of benefit already realized therefrom.
7. Legal Obligations
The existence of leases or other legal obligations governing the continuation
of the Nonconformity and the existence of contingency provisions permitting
termination of such obligations.
8. Physical Feasibility
The feasibility of eliminating the Nonconformity without relocation of sound
major structures or acquisition of additional land.
9. Financial Feasibility
The feasibility of eliminating the Nonconformity without expense
disproportionate to the cost of the proposed action.
10. Parking
The impact of the action on the need for off-street parking and the degree to
which it is possible to eliminate any parking Nonconformity.
11. Conformity With Plan
The extent to which the requested action is supported by the adopted Barberton
Comprehensive Plan despite present zoning that may not support it.
12. Hardship
The degree to which requiring elimination of the Nonconformity in conjunction
with the requested action would impose undue hardship upon the property owner
or user because of the inability of the property to be reasonably used without
the Nonconformity.
1310.04 Staff Approvals
(a) Temporary Uses
   (1) Purpose
   Uses not in conformance with the provisions of this Code may provide a
public benefit without significant detriment to the public welfare if they are
established only for limited durations.  In such cases full compliance with
regulations for permanent uses may be unnecessary.  This division allows uses
not in compliance with regulations applicable to permanent uses to be
established as Temporary Uses.
   (2) Applicability
   A. Permit Required
   Except as specifically exempted therefrom, no Temporary Use not in full
compliance with the provisions of this Code applicable to permanent uses shall
be established or maintained without a currently valid Temporary Use Permit. 
Such Permits shall be issued by the Building Commissioner in accordance with
Table 1310G and other provisions herein.  No Certificate of Compliance shall be
required for Temporary Uses.
   A Temporary Use not in compliance with any provision of these regulations
shall be considered a permanent use and shall be subject to all regulations
applicable to permanent uses.
   (3) Approval Process
   A complete and correct application for a Temporary Use Permit shall be filed
with the Building Commissioner at least 30 days before the establishment of the
use.  The application shall include an identification of the property and the
type and proposed starting and ending dates of the use.  It shall be
accompanied by the applicable filing fee.
The Building Commissioner or Board of Zoning and Building Appeals may deny such
a Permit or any renewal thereof or approve it subject to any restrictions, time
limits, or conditions found necessary to conform to the Approval Criteria of
Table 1310G.  Within 7 days of application or of a decision by the BZBA, where
required, the Com-missioner shall either issue or deny a Permit.
The Permit shall set forth any conditions to which it is subject.  The
permittee shall display the Permit within plain view on the premises of the
Temporary Use for the duration of the Use.
(4) Term of Permit
   A. Initial Term
   A Temporary Use Permit may be issued:
   1. by the Building Commissioner, for a period ending not later than 60
calendar days--or 3 calendar days in the case of a yard sale--from the date of
the establishment of the use, or
   2. by the Board of Zoning and Building Appeals, for a period ending not
later than 180 calendar days from date of Permit issuance.
   3. for yard sales, no more than 2 times in a calendar year to the same
household.
   B. Renewal
   1. Renewal Period
   A Permit may be renewed at its expiration:
   a. by the Commissioner, for a period not longer than 60 days from the
expiration date, or
   b. by the Board, for a period not longer than 180 days from the expiration
date.
   A Permit for a yard sale shall not be renewed.
   2. Maximum Duration
   A Permit may be renewed for a cumulative total, including the original term
thereof:
   a. by the Commissioner, of no more than 180 days from the date of the
establishment of the use, or
   b. by the Board, of no more than 360 days from the date of the
establishhment of the use.
Application by the permittee for a new Permit within 60 days after the
expiration of a Permit for the same use on the same property shall be
considered a renewal of the previous Permit.
(5) Partial Compliance Upon Renewal
As a condition of Permit renewal, the Building Commissioner or Board may
require partial compliance with regulations that would be applicable if the
Temporary Use were a permanent use if such compliance is deemed necessary to
make the use compatible with its environs.  The Commissioner or Board may
require progressively greater compliance with each subsequent renewal.
(6) Special Temporary Uses
Temporary Uses shall conform to provisions of any City regulations applying to
special types of Temporary Uses in addition to the requirements of this
section.
Table 1310G: Approval Criteria for Temporary Uses
1. No Permanent Exception to Normal Requirements
The Temporary Use is not likely to create longterm or permanent conditions in
conflict with ap-plicable City development regulations governing permanent
uses.
2. Easily Terminated
The use is of such a nature as to be easily and inexpensively terminated if
termination is required or if any condition to which the Temporary Use Permit
is made subject is not maintained. 
Any permanent structures installed for the Temporary Use are suitable for
conversion to permanent uses allowed under applicable City regulations.
3. Not Alternative to Other Approval
The Temporary Use Permit is the most suitable device to grant a use temporary
relief from regulatory requirements and does not serve as an alter-native to a
Variance, amendment, Conditional Use, or other approval for a use that is
likely to remain permanently.
4. Not Alter Local Character
The Temporary Use will not permanently alter the essential character of the
locality nor substantially and permanently impair environmental quality,
property values, or public safety or welfare in the vicinity.
(b) Interpretations
   (1) Purpose
   Because no set of written regulations can be specific enough to anticipate
all circumstances, the intent of general rules as applied to particular
situations will occasionally require interpretation. 
   To avoid unnecessary delay, the procedure herein for determining
interpretations is intended to be as expeditious as possible.
   (2) Applicability
   Any party may request from the Building Commissioner an interpretation of
any provision of this Code, including the Zoning District Map. 
   The Commissioner may also make such interpretations in the absence of a
specific request as he or she determines necessary to administer the
regulations.
   (3) Approval Process
   In consultation with the Director of Law, the Building Commissioner may
determine interpretations of ambiguities in the text of the regulations or the
Zoning District Map.  Such interpretations shall be subject to Appeal as
provided in division 1310.03(c).
   No interpretation shall be made that is contrary to:
      A. rules of interpretation or definitions in Chapters 1360, Definitions,
or
      B. rules of interpretation of Zoning District Map boundaries in division
1110.01(b)(1), or
      C. other applicable regulations.
(c) Unlisted Uses Similar to Listed Uses
   (1) Purpose
   No set of regulations can list all land uses that may exist or may come into
existence in the future. 
   Unnecessary costs and delays are imposed by requiring approval of a text
amendment to this Code prior to the establishment in a zoning district of an
unlisted use that is similar to a use already listed as allowed in that
district.  The provisions of this division allow such uses to be established
with minimal cost and delay.
   (2) Applicability
   A use may be determined to be similar to a listed use in a particular Use
Group in Chapter 1130 only if it is not listed as a Permitted or Conditional
Use in any other Use Group.
   (3) Approval Process and Criteria
   A permanent use not established as a Permitted or Conditional Use in a
zoning district, shall be allowed therein if it is determined by the Planning
Director to be essentially similar to any listed use in that district with
respect to:
      A. types of goods or services produced or sold, and
      B. generation of automobile, truck, or pedestrian traffic, and
      C. hours of operation, and
      D. general effect upon its environs.
   Uses determined to be similar to listed Conditional Uses shall be subject to
the approval of a Conditional Use Permit.  All regulations applicable to a
listed use shall also apply to an unlisted use to which it is judged similar.
(Ord. 117-2016. Passed 11-28-16.)
1310.05 Subdivision Approvals
(a) Purpose
The City Planning Commission shall have the pow-er to approve plats of
subdivisions within or to be annexed to the City in order to:
   (1) promote the orderly layout and appropriate use of land
   (2) prevent the creation of unbuildable lots or lots that do not conform to
this Code
   (3) assure continuity of streets and other facilities between neighboring
subdivisions, and
   (4) assure provision of improvements that reduce environmental problems and
provide for the needs generated by new developments.
(b) Applicability
No lot, tract, or parcel of land within the City shall be transferred before a
Major Subdivision or Minor Subdivision has been approved hereunder and
recorded.  Neither description of such property by metes and bounds in the deed
of transfer nor the absence of public streets or other public areas shall
constitute and exception to this requirement.
No division of land within the City shall be submitted for recording with the
Summit or Wayne County Recorder, as applicable, that has not been approved as
provided herein.
No construction or installation of improvements in a subdivision shall begin
before approval of a Pre-liminary Plat or Minor Subdivision.
Approval of Preliminary Plats and Final Plats shall be required for Major
Subdivisions, as defined herein.  Approval under a simplified approval process
shall be required for Minor Subdivisions, as also defined herein.
(c) Site Condos and Coops
Site condominiums and site cooperatives, as defined herein, are not subject to
subdivision approval hereunder but are subject to Site Plan Review approval
under Section 1310.07.
(d) Exemptions
The following shall not require approval as a subdivision hereunder:
   (1) public acquisition of land for the widening of existing streets
   (2) any combination of existing lots of record or portions thereof that does
not create any new or residual parcel smaller in lot width or lot depth than
any existing lot
   (3) vacation of alleys along which 50 percent or more of abutting lots are
developed
   (4) vacation of unimproved easements for public travel, of pedestrian ways,
and partial street vacations.
(e) Minor Subdivisions
   (1) Qualification for Filing
   A subdivision of land may be approved as a Minor Subdivision under authority
of Section 711.131 of the Ohio Revised Code if the parcel to be divided is:
      A. located along an existing public street, and
      B. does not involve the opening, widening, or extension of any street,
and
      C. does not create more than five lots, including the parent lot, after
it is completely subdivided, and
      D. does not involve the installation of any public utility.
   (2) Minor Subdivisions for Model Homes
   A portion of a Major Subdivision may be filed as a Minor Subdivision for the
purpose of early construction of model homes.  Such a Minor Subdivision shall
be filed and may be approved at the same time as the Preliminary Plat for the
Major Subdivision.
(f) Planned Unit Developments
Subdivisions filed as Planned Unit Developments under Section 1310.06 may be
granted relief from the requirements of this Code as provided therein.
(g) Plat Vacation and Resubdivision
   (1) Vacation
   Vacations of plats or parts thereof shall be approved by the Planning
Commission after a copy of the plat to be vacated and an instrument declaring
such vacation has been filed with the Commission.  Plat vacations shall be
subject to Section 711.17 et. seq. of the Ohio Revised Code.  Approved vacating
instruments shall be recorded with the County Recorder.
   (2) Resubdivision
   To resubdivide a recorded subdivision or part thereof, the old plat or
portion shall be vacated and the new plat or portion approved under procedures
for new subdivisions herein.  The vacating declaration and the resubdivision
plat may be filed and acted upon simultaneously.  Approved resubdivisions shall
be recorded, as applicable, with the Summit or Wayne County Recorder.
(h) Approval Process
The approval processes for Preliminary Plats, Final Plats, and Minor
Subdivisions shall be as provided in Chapter 1320, Approval Procedures. 
Approval Criteria shall be as provided in Table 1310H.
Table 1310H: Approval Criteria for Preliminary Plats and Minor Subdivisions
   1. Comprehensive Plan
   The subdivision is in conformity with the Comprehensive Plan of the City.
   2. Planning Standards
   The subdivision exhibits conformity with the planning standards set forth in
Sections 1240.02 through 1240.08.
   3. Improvements Standards
   The subdivision conforms to the standards for improvements of Section
1240.09.
   4. Other Regulations
   The subdivision conforms to all other applicable provisions of this Code.
1310.06 Planned Unit Development
(a) Purpose
The provisions of this section are intended for special situations in which:
   (1) adequate space, light, air, and other objectives of this Code relating
to public health, safety, and welfare can be achieved through skillful planning
without literal application of the detailed regulations otherwise applicable,
and
   (2) special amenities and benefits to the City beyond those otherwise
required by City regulations--and the development of properties with special
constraints such as environmental sensitivity or by-passed infill parcels--can
be achieved by allowing more flexible planning than is otherwise allowed by
such regulations.
These objectives can be accomplished where:
   (1) a substantial area of land is planned for development as a single
integrated unit, and
   (2) its planning is subject to more detailed review by the City than is
usually required, and
   (3) its development is governed by a specific plan rather than by generally
applicable verbal regulations and quantitative standards.
The objective of Planned Unit Development (PUD) is therefore not simply to
allow exceptions to otherwise applicable regulations.  It is instead to make
possible a higher level of urban environmental quality than can be achieved
under the normal development requirements.
It is accordingly the intent of the City to suspend the application of detailed
land use regulations as provided herein only where such special quality is
achieved.  In this way the City may grant the cre-ative developer a desirable
flexibility and at the same time not only protect but enhance the welfare of
the residents and other users of a development and the rest of the community. 
Approval under this section is a privilege to be earned and not a right that
can be claimed.  Exceptions to the normal regulations are not granted
automatically but only upon a finding that they will result in a superior
development. 
(b) Eligibility for Filing
A Planned Unit Development may be residential, commercial, office,
institutional, industrial, or a combination thereof.  It may be developed in
any district in which PUD's are allowed.
No development shall be filed as a Planned Unit Development unless it:
   (1) is at least 3 acres in size, and
   (2) contains 2 or more detached principal use buildings, and
   (3) is initially under the same ownership or control.
(c) Special Incentives
To further a superior level of planning and ameni-ty in new development, the
incentives provided herein are offered in Planned Unit Developments.
Flexibility to suspend normal regulatory requirements is not conferred as a
right but is subject to a finding by the City that the objectives of these
provisions will be served thereby. Exceptions in a PUD shall not be considered
as Variances and shall not be required to conform to the Approval Criteria
therefor.
   (1) Varied Development Standards
   Except as restricted by paragraph 1310.06(d)(4), standards for number of
princi-pal buildings per lot, lot area, lot area per dwelling unit, lot width,
building height, floor area ratio, yard dimensions, blocks, and the like may
vary from those established elsewhere in this Code.
   (2) Varied Improvement Standards
   Dimensional and design standards and guide-lines for allowable and mandated
improvements--such as for streets, off-street parking and loading areas,
landscaping and screening, signs, and sidewalks but not improvement
construction specifications---may vary from standards established in this Code.
   All utility layout and pavement construction plans shall be reviewed by the
City Engineer.
   (3) Mixed Land Uses
   Land uses other than those allowed as Permitted or Conditional Uses in the
applicable zoning district may be permitted on up to 10 percent of the net site
area in Residential Districts and 20 percent in other districts.
(d) Special Requirements 
   (1) Site Plan Approval
   Whether or not a land subdivision is involved, Site Plan approval under
Section 1310.07 shall be required.
   All development in a PUD shall be in conformity with a Final Site Plan
approved as provided in Table 1320A.
   (2) Quality of Planning
   To be granted the flexibility permitted hereunder, a development shall
evidence a level of integrated planning and environmental quality that
substantially exceeds that otherwise required by this Code.
   Among the features that may evidence such quality are:
      A. siting of buildings and other facilities in greater harmony with the
natu-ral characteristics of the land, such as wooded areas, natural
drainageways, or areas of sensitive or valuable environmental character
      B. superior buffering of uses within and adjacent to the development from
incompatible uses
      C. the amount or quality of landscaping
      D. the amount, quality, or interconnectedness of common open space
      E. provision of pedestrian, jogging, or bicycle paths separated from
streets
      F. preservation of drainageways and other natural features
      G. provision of public or common recreational facilities
      H. creative adaptation of a by-passed infill parcel to the character of
its environs
      I. enclosed, underground, depressed, or outstandingly landscaped parking
areas
      J. varied setbacks or other measures to reduce monotony in design
      K. preservation of historically or architecturally significant sites or
structures
      L. unusual development planning features that further energy
conservation, pollution control, crime prevention, social interaction, or other
desirable community objectives
      M. other special features determined by the Planning Commission or City
Council to enhance the environment of the development.
   (3) Not Detrimental
   Despite exceptions granted to normally appli-cable regulations, the Planning
Commission and City Council shall determine that neither the PUD nor any
portion thereof will be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other properties
in its vicinity, impair property values or environmental quality in the
neighborhood, impede the orderly development of surrounding property. 
   They shall further determine that the PUD will not be detrimental to the
public health, safety, or general welfare to a substantially greater degree
than development allowed under normally applicable regulations.
   (4) Specific Standards
      A. Maximum Density
      Residential density on any lot in a PUD may exceed that permitted by the
applicable zoning district. Except that the overall number of dwelling units in
the development and each phase thereof shall not exceed by more than 35 percent
the number allowed by the regulations of the applicable district.
      Land area devoted to new permanent common or public open space provided
as part of a development within its residential areas may be included as
residential lot or site area for purposes of density calculations. 
      There shall not be counted as open space for this purpose land covered by
buildings or devoted to streets, parking, loading, service, refuse disposal,
storage, vehicular maneuvering or circulation, or 50 percent of wet and 25
percent of dry storm-water retention or detention basins.
      B. Building Separation
      There shall be a minimum horizontal separation between all detached
buildings equivalent to:
      1. 10 feet between one- or two-story buildings only, or
      2. one-half the height of the taller building in all other cases.
      Greater separations may be required where necessary to conform to
applica-ble Approval Criteria of Table 1310I.
      C. Yards
      Where the normal definitions of yards do not apply, the Site Plan shall
either:
      1. designate which open spaces on the property are to be treated as
front, corner side, interior side, or rear yards for purposes of the provisions
on allowable yard obstructions in Chapter 1140, Accessory Uses and Yards, or
      2. be accompanied by homeowners or condominium association covenants or
other legal instruments governing such obstructions.
(e) Approval Process
Preliminary and Final Site Plans for Planned Unit Developments shall be acted
upon only in conformance with:
   (1) the regulations of this section, and
   (2) the Site Plan Review regulations of Section 1310.07, and
   (3) the Approval Process provided in Chapter 1320, and
   (4) the Approval Criteria for Site Plans provided in Table 1310I.
No permit or certificate for a PUD or phase thereof shall be issued before
approval of a Final Site Plan therefor.
No construction or installation of improvements in a PUD shall begin before
approval of a Preliminary Site Plan as provided herein.
1310.07 Site Plan Review
(a) Purpose
In certain special cases, conformance to the specific requirements herein may
not be sufficient to assure that new development conforms to the purposes of
this Code.
In such cases, discretionary approval of development site plans for conformance
to principles of good planning may be necessary in addition to review of such
plans for compliance with specific regulations.  Site Plan Review, as provided
herein, offers a mechanism for such discretionary approval.
Site Plan Review is intended for special situations in which development
projects can create significant adverse impacts on their surroundings that can
bet-ter be managed by case-by-case plan review than by prescriptive
regulations.  Its purpose is to prevent or reduce such impacts through approval
of individual site development configurations.
Site Plan Review may add to the requirements of normal City regulations special
requirements found to be necessary to assure compatibility with surrounding
land uses, thoroughfares, environmental character, and public services.
Developments to which this section applies shall be regulated by both:
   (1) the specifics of an approved Site Plan, and
   (2) all requirements of applicable City regulations except where exceptions
have been approved through Planned Unit Development or Variance provisions.
(b) Applicability
Except as exempted herein, actions requiring a Building Permit shall conform to
the requirements of this section if they:
   (1) establish more than one principal building on a lot, or
   (2) establish a manufactured home park, as defined herein, or
   (3) are filed as a Planned Unit Development under Section 1310.06, or
   (4) establish a site condominium or site cooperative, both as defined
herein, or
   (5) are otherwise required by City regulations to be approved under Site
Plan Review.
(c) Approval Process
Site Plans shall be filed and acted upon only in conformance with the Approval
Process provided in Chapter 1320, the submission requirements of Tables 1320B
and 1320C and the Approval Criteria of Table 1310I.
Site Plans may be submitted for Multi-Stage Review under division 1320.02(d)
(5).
Table 1310I:  Approval Criteria for Site Plans
1. Consistent With City Plan
The development is generally consistent with the objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan as viewed in light of any changed conditions since its
adoption.
2. Circulation
Streets, sidewalks, pedestrian ways, bicycle paths, and off-street parking and
loading are provided as appropriate to planned land uses. 
They are adequate in location, size, capacity, and design to ensure safe and
efficient circulation of automobiles, trucks, bicycles, pedestrians, fire
trucks, garbage trucks, and snow plows, as appropriate, without blocking
traffic, creating excessive pedestrian-vehicular conflict, creating unnecessary
through traffic within the development, or unduly interfering with the safety
or capacity of adjacent streets.
3. Open Spaces and Landscaping
The size, shape, and location of a substantial portion of any public or common
open space in residential areas render it usable for recreation purposes.
Open space between all buildings is adequate to allow for reasonable light and
air, access by fire fighting equipment, and for privacy where walls have
windows, terraces, or adjacent patios.  Open spaces or other measures along the
perimeter of the development protect existing and permitted future uses of
adjacent property from adverse effects of the development.
4. Covenants
Adequate provision has been made in the form of deed restrictions, homeowners
or condominium associations, or the like for: 
   A. the preservation and regular maintenance and repair of any open spaces,
thoroughfares, utilities, water retention or detention areas, and other common
elements not to be dedicated to the City or another public body, and
   B. such control of the use and exterior ap-pearance of individual
structures, if any, as is necessary for continuing conformance to the approved
Plan, such provision to be binding on all future ownerships.
5. Public Services
The land uses, intensities, and phasing of the development are consistent with
the anticipated ability of the City, the Barberton Public Schools, and other
public bodies to provide and economically support police and fire protection,
water supply, sewage disposal, schools, and other public facilities and
services without placing undue burden on existing residents and businesses.
6. Phasing
Each phase of the development of the property can, together with any phases
that preceded it, exist as an independent unit that meets all of the foregoing
criteria and all other applicable regulations even if no subsequent phase
should ever be completed. 
The provision and improvement of public or common area improvements, open
spaces, and amenities---or the provision of guarantees of their improvement---
are  phased generally proportionate to the phasing of the number of dwelling
units and/or amount of non-residential floor area.
1310.08 Certificates of Appropriateness
(a) Purpose
To further only those environmental changes within the PO Preservation Overlay
District that are consistent with the purposes of the District, the Design
Review Board shall review applications for Certificates of Appropriateness
therein.
(b) When Required
A Certificate of Appropriateness shall be required prior to any alteration, as
defined herein, that causes a visual change, as also defined herein, on any
property located in the PO District.
Except as exempted under division (c), no Certificate of Compliance, Demolition
Permit, or any other City permit or certificate shall be issued for such
alteration prior to approval of a Certificate of Appropriateness.
The Design Review Board may establish such specific submission requirements for
applications for Certificates of Appropriateness as it determines are required
to judge conformance of a proposed action with the Approval Criteria of Table
1310J.
(c) Exemptions
No Certificate of Appropriateness  shall be required for the alterations
specified in this division.
   (1) Routine Maintenance
   Routine maintenance and repair that does not in the judgment of the Planning
Director involve a significant visual change, as defined herein, shall be
exempt.
   (2) Mandated Alterations
   Alterations mandated for reasons of public health, safety, or protection of
property by the City or any other authorized government body and approved for
exemption by the Planning Director shall be exempt.
   (3) Casualties
   Alterations occasioned--whether  at one time or gradually over an extended
period--by natural causes, acts of God, accidents, vandalism, normal
deterioration with age, and other casualties  shall be exempt.
   (4) Emergency Alterations
   Alterations shall be exempt that in the judgment of the Building
Commissioner must be taken before a Certificate of Appropriateness could be
approved in order to prevent:
      A. an immediate peril to public health or safety, or
      B. serious damage to a property that has already been damaged or is
otherwise at risk of such damage.
   Such alterations shall be confined to the minimum necessary to prevent such
peril or damage.
(d) Action on Application
   (1) Approval Process
   Actions taken on Certificates of Appropriate-ness shall conform to the
approval process provided in Chapter 1320.
   (2) Limits on Compatibility Required
   The determinations of the Design Review Board based on Table 1310J shall
conform to the limitations herein.
      A. Not Deprive of Reasonable Use
      The determinations shall not deprive the property owner of reasonable use
of and a reasonable return, as defined herein, from the property. 
      Such use and return shall be based on the current or, if vacant, most
recent viable use of the property and not on any prospective new use that might
yield a greater utility or return.
      B. Not Impose Financial Hardship
      The determinations shall not impose a financial hardship on the property
owner or user in light of the costs to the property owner, the availability and
probability of approval of financial assistance therefor from the City of
Barberton or other sources, the costs of continuing maintenance, and the
financial resources of the property owner or user.  Mere reduction in financial
return or increase in costs shall not be considered hardship.
      C. Not Impair Economic Functioning
      The determinations shall preserve or enhance, and not unreasonably
impair, the economic functioning of any portion of the District lawfully used
or zoned for business use.
      D. Not Require Uniformity
      Uniformity of design shall not be required in order to achieve
compatibility.  Nor shall such contemporary design as may be visually
compatible in a particular location with a historic environment be disapproved.
      E. Not Abridge Underlying Zoning
      Compatibility shall be judged solely on the basis of historic factors and
not on the basis of land use, site planning, or intensity allowances already
conferred by the underlying zoning district, other provisions of this Code, or
a Planned Unit Development approval.
      Significant reduction or elimination of any development right conferred
by this Code--such as allowable land use, building height, or Floor Area Ratio-
-shall not be required of the applicant as a condition of approval.
      F. Not Based on Personal Preference
      Judgments of visual compatibility hereunder shall be based on generally
accepted principles of applicable design professions and/or documented historic
styles.  They shall not represent a substitution of the personal taste or
preferences of the members of the Design Review Board or their professional
advisors for those of the applicant or his or her design professionals.
      G. Standard for Secondary Properties
      For secondary properties, as defined herein, the Board shall require a
lesser standard of consistency and compatibility, especially with respect to
preservation of the property's existing character.
   (3) Changes Required for Approval
   The Design Review Board shall not disapprove a Certificate of
Appropriateness without also specifying in writing to the applicant the changes
in the proposal that would make it conform to the applicable Approval Criteria
herein. 
   (4) Appeal
   An applicant or other party may appeal a Final Action decision to approve,
conditionally approve, or not to approve a Certificate of Appropriateness to
the Board of Zoning and Building Appeals in accordance with the provisions on
Appeals in division 1310.03(c).
   (5) Landscaping Not Prohibited
   No provision of this Section shall be interpreted as authorizing or allowing
the prohibition of the planting of trees, shrubs, grass, or other ground cover
in any PO District, whether or not such landscaping existed during any
historical period.
Table 1310J: Approval Criteria for Certificates of Appropriateness
1. Consistency Required
The proposed action is generally consistent with:
   A. the objectives of the citywide Preservation Plan adopted by the City
Council, as viewed in light of any changes in the area of the sub-ject property
since such adoption, and
   B. applicable Design Guidelines adopted under division 1310.02(c)(6) by the
City Council.
2. Visual Compatibility Required
   A. Types of Compatibility
   The proposed alteration is visually compatible, as defined herein, in its
publicly visible appearance, as also defined herein, with the distinguishing
surviving visual features of the historic character, as defined in the adopted
Design Guidelines, of:
      1. the existing property being altered, and
      2. surrounding properties and adjacent public ways within the PO
District, and
      3. the PO District as a whole in which the property is located.
   B. Elements of Compatibility
   The visual compatibility required shall be judged, as applicable, with
respect to the following elements of design:
      1. Location, orientation, and placement
      2. Height and scale
      3. Proportions (e.g., of windows, doors, or sign lettering)
      4. Shape (e.g., of roof or signs)
      5. Materials, textures, and colors
      6. Style or design character
      7. Directional expression, or horizontal or vertical character
      8. Open spaces, including setbacks and spacing
      9. Landscaping
      10. Other elements of the publicly visible appearance.
3. Avoidance of Loss or Damage Required
The proposed action is unlikely to result in the loss or removal of, or
significant damage to, a valuable primary property that it is feasible to save
or to preserve in its present location.
4. Timely Action Required
The property owner has demonstrated the ability and intent to take the proposed
action promptly after approval of a Certificate of Appropriateness, and, in the
case of a proposed demolition or relocation of a structure, to promptly
establish a new permanent structure or other permanent use on the site it
formerly occupied.
1310.09 Mandatory Referral
(a) Purpose
In order to further coordinated planning consistent with the Comprehensive
Plan, it is desirable that certain actions of the City government as well as
actions of private property owners be reviewed by the Planning Commission.
(b) Applicability
No action shall be taken by the City Council or any board, commission, or
officer of the City on any iutem specified herein before such action has been
referred to the Planning Commission for advisory comment.
The actions to which this provision applies are:
   (1) construction or authorization of construction of any of the following or
any substantial part thereof:
      A. a public building, or
      B. a public park, playground, or other public open space, or
      C. a public bridge or tunnel, or
      D. a public dock, or
      E. a publicly or privately owned utility.
   (2) construction, opening, vacation, widening, narrowing, relocation, or
change in the use of any public street or alley
   (3) adoption of any City ordinance or regulation controlling the use or
development of land, whether or not to be included in this Code
   (4) annexation of land into the City or deannexation of land
   (5) approval by City Council of a Joint Economic Development Zone agreement
under Section 715.69 of the Ohio Revised Code
   (6) provision of City sewer or water service to any property outside the
City
   (7) actions under any other City code or ordinance relating to a property in
the PO Preservation Overlay District.
(c) Approval Process
   (1) Extraordinary Majority
      A decision by City Council to take an action not approved in the
recommendation of the Commission shall require a two-thirds vote of the entire
voting membership of City Council.
   (2) Waiver by Mayor
      The Mayor may waive the requirement for Mandatory Referral in cases of
emergency or when immediate action is otherwise essential.
   (3) Referral Notice
      The Mandatory Referral notice to the Commission shall identify the
property to be affected by the proposed action, describe the action to be taken
and the time such action is contemplated, and provide other information
requested by the Commission. 
      The notice shall include a copy of any proposed ordinance or agreement
involved in the action.
   (4) Approval Process
      Except as otherwise provided in this section, the Mandatory Referral
process shall be carried on as provided in Chapter 1320.
(d) Approval Criteria
   The Commission shall review the proposed action for consistency with the
Comprehensive Plan adopted by City Council and with any neighborhood or
district plans, capital improvements programs, or other official plans or
programs of the City as viewed in light of any changes in the City since
adoption.
Chapter 1320
Approval Procedures
1320.01 General Provisions
(a) Applicability
Except as otherwise provided herein or in Chapter 1310, the requirements of
this chapter shall apply to all applications for Development Approvals
submitted under Chapter 1310.
The Advisory Action Body, Final Action Body, and Administrative Officer
referenced in this chapter shall be as provided in Table 1320A.
The Review Body shall be the applicable Advisory Action Body or Final Action
Body.
The Hearing Body shall be as provided in Table 1320A.
(b) Fees
   (1) Filing Fee
   An applicant shall pay a filing fee to cover administrative costs of
processing an application for a Development Approval and the expenses of Public
Notice.  The applicable Administrative Officer shall take no action to process
the application until such fee has been paid in full.
   (2) Professional Service Fee
   An applicant shall pay a fee equal to the cost to the City of engineering,
legal, planning, court reporting, or other professional work, if any,
determined by the applicable Administrative Officer to be necessary to review
the application.
   (3) Improvement Plan Review Fee
   An applicant for subdivision, Site Plan, Planned Unit Development, or other
applicable approval shall pay a fee equal to a percentage of the cost of
improvements required by Section 1240.09 as estimated by the City Engineer for
the technical review of improvement plans.  If the actual cost of the
improvements is less than such estimate, the fee shall be recomputed at the
request of the developer accompanied by evidence of actual costs and the
difference shall be refunded to the applicant.
   (4) Improvement Inspection Fee
   A developer shall pay a fee for inspection of the construction of
improvements required by Section 1240.09 made by him or her or made by the City
after his or her default.  The fee shall equal the cost to the City of
conducting such inspection for compliance with approved plans and
specifications and applicable regulations.
   (5) Resubmittal Fee
   An applicant reapplying for approval of any application that has previously
been reviewed shall pay a resubmittal fee in lieu of paying another filing fee.
   (6) Fee Amounts
   The amounts of fees shall be as determined from time to time by the City
Council.  A schedule of current fees shall be made available in the offices of
the applicable Review Body.
(c) Disclosure of Interest
The party signing the application for any Development Approval shall be
considered the applicant.
An applicant must be one of the parties specified in division (d)(1) of Section
1320.02.  If the applicant is not the City government, a disclosure of interest
shall be filed with the application as provided herein.
   (1) Applicant Is Not Fee Owner
   If the applicant is not the fee owner of record of the subject property, 
the application shall disclose the legal capacity of the applicant and the full
names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners.
   In addition, an affidavit of the fee owner(s) shall be filed with the
application stating that the applicant has authority from the owner to make the
application.
   (2) Applicant or Owner Is Trust
   If the applicant or fee owner is a trust or trustee thereof, the full name,
address, telephone number, and extent of interest of each beneficiary shall be
disclosed in the application.
   (3) Applicant or Owner Is Corporation/Partnership
   If the applicant, fee owner, contract purchas-er, option holder, or any
beneficiary of a trust owning the subject property is a corporation, the
application shall disclose the names and addresses of the corporation's
officers, directors, and registered agents, or the partnership's general
partners and those shareholders or lim-ited partners owning in excess of five
percent of the outstanding stock or interest in the cor-poration or interest
shared by the limited partners.
Disclosure of present ownership shall include a statement of the name, address,
and phone number of the prospective purchaser, if any.
In the event of a change in ownership between the time the application is filed
and the time of the meeting or public hearing thereupon, such change shall be
disclosed by affidavit no later than the time of the meeting or hearing.
(d) Conflict of Interest
   (1) Voting by Interested Members
   A member of any Review Body who knowingly has a direct or indirect interest
in any question before that Body shall disqualify himself or herself from
voting thereupon.
   An indirect interest shall include an interest of the member's spouse,
sibling, child, parent, in-law, or any organization with which the member
holds, has held within the previ-ous 2 years, or is in discussions concerning,
any paid or unpaid office or position.
   (2) Ex Parte Communications
   Members of Review Bodies who, prior to the Review Body decision on an
application, have communicated with parties interested in the outcome thereof
or their agents, other than in an official meeting of the Review Body or a duly
appointed committee thereof or as otherwise authorized in advance by the Chair,
shall disclose in a public meeting of the Review Body the content of such
communication prior to the vote on the application.
   (3) Recommendation of Professionals
   No Review Body or any member thereof or any employee of the City shall
suggest or recommend an attorney, planner, architect, engineer, or other person
or organization offering professional services to an applicant or prospective
applicant in connection with an application before that Body.
   (4) Ethics
   Members of Review Bodies shall be subject to Chapter 102 and Section 2921.42
of the Ohio Revised Code and all opinions issued by the Ohio Ethics Commission.
(e) Public Hearing
   (1) Applicability
   The provisions herein shall apply to any action that requires a public
hearing under Table 1320A.
   (2) Hearing Conduct
   Applicants shall have the right to have subpoenas issued by the City for
persons or documents, to present witnesses, and to crossexamine all witnesses
testifying at the public hearing.
   The Chairman of the Hearing Body or President of Council, as appropriate, 
may compel the attendance of witnesses.  All testimony by witnesses shall be
given under oath administered by the Chairman or Council President.
   All parties wishing to be heard shall be heard at least once at the hearing
or a continuation thereof.  Such parties may testify themselves or, at their
option, be represented by an attorney, architect, engineer, planner, or other
professional advisor or agent.
(f) Public Notice
   (1) Applicability
   Public notice of a hearing shall be as provided herein for any action that
requires a public hearing under Table 1320A.
   (2) Sign Notice (15 Days)
   A. Sign Required
   The applicant shall post a sign provided by the Administrative Officer, or
an equivalent sign provided by the applicant that the Officer approves, on the
subject property.
   The sign shall:
      1. be at least 10 square feet in area, and
      2. face and be readable from a public street, and
      3. be no further than 20 feet from the street line, and
      4. be erected no less than 15 nor more than 30 days prior to the
scheduled date of the hearing, and
      5. remain continuously in place until the hearing is concluded but be
removed by the applicant no later than 10 days thereafter.
   The Administrative Officer may provide a re-usable sign to an applicant for
this purpose.  He or she may require a reasonable deposit as security for the
return in good condition of any such sign.
   No posted sign shall be removed, tampered with, or destroyed before the
conclusion of the hearing.
   B. Exceptions
   No sign shall be required for Homeowner Variances, as defined in division
1310.03(a)(6), and amendments of the Ordinance initiated by the City to rezone
more than 10 parcels of land under Section 713.12 of the Ohio Revised Code.
   No posting of a sign on private property shall be required if the property
owner is not the applicant and is not represented by the applicant and objects
to such posting.
   (3) Written Notice (15 Days)
      A. Applicability
      Except in the case of Amendments initiated by the City to rezone more
than 10 parcels of land under Section 713.12 of the Ohio Revised Code, the
Administrative Officer shall provide written notice of a required public
hearing to the parties specified herein.
      1. Land Owners
      The Officer shall notify all owners of record of each parcel of real
estate included:
         a. in the subject property, or
         b. contiguous thereto or across the street therefrom, or
         c. in all other locations within
         200 feet in all directions from the boundaries thereof.
      The owners of record shall be those appearing on the records of Summit or
Wayne County or those who paid property taxes for the most recent year
according to County records.
      2. Organizations
      The Officer shall notify organizations that have:
         a. filed written requests to be notified of applications of spe-cified
types within a geograph-ic area specified, and
         b. renewed such request when most recently asked to do so by the
Administrative Officer.
      The Administrative Officer shall not require renewals more frequently
than once a year.  The City Council may establish a reasonable fee for such
notifications to cover the costs thereof.
      B. Form of Service
      The written notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, not less than 15 nor more than 30 days before the scheduled hearing
date.
   (4) Published Notice (15 Days)
   The Administrative Officer shall cause to be published a notice of every
hearing once in a newspaper of general circulation in Barberton not less than
15 days nor more than 30 days before the scheduled date thereof. 
   This requirement shall apply to all Amendments, including comprehensive
rezoning Amendments  initiated by the City.
   (5) Content of Notice
      A. Sign Notice
      A sign notice shall state:
      1. the action proposed, including the zoning district, Conditional Use or
specific Variance requested, and
      2. the scheduled date, time, and location of the hearing, and
      3. a phone number at City offices to call for further information.
      It shall conform to standards for let-tering size, copy, and other items
that may be established by Council.
      B. Written and Published Notice
      A written notice or published notice shall contain:
      1. the items of content required for a sign notice, and
      2. the name of the applicant, and
      3. the street address or other description of the property that will
enable the ordinary reader to accurately locate it, and
      4. the location where the application or proposal by the City may be
examined by the public and the hours it is available for inspection, and
      5. when and how the recipient of the notice may provide verbal hearing
testimony or written comments.
(6) Evidence of Notification
   No later than the time of the hearing, the applicant shall file with the
Hearing Body an affidavit stating that the requirement for sign notice herein
has been fully complied with.
1320.02 Approval Process
(a) Applicability
Except as otherwise provided herein or in Chapter 1310, the Approval Process in
this section shall apply to all applications for Development Approvals
authorized in Chapter 1310 except:
   (1) Temporary Uses
   (2) Interpretations
   (3) Unlisted Uses Similar to Listed Uses
   (4) Appeals
   (5) Any other approval for which a different approval process is provided.
The approval process for the excepted applications shall be as provided in
Chapter 1310.
(b) Need for Approval
   (1) Determination of Need for Approval
   Upon receipt of an application for a Building Permit, Certificate of
Occupancy, or other permit or certificate, the Building Commissioner shall
determine whether any Development Approval is required as a prerequisite
thereto.
   Upon determining that a permit or certificate cannot be issued without such
Approval, the Commissioner shall refer the applicant to the applicable
Administrative Officer specified in Table 1320A.
   (2) C of A and Other Approval Required
   If the Building Commissioner determines that both a Certificate of
Appropriateness and another form of Development Approval under division 1310.01
(a) are required, he or she shall advise the applicant that under division
1320.02(f)(7) Final Action must be taken to approve or conditionally approve
such other Approval before Final Action may be taken on the Certificate.
   (3) Notice to Administrative Officer
   Within 3 days of making his or her determination, the Commissioner shall
transmit to each applicable Administrative Officer specified in Table 1320A a
statement of all Development Approvals he or she has determined to be required.
(c) Pre-Filing Conference
Informal Pre-Filing Conferences are hereby authorized as a way of avoiding
delays, disputes, and unnecessary expenditures by both applicants and the City
at later stages of development review.
Prior to filing an application for any Development Approval, an applicant may
request a Pre-Filing Conference with the applicable Administrative Officer or,
as applicable, with the Planning Commission, Board of Zoning and Building
Appeals, or Design Review Board.
At the Conference, the applicant may outline his proposal and submit
preliminary information.  The officer, Commission, or Board shall advise the
applicant concerning in what respects his or her proposal appears to conform or
not conform to appli-cable City plans and development regulations, applicable
Approval Criteria, and desired standards of planning.
Although not mandatory, a Pre-Filing Conference is strongly recommended for
actions requiring:
   (1) Certificates of Appropriateness
   (2) Planned Unit Development
   (3) Approval of a Major Subdivision
   (4) Site Plan Review.
(d) Application Filing
   (1) Who May Apply
   The petitioner for any Development Approval provided in Chapter 1310 may be:
      A. the City Council or any member thereof, or
      B. any board, commission, or agency of the City government, or
      C. any other party with a property interest in the parcel or area, or a
      portion thereof, for which the approval is requested--such as the fee
owner or trustee of record, trust beneficiary, lessee, contract purchaser, or
option holder--or his or her agent or nominee.
   (2) Contents of Application
   Except in the case of an action proposed by the City or a board or
commission thereof, any party requesting any City action to which this chapter
applies shall file an application on a form provided therefor by the
Administrative Officer.
   Every such application shall include the applicable items provided in Tables
1320B and 1320C.
   (3) Waiver of Required Submission
   The Administrative Officer may waive any item required by Tables 1320B or
1320C in an individual case if he or she determines the item would not be
necessary for a decision on the particular application or would impose
unreasonable expense or delay in relation to the nature of the action proposed.
   He or she shall advise the applicable Review Bodies of items that have been
waived prior to their action on the application.  A Review Body may rescind the
waiver and require a waived submission before acting.
   (4) Actions Requiring Multiple Approvals
   An applicant requiring more than one type of Development Approval as
provided in division 1310.01(a)--such as a Variance and a Conditional Use--may
apply concurrently for all Approvals needed, subject to the limitation on
action thereupon provided in division 1320.02(f)(7).
   (5) Multi-Stage Review
      A. Purpose and Applicability
      The provisions in this division for Multi-Stage Review are intended for
use by applicants for complex or highly discretionary approvals. 
      Their purpose is to defer the expenses of preparing detailed plans,
drawings, studies, and legal documents until after one or more stages of
preliminary approval of an application has been formally granted.
      Filing for Multi-Stage Review is at the option of the applicant.
      B. Applications
      At the time of initial application, an applicant may request Multi-Stage
Review of any application for Advisory Action or Final Action.
      Such request shall be for one or more stages of review of a more
generalized application, called Initial Review, followed by review of a
detailed final application, called Official Review.
      The request shall be granted unless in the judgment of the Administrative
Officer the requested Initial Review would constitute a rehearing under
division 1320.02(g)(18)
      An application may at the request of the applicant undergo more than one
stage of Initial Review.
      The Administrative Officer may refuse to accept any Initial Review
application that in his or her judgment contains insufficient information for
meaningful Initial Review.
      An additional filing fee as determined by the City Council shall be paid
for applications submitted for Multi-Stage Review.
      C. Approval Process
      An application to which Multi-Stage Review is applicable shall go more
than once through the approval steps provided in divisions 1320.02(d) through
(f).
      1. Initial Review
      The application contents required by
      Tables 1320B and 1320C may for Initial Review be submitted in partial or
more general or more prelim-inary form than these tables otherwise require. 
The normal requirements of these tables shall apply during Official Review
except as provided by division 1320.02(d)(3).
      Initial Review approval shall constitute approval only of the level of
detail and completeness presented in the Initial Review application and shall
not be construed as approval of any items or particulars not submitted at the
Initial Review stage.
      2. Official Review
      Official Review shall not be considered a Rehearing under division
1320.02(g)(18).
      An Official Review filing may be for the entirety or for any phase or
por-tion of a development or action given Initial Review approval.
      No Certificate of Compliance shall be issued until after Official Review
approval or conditional approval of an application.
      The Final Action Body may rescind Initial Review approval if the
applicant has failed to file within 360 days of the date of Initial Review
approval or of approval of an amendment thereto either an application for
Official Review approval in conformance therewith or an applica-tion for an
amendment to the previous Initial Review approval.  The Final Action Body may
grant an ex-tension of this time period.
   (6) Applications for Final Plats and Site Plans
   An application for approval of a Final Plat or Final Site Plan for a Planned
Unit Development shall be submitted not later than 360 days after the date of
approval of the Preliminary Plat or Plan.
   Any application submitted after such period shall be considered a new
Preliminary Plat or Plan unless an extension is approved by the City Council.
   The Final Plat or Plan filed may be for all or part of the development given
Preliminary Plat or Preliminary Plan approval. 
   At the developer's risk, a Final Plat or Plan may be filed simultaneously
with the Preliminary Plat or Plan.
   (7) Acceptance of Application
   The Administrative  Officer shall accept an application upon determining
that it is complete, accurate, and is for a Development Approval that the
Review Body being petitioned is authorized hereunder to hear.
   He or she shall within 10 days of filing notify the applicant of any
determination that the application cannot be accepted and specify the basis for
non-acceptance.
   If such notification is not made within such period, the application shall
be deemed accepted as of the date of expiration of such period.
   (8) Fees
   All applications shall be accompanied by the applicable fees required under
1320.01(b).
   (9) Docketing
   Upon acceptance of an application, the applicable Administrative Officer
shall docket the application for a hearing or meeting of the Review Body
scheduled no later than 45 days thereafter.
   He or she shall notify the applicant in writing of the time, date, and
location thereof.  Unless the applicant agrees to waive this requirement,  such
notice shall be sent no later than the period required for written notice in
division 1320.01(f)(3), or, if no hearing is required, no less than 5 days
before the meeting, 
   The Administrative Officer shall transmit the application to the applicable
Advisory Action Body, or, if Advisory Action is not required under Table 1320A,
to the applicable Final Action Body.
   This paragraph shall not apply to applications for which the Building
Commissioner or Planning Director is the Final Action Body.
   (10) Notice to Council and Others
   Within 3 days of acceptance of the application, the Administrative Officer
shall send written notice as provided in Table 1320D.
   This requirement for notice shall apply whether or not a public hearing and
public notice thereof are required.
   The notice shall disclose the nature of the application and the date, time,
and location of the meeting at which it is scheduled to be considered.
   (11) Public Examination
   The application or proposed action by the City shall be available for
inspection by the public in:
      A. the office of the Clerk of Council, for matters for City Council
action, or
      B. the Planning Department, for matters for Planning Commission or Design
Review Board action, or
      C. the Building Department, for matters for Board of Zoning and Building
Appeals action.
(e) Staff Review and Assistance
   (1) Planning Department Review
   The Planning Director may, together with the Building Department and other
departments, consultants, and officials of the City, prepare for the applicable
Review Body a written review of any application of which the Planning Director
is notified under Table 1320D.
   Such review shall be made available to any interested party at the offices
of the Planning Department no later than 5 days before the scheduled date of
the meeting of the applicable Review Body at which the application is to be
considered.
   (2) Staff Assistance
   The staffs of the Planning Department and Building Department may advise and
assist the applicant in meeting regulatory requirements and securing Review
Body approval.  Unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code, they shall
have no power to approve or disap-prove any filing or in any way restrict the
applicant's right to seek approval thereof.
   (3) PUD Technical Review Committee
   The flexibility of Planned Unit Development approval procedures involves
less reliance on adherence to specific code provisions and greater reliance
upon detailed case-by-case evaluation of a site plan.  Therefore, upon receipt
of an application for approval of a Preliminary Plan of a PUD, the Planning
Director shall refer the application to the PUD Technical Review Committee
(PTRC).
   The PTRC shall be chaired by the Planning Director and shall consist of the
following people or their representatives:
      A. the Service Director
      B. the Planning Director
      C. the City Engineer
      D. the Building Commissioner
      E. the Fire Chief
      F. the Utilities Director
      G. the Director of Parks and Recreation
The Committee shall not take any action in the absence of a quorum consisting
of a simple majority of its membership.
The Planning Director shall notify the Planning Commission in writing of the
general nature of each PUD application transmitted to the PTRC at the time of
such transmittal.
The PTRC shall meet with the applicant at his or her request.  It shall report
to the applicant on revisions it finds necessary to the application based on
the Approval Criteria of Table 1310I and generally accepted technical or
professional standards or practices related thereto.  It may request but not
require that such revisions be made prior to transmittal to the Planning
Commission.
The PTRC shall adopt by a majority of the members in attendance a
recommendation to the Planning Commission to approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove the application based on the Approval Criteria of Table 1310I. 
It shall transmit such recommendation in writing to the Commission and the
applicant no less than 5 days before the Commission meeting at which the
application is to be considered.
(f) Action on Application
   (1) Written Comments
   The Administrative Officer shall transmit to the applicable Review Body all
written comments or reviews received on the application before the vote on
action thereupon.  Such comments shall become part of the written record.
   (2) Executive Session
   No Review Body shall deliberate or take ac-tion in executive session except
as allowable by law.
   (3) Advisory Action
      A. Hearing
      Before taking action, the Advisory Action Body shall, no later than 25
days after the Administrative Officer has accepted the application, hold a
hearing in conformance with divisions 1320.01(e) and (f) if so provided in
Table 1320A.
      B. Report of Advisory Action
      Within 5 days after taking Advisory Action, and no less than 5 days prior
to the meeting at which the application is scheduled for Final Action, the
Advisory Action Body shall make its report available to:
      1. the Administrative Officer of the Final Action Body, and
      2. the applicant, and
      3. those Councilperson(s) elected by wards in whose ward(s) the property
that is the subject of the application is located and all at-large Council
members, and
      4. any objectors or other interested parties at their request.
      The report shall consist of written Findings of Fact pertaining to the
Approval Criteria provided herein for the applicable action together with a
recommendation for Final Action on the application and any conditions to which
such action is recommended to be made subject.  The report shall include the
roll call vote on the action.
      The recommended action may include any modification of normal
requirements that is authorized by applicable regulations.
      C. Action by Planning Director
      The Planning Director may take Advisory Action as provided in division
1310.02(f)(12).
   (4) Planning Commission Action on PUD Preliminary Plan
   The Planning Commission may either approve or disapprove an initial
recommendation of the PUD Technical Review Committee on a Planned Unit
Development Preliminary Plan application.  If the Commission disapproves the
recommendation, the application shall be referred back to the Committee and the
applicant for revision and/or reconsideration. 
   The Committee shall have 30 days from the date of the Commission's action,
or any greater period mutually agreed to by the applicant and the Committee, to
transmit a second recommendation to the Commission.  Such recommendation shall
be transmitted to the Commission and the applicant no later than 5 days before
the Commission meeting at which the application is to be reconsidered.  At such
meeting, the Commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the
application.
   (5) Action on Final Plat or Site Plan
   A Final Plat of subdivision or a Final Site Plan shall not be disapproved
with respect to any feature thereof approved in the Preliminary Plat or
Preliminary Plan if such feature conforms substantially to that shown on such
approved Plat or Plan.
   This provision shall not prevent disapproval of a Final Plat or Plan on the
basis of a substantial change from the approved Preliminary Plat or Plan or of
material information first submitted with the application for a Final Plat or
Plan.
   (6) Final Action
      A. Prerequisite to Final Action
      The Final Action Body shall not take Final Action upon an application
requiring action by an Advisory Action Body until either:
      1. it has received a report thereupon from such Body, or
      2. in the case of Mandatory Referrals, 60 days or, if approved by
Council, 90 days have elapsed from the date of referral, or
      3. in the case of all other actions, 45 days have elapsed from the date
of acceptance of the application by the Administrative Officer.
      The Final Action Body shall, before taking action, hold a hearing in
conformance with divisions 1320.01(e) and (f) if a hearing is required under
Table 1320A.
      B. Conditions of Approval
      Except in the case of an Amendment, the Final Action Body may make its
approval subject to any conditions or restrictions it finds necessary to
conform to applicable Approval Criteria.  It may also set time limits within
which such conditions or restrictions must be complied with.
      C. Extraordinary Council Majority
      A vote of three-fourths of the members of City Council shall be required
to take any action on an Amendment different from the Advisory Action of the
Planning Commission.
      D. Action on Preliminary Plan
      In taking action on a Preliminary Plan for a Planned Unit Development,
City Council shall either take the action recommended by the Planning
Commission or shall disapprove the Plan.
      E. Action on Plats
      Prior to Final Action on a Final Plat, the City Engineer shall submit to
the Planning Commission an examination of the accuracy and closure of survey,
legibility, and completeness of the drawing and proper kind and location of
monuments.
      The Chair and Secretary of the Planning Commission shall sign on the face
of an approved Preliminary or Final Plat, noting any conditions to which the
Commission's approval was made subject that have not yet been satisfied.
      F. Action by Staff
      The Planning Director or Building Commissioner may take Advisory Action
as provided in division 1310.02(f)(12).
   (7) Actions Requiring Multiple Approvals
   Notwithstanding  any time limits for final action herein, no Final Action
shall be taken on a Certificate of Appropriateness for any property that also
requires any other Development Approval under Chapter 1310 until Final Action
has been taken to approve or conditionally approve such other Approval.
   The action of the Design Review Board on the application for a Certificate
of Appropri-ateness shall be generally consistent with, and shall not
substantially invalidate, the action taken on the other Development Approval.
   (8) Time Limit for Final Action
   Final Action on an application shall be taken by the Final Action Body
within the following periods after acceptance thereof by the Administrative
Officer:
      A. 14 days, in the case of any application on which Final Action is taken
by the Building Commissioner or Planning Director, or
      B. 60 days, in all other cases except Mandatory Referral.
   These periods may be extended by mutual agreement of the applicant and the
Final Action Body or if the application requires multiple approvals and is
therefore subject to division (f)(7).
   An application not acted upon within the applicable time period shall be
deemed to be approved.
   (9) Withdrawal
   Prior to the vote on Advisory or Final Action, an application may be
withdrawn.  A withdrawn application may be resubmitted at any time and shall
not be considered a rehearing under division 1302.02(g)(18).
   (10) Basis for Action
      A. Approval Criteria
      An Advisory Action Body shall not recommend, nor shall a Final Action
      Body grant, approval or conditional approval to an application except on
the basis of written Findings of Fact that all   applicable Approval Criteria
have been met or will be met if conditions to which the approval is made
subject are complied with.
      An Advisory Action Body shall not recommend, nor shall a Final Action
Body grant, disapproval to an application except on the basis of Findings of
Fact that at least one of the applicable Approval Criteria has not been met and
cannot be met by the imposition of acceptable conditions.
      B. Findings of Fact
      Determinations  that Approval Criteria have or have not been met that are
not accompanied by specific Findings of Fact in support thereof shall not be
considered Findings of Fact as required herein.
      Findings of Fact shall be a citation of specific facts about the
application that the Approval Body finds to be true and which led to its
conclusion that the application conforms or fails to conform to one or more
applicable Approval Criteria.
      C. Allowable Conditions
      Conditions to which any approval hereunder is made subject shall be on-ly
such as are reasonably required to make the application conform to appli-cable
Approval Criteria and shall not be so restrictive as in effect to preclude
establishment of a Permitted Use. 
      No text or map amendment shall be made subject to any conditions.
      D. Limitation on Action
      1. Site Plan Review
      Action taken on projects submitted for Site Plan Review under Section
1310.07 shall not deny or significantly reduce the development rights
specifically granted to a property owner by other provisions of this Code--such
as for land uses, building heights, or Floor Area Ratio--but shall be confined
to governing the way these rights  are exercised on a particular site.
      This limitation shall not apply to Site Plan Review for Planned Unit
Developments.
      2. Final Plat or Plan
      A Final Plat or Final PUD Plan for a development or any portion thereof
shall be approved if it conforms substantially to the Preliminary Plat or
Preliminary Plan.
   (11) Transferability of Approvals
   Except where expiration periods are provided for in applicable regulations,
all approvals together with any conditions to which they are made subject shall
run with the land and be transferable.
   (12) Action by Staff
      A. On Minor Subdivisions
      The Planning Director shall take Final Action on behalf of the Planning
Commission on applications for approval of Minor Subdivisions, as defined
herein.  He or she shall approve such subdivisions upon determinining that they
conform to all applicable regulations.
      B. On Other Minor Applications
      The Planning Commission or Design Review Board may authorize the Planning
Director--and the Board of Zoning and Building Appeals may authorize the
Building Commissioner--to take Advisory or Final Action to approve minor
applications for Development Approvals other than Appeals on its behalf.
      Such minor applications shall be confined to those that:
      1. do not require a public hearing under provisions of the Ohio Revised
Code, and
      2. are in the judgment of such Body such cases as it would normally
approve unconditionally, and
      3. have been previously specified in writing as minor applications by
such Body.
      The Planning Director and Building Commissioner shall have no authority
hereunder to disapprove such applications or approve them with conditions.
      C. Rules for Staff Action
      The Director or Commissioner  shall act on an application within 14 days
of receiving it.
      He or she shall report to the applicable Review Body for its information
the action taken on all applications on which he or she has acted.
      The Director or Commissioner may decide for any reason not to take acion
on an application.  In such case he or she shall refer it to the applicable
Review Body on behalf of which he or she is authorized to act for consideration
in accordance with otherwise applicable procedures.  Within 7 days of receiving
the application, the Director shall also send written notice to the applicant
and to the applicable Review Body of his or her action or decision not to take
action.
      Any action of the Director or Commissioner may be appealed as provided in
division 1310.03(c).
   (13) Approval Is Not Acceptance of Dedication
   Final Action approval shall not constitute acceptance by the public of the
dedication of any street or other public area or improvement related to such
approval.  Such acceptance shall only be by separate action of City Coun-cil in
accordance with division 1240.09(a)(6), Acceptance of Dedications.
   (14) Approval Terms Not to Be Altered
   The general terms, conditions, and requirements set forth in any approval or
conditional approval of an application shall not be modified, revoked, or
otherwise impaired by the Review Body that granted it except:
      A. on the basis of relevant new or changed information, or
      B. where automatic expiration or revocation of approval is specifically
provided for herein.
   This provision shall not, however, be construed to prevent a Final Action
Body from taking an action that differs from that of the applicable Advisory
Action Body.  It shall not prevent the Board of Zoning and Building Appeals
from sustaining an Appeal under division 1310.03(c).  Nor shall it disallow the
imposition of additional conditions at a later stage of review relating to the
more detailed plans and information that are at that time first submitted, such
as in the case of a Final Plat, Final PUD Plan, or later stage of Multi-Stage
Review.
   (15) Applications Affecting
   Highway Acquisitions
      A. Applicability
      The provisions of this division shall apply to:
      1. applications for all Development Approvals authorized in Chapter 1310
except for:
         a. text amendments, and
         b. interpretations, and
      2. applications for all Permits authorized in Section 1350.01 for
Potential Acquisition Property, as defined in division D1, and Acquisition
Property, as defined in division D2.
      B. Notice to ODOT
      Within 3 days of acceptance of any application to which this division
applies, the applicable Administrative Officer or official authorized to issue
the Permit shall notify the Ohio Department of Transportation by certified
mail, return receipt requested, of the application.
      C. Application Approval Prohibited
      1. Potential Acquisition Property
      Notwithstanding  any other provision of this Code, no application to
which this division applies shall be approved within the Acquisition Per-iod,
as defined in division D3, unless the Department has within such Per-iod
notified the City that it has no current plans to acquire any property involved
in the application.
      2. Acquisition Property
      Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, no application to which
this division applies shall be approved at any time for Acquisition Property.
      D. Definitions
      1. Potential Acquisition Property
      Potential Acquisition Property is property located within either:
      a. 300 feet of the centerline of, or
      b. a 500-foot radius of the intersection of any public street with the
centerline of a new state highway proposed for con-struction, or existing state
highway proposed for change, in a currently valid certification to the City by
the Ohio Department of Transportation under Section 5511.01 of the Ohio Revised
Code.
      2. Acquisition Property
      Acquisition Property is the entirety or any part of property that is
currently Potential Acquisition Property that the Department has notified the
City within the Acquisition Period that it has either purchased or initiated
proceedings to appropriate.
      3. Acquisition Period
      The acquisition period is 120 days beginning the date of receipt by the
Ohio Department of Transportation of the notice from the City required herein
plus any extension agreed to by the Department and the property owner of which
the City has been given notice.
(g) Post-Action Procedures
   (1) Report of Action
      A. Distribution of Report
      The Administrative Officer shall--within 5 days of the date of Final
Action or of the satisfaction of conditions as provided in division (g)(6)
herein, whichever is later--send a copy of the report of the Final Action Body
to:
      1. the applicant, and
      2. the Building Commissioner, and
      3. the Planning Director, and
      4. those Councilperson(s) elected by wards in whose ward(s) the property
that is the subject of the application is located, and all at-large
Councilpersons, and
      5. objectors or other interested parties at their request, and 
      6. the applicable Advisory Action Body, and
      7. any other Review Body currently scheduled to review an application for
any Development Approval on the same property.
      B. Content of Report
      Such report shall include a statement of the action taken by the Final
Action Body and of all conditions to which the Final Action approval was made
subject.
      Any Review Body or City official that disapproves or conditionally
approves an application for any Development Approval shall specify in writing
to the applicant in its report thereto the reason for disapproval or for the
conditions imposed.
      The report to the Building Commissioner shall also include copies of all
plans, drawings, renderings, or other specifications that represent the
application as approved.
   (2) Appeal
   A Final Action may be appealed to the Board of Zoning and Building Appeals
if so provided in division 1310.03(c), subject to the time period and other
restrictions therein. 
   Except as otherwise provided herein, actions not appealable under such
provisions and ac-tions for which an Appeal has not been sus-tained shall be
subject only to judicial review.
   (3) Judicial Review
   A Final Action hereunder may be appealed to the Court of Common Pleas in
accordance with state law.
   (4) Negotiation Period (PO District)
      A. Period Mandated
      If the Design Review Board disapproves an application for a Certificate
of Appropriateness, no permit or certi-ficate requiring such Certificate shall
be issued, and no action requiring such Certificate shall be taken, during the
negotiation period provided herein.
      B. Length of Period
      The negotiation period shall be 270 days in the case of a proposed
demolition, and 180 days in all other cases, beginning the date of
disapproval.  It may be extended beyond such periods for any duration by mutual
agreement of the applicant and the Board.
      C. Good Faith Discussion Required
      During such period, the Board and the applicant shall undertake
continuing and meaningful discussion in good faith to attempt to work out an
alternative plan that is acceptable to both parties. 
      Except as mutually agreed otherwise, they shall meet for this purpose
within 30 days of the beginning of the negotiation period and at least every 30
days thereafter until a plan is agreed to by both parties or until the end of
the negotiation period, whichever comes first.
      D. Alternative Plan
      The alternative plan may involve modification of the proposed action,
acquisition by a public body of the property or an easement thereupon,
relocation of a structure, or provision of public financial assistance to
support the costs of actions the Board requires.
      At any time during the negotiation period the Board may approve a
Certificate based on such a plan.
      E. Protection of the Property
      At the beginning of and at any time during the negotiation period, the
applicant shall take such steps as are required in the judgment of the Building
Commissioner to protect the property from deterioration or vandalism during
such period.
      F. Failure to Agree on Plan
      If at the end of the negotiation period the parties have not agreed on an
alternative plan, the Certificate of Appropriateness for the proposed
alteration shall be issued.
      Except that if the Board determines that the applicant has failed to com-
ply with any requirement of division (g)(4)C, the Certificate shall not be
issued.  The determination of the Board may be appealed under division 1310.03
(c).
   (5) Waiting Period
   No permit or certificate authorized by an approval by any Final Action Body
shall be issued until:
      A. in the case of actions subject to Appeal, the period provided in
division 1310.03(c) for the filing of an Appeal has elapsed, or
      B. in the case of an Amendment or any other approval by the City Council,
the 30-day period provided in Section 5.12 of the Barberton City Charter has
either elapsed or has been waived by Council.
   (6) Initial Compliance With Conditions
   Prior to notifying the Building Commissioner of an approval, the
Administrative Officer shall determine that any conditions to which such
approval was made subject that are to be satisfied prior to issuance of a
certificate or permit have been satisfied.  The Officer shall so certify in
writing to the Building Commissioner before the certificate or permit may be
issued.
   (7) Submission of Guarantees
   Before issuance of any permit or certificate, any financial guarantees
required by City regu-lations or by any Final Action hereunder shall be filed
with and accepted by the City Council in accordance with division 1350.02.
   (8) Submission of Covenants
   Before issuance of any permit or certificate, deed restrictions or covenants
of homeowners or condominium associations or the like shall  be submitted that
make adequate provision in the judgment of the Director of Law for:
      A. the improvement, preservation, regular maintenance, and public
liability insurance required for any open spaces, thoroughfares, utilities,
water retention or detention areas, and other common elements not to be
dedicated to the City or to another public body, and
      B. such control over the use and exterior design of individual
structures,  if any, as is necessary for continuing conformance to an approved
Site Plan or a Certificate of Appropriateness approval, such provision to be
binding on all future ownerships.
   (9) Engineer Review of Minor Subdivision
   After approval of a Minor Subdivision, the subdivider shall submit to the
City Engineer either a plat map or a metes and bounds deed description, as the
Engineer requires.  The Engineer shall certify approval thereupon within 7 days
of its receipt if it is found to conform to the approved Minor Subdivision.
   (10) Submission of Deed
   Prior to the signing of the Final Plat or Site Plan, the applicant shall
deliver to the Planning Director:
      A. a full covenant and warranty deed to all dedicated property in proper
form for recording, and
      B. a title insurance policy in an amount as approved by the Director of
Law covering streets and other lands dedicated.
   (11) Recording of Plat or PUD Plan
   The applicant shall file for recording with the Summit or Wayne County
Recorder, as applicable:
      A. the approved Final Plat of a subdivision, or
      B. the metes and bounds deed description or plat approved as a Minor
Subdivision, or
      C. a Final Site Plan approved under Section 1310.07, Site Plan Review,
whether for a Planned Unit Develop-ment or other development.
   He or she shall submit evidence of such recording to the Planning Director.
   No Building Permit for any lot not already of record shall be issued before
such evidence has been received.  The applicant shall pay all recording costs.
   (12) Submission of Reproducible Plans
   One reproducible mylar copy of an approved PUD Plan, Preliminary or Final
Plat, Site Plan, or approved amendment thereto shall be filed with the Planning
Director together with a number of copies thereof that he or she shall
specify. 
   The Director shall distribute such copies to the Building Commissioner,
Service Director, City Engineer, Board of Education, Utilities Department, and
other affected City departments for their files.
   (13) Issuance of Permit
   Unless the Final Action Body directs otherwise, the Planning Director shall
issue a Conditional Use Permit or Certificate of Ap-propriateness--and the
Building Commissioner shall issue any other permit or certificate--approved by
such Body within 7 days after he or she has received notification of approval
or conditional approval thereof, or after the expiration of the waiting period
provided in division (g)(5), whichever is later.
   The permit or certificate shall specify any conditions or restrictions to
which such Body has made its approval subject.
   (14) Revocation of Permit
   The Building Commissioner shall revoke any permit or certificate issued
hereunder:
      A. if the action taken after issuance is not consistent with plans and
information submitted as part of the application therefor and given Final
Action approval, or
      B. if any applicable provisions of City regulations or any conditions to
which a Final Action approval hereunder was made subject are not complied with,
or
      C. if after they are initially complied with, compliance with such
conditions is not maintained at any time, or
      D. in the case of a Conditional Use Permit, Certificate of
Appropriateness, or design review approval for use of a Transition Overlay
District, if within 360 days of the date of issuance the use or alteration is
not established, or any required Building Permit is not obtained and building
started.
   The Building Commissioner shall give the permitee or Certificate holder 21
days notice of any intended revocation and the reasons therefor and an
opportunity within that period to answer any charges of noncompliance or to
propose measures to bring the permitted action into compliance within a
reasonable time.
   (15) Expiration of Subdivision or Site Plan Approval
   Subdivision or Site Plan approval shall be automatically revoked if:
      A. the applicant has failed to file within 360 days of the date of
Prelim-inary Plat or Plan approval a Final Plat or Final Plan in conformance
therewith or a revised Preliminary with an application for an amendment, or
      B. construction on the development has not begun within 720 days of the
date of Final Action approval or conditional approval of a Final Plat or Final
Plan, or
      C. all construction has not been completed within 1,440 days thereof.
   The applicable Final Action Body may approve one or more extensions of
either time period.
   (16) Maintenance of Vacant Land
   Land designated for future construction phases and other land not intended
for immediate im-provement shall be landscaped or otherwise maintained with a
neat and orderly appearance as specified by the Planning Director.
   (17) Site Restoration
   If construction on a property is permanently discontinued as a result of
permit expiration or revocation or for any other reason, the permitee shall
repair any excavation, rough grading, or other earth work and restore the site
to a safe condition and neat appearance approved by the Planning Director.
   (18) Rehearing
   Except as otherwise provided herein, no application that has been
disapproved by a Final Action Body shall be resubmitted with-in 360 days of the
date of Final Action disapproval, or of the expiration of any applicable
negotiation period under division (g)(4), except on the grounds of new factual
evidence or a change in conditions found to be valid by the applicable
Administrative Officer.
   A tie vote shall not be considered a disapproval for purposes of this
division. Revision of an application that removes characteristics on which its
disapproval was based shall be considered such a change in conditions.
   (19) Inspection of Subdivision or Site Plan Improvements
   The Building Commissioner shall inspect all improvements required by Section
1240.09 to verify compliance with City regulations, standards, and conditions
of approval:
      A. prior to approval of a Final Plat or Final PUD Site Plan, or
      B. for guaranteed improvements, prior to releasing the applicable
guarantee or portion thereof.
(h) Amendments to Approved Subdivision or Site Plan
   (1) When Required
   Approval of an amendment shall be required for any material change,
deletion, or addition made to a Preliminary Plat or Site Plan, either as a
revised Preliminary Plat or Plan or in the form of a Final Plat or Plan that
does not conform to the Preliminary.
   An applicant seeking approval of an amendment shall file an application
therefor with the Planning Director.
   The application shall describe the amendment sought and provide such other
information as the Planning Commission or City Council may require.  It shall
be accompanied by the number of copies of the proposed amendment required by
the Director and a filing fee determined by the City Council.
   (2) Approval Process
   Action on Amendments shall be as provided in Table 1320A.
   (3) Minor Amendments Defined
   As used in Table 1320A, a Minor Amendment shall be any change from the
previously approved Plan or Plat, other than changes required by the City, that
meet all of the conditions in this division.
      A. Land Use Change
      There is no change in land use type or housing type.
      B. Location Change
      There is no change in any provision of the approved Plan or Plat
specifying the location of a structure, off-street parking or loading area,
open space area, or any public or common area or right-of-way, by more than 10
feet in any direction, nor a change in the spacing between any structures by
more than 10 percent.
      C. Standards Change
      There is no change of more than 10 percent in any non-locational
quantitative specification of the previously approved Plan or Plat, including:
      1. the number or any dimension of lots, yards, structures, pedestrian
ways, or vehicular thoroughfares
      2. any residential density
      3. coverage of the site by structures
      4. amount of common open space acreage 
      5. utility line capacity
      6. amount of floor area of development other than residential 
      7. amount of land to be conveyed to or reserved for a public body
      8. size or capacity of any off-street parking or loading area
      9. amount or dimensions of proposed tree or ground cover, landscaping, or
screening.
      D. Greater Variation Change
      There is no other change that causes the development to fall short of
meeting the requirements of any nor-mally applicable City development
regulation to any greater degree than provided on the previously approved Plan
or Plat.
   The Planning Commission may disallow Minor Amendment status if a proposed
amend-ment fails to meet the foregoing criteria when considered together with
Minor Amendments previously approved for the same development.
   (4) Recording
   An amended Plan or Plat shall be recorded in conformance with the
requirements of division 1320.02(g)(11).
(i) Permits for Developed Lots in Site Plan Developments
After completion of initial construction of a development, no Building Permit
or Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for any lot or building site within
the development or any phase thereof for which a Site Plan has been approved
unless the application therefor conforms to one of the conditions in this
division.
   (1) Conforms to Site Plan
   The application therefor conforms to the approved Site Plan.
   (2) Conforms to Regulations
   The application conforms to all City development regulations that would
apply to the subject development if a Site Plan had not been approved and is
also generally consistent, in the judgment of the Planning Director, with the
approved Plan.
   (3) Amendment Approved
   An amendment to the approved Plan is approved under division 1320.02(h) to
allow the action for which the Permit or Certificate is sought.
   (4) Variance Approved
   For Permits or Certificates affecting a single lot of less than 1/4-acre
containing less than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area, a Variance from the
Plan or the regulations has been approved under division 1310.03(a).
Table 1320A: Action on Development Approvals
 Advisory Action Final Action Body Public Hearing Body Administrative Provision
 Body                                                  Officer
                Advisory    Final       Public       Administrative Provision
                Action Body Action Body Hearing Body Officer
A. Amendments
1. Text         PC [a]      Council     Council      PD             1310.02
Amendments
2. Rezonings to DRB [a]     Council     Council      PD             1310.02(c)
PO District                                                         Table 1310B
3. All Other    PC [a]      Council     Council      PD             1310.02
Map Amendments
B. Adjustments
1. Variances:
a. To Chapter   --          PC          PC           PD             1310.03(a)
1240
b. To All Other --          BZBA        BZBA         BC             1310.03(a)
Provisions
2. Conditional  --          PC          PC           PD             1310.03(b)
Uses
3. Special      --          PC          PC           PD             1310.03(b)
Exceptions
4. Appeals      --          BZBA        --           BC             1310.03(c)
5. Changes to
Nonconforming   --          BZBA        BZBA         BC             1310.03(d)
[b]
C. Staff
Approvals
1. Temporary    --          BC or BZBA  --           BC             1310.04(a)
Uses
2.              --          BC          --           BC             1310.04(b)
Interpretations
3. Unlisted     --          PD          --           PD             1310.04(c)
Uses
D. Certificates
of              --          DRB         DRB          PD             1310.08
Appropriateness
E. Development
Plans
1. Minor        --          PD          --           PD             1310.05(e)
Subdivisions
2. Preliminary
Subdivision     --          PC [a]      --           PD             1310.05
Plats
3. Final
Subdivision     --          PC [d] [e]  --           PD             1310.05
Plats
4. Planned Unit
Developments:
A. Preliminary  PC          Council [c] PC           PD             1310.06
Plan
B. Final Plan   --          PC [d] [e]  --           PD             1310.06
7. Plat         --          PC          --           PD             1310.05(g)
Vacations
F. Vacations of
streets,        PC [a]      Council     --           PD             --
alleys, &
public areas
G. Mandatory    PC          Council or  --           PD             1310.09
Referrals                   other
 
BZBA:  Board of Zoning and Building Appeals   DRB: Design Review Board
Council:  City Council             PC:  City Planning Commission
BC:  Building Commissioner            PD:  Planning Director
--   :  No action of this type is required.      PO:  Preservation Overlay
District
[a]  No public hearing by this body is required, but a public hearing may be
held at its option.  Requirements for Public Notice shall be complied with for
any such hearing.
[b]  Only those changes requiring special discretionary approval under Table
1340A.
[c]  Council action is limited by 1320.02(f)(6)D.
[d]  Commission action is limited by 1320.02(f)(5).
[e]  Commission action is limited by 1320.02(f)(10)D.
Table 1320B: Required Contents of Application Filings [a]
                                                 Site                                                          Vacations
 Map                                             Plan    Change to                                             of
 Amendment  Conditional Variance Certificate of  Review  Property   Preliminary Minor  Final Plat Subdivision Streets
 (Rezoning) Use 1310.03 1310.03  Appropriateness [c]     With Non-  Plat        1310.05            1310.05     Alleys &
 1310.02    (b)         (a)      1310.08         1310.06 conformity 1310.05                                    Public
                                                 -       1310.03(d)                                            Areas
                                                 1310.07
                                                                      Site                                                          Vacations
                      Map                                             Plan    Change to                                             of
                      Amendment  Conditional Variance Certificate of  Review  Property   Preliminary Minor  Final Plat Subdivision Streets
                      (Rezoning) Use 1310.03 1310.03  Appropriateness [c]     With Non-  Plat        1310.05            1310.05     Alleys &
                      1310.02    (b)         (a)      1310.08         1310.06 conformity 1310.05                                    Public
                                                                      -       1310.03(d)                                            Areas
                                                                      1310.07
1.   Names/addressex          x           x        x               x       x          x           x                  x           -
2.   Project name  x          x           x        x               x       x          x           x                  x           -
3.   Legal         x          x           x        x               x       x          x           x                  x           -
description
4.   Location      x          x           x        x               x       x          x           x                  x           x
5.   Action requestxd         x           x        x               x       x          x           x                  x           x
6.   Fees          x          x           x        x               x       x          x           x                  x           x
7.   Authorization x          x           x        x               x       x          x           x                  x           -
8.   Land use      x          x           x        x               x       x          x           x                  x           -
9.   Criteria      x          x           x        x               x       x          x           x                  x           -
10.   Disclosure   x          x           x        x               x       x          x           x                  x           -
11.   Notification x          x           x        x               [b]     x          [b]         -                  -           -
list
12.   Zoning       x          x           x        x               -       x          x           x                  x           -
13.   Common Area  -          -           -        -               x       -          x           x                  -           -
Maintenance
14.   Other        x          x           x        x               x       x          x           x                  x           x
 
                                                 Site                                                          Vacations
 Map                                             Plan    Change to                                             of
 Amendment  Conditional Variance Certificate of  Review  Property   Preliminary Minor  Final Plat Subdivision Streets
 (Rezoning) Use 1310.03 1310.03  Appropriateness [c]     With Non-  Plat        1310.05            1310.05     Alleys &
 1310.02    (b)         (a)      1310.08         1310.06 conformity 1310.05                                    Public
                                                 -       1310.03(d)                                            Areas
                                                 1310.07
                                                                                               Site                                                          Vacations
                                               Map                                             Plan    Change to                                             of
                                               Amendment  Conditional Variance Certificate of  Review  Property   Preliminary Minor  Final Plat Subdivision Streets
                                               (Rezoning) Use 1310.03 1310.03  Appropriateness [c]     With Non-  Plat        1310.05            1310.05     Alleys &
                                               1310.02    (b)         (a)      1310.08         1310.06 conformity 1310.05                                    Public
                                                                                               -       1310.03(d)                                            Areas
                                                                                               1310.07
15.   Heights                               -          x           *        x               x       -          -           -                  -           -
16.   Dwelling units                        -          x           *        -               x       -          -           -                  -           -
17.   Floor area                            -          x           *        -               x       -          -           -                  -           -
18.   Employees                             -          x           *        -               x       -          -           -                  -           -
19.   Lot coverage                          -          x           *        x               x       -          -           -                  -           -
20.   Plat of Survey                        -          *           *        -               x       -          x           x                  -           -
21.   Table 1320C Requirements (Site Plan) [-]         *           *        *               x       -          x           x                  -           -
22.   Renderings                            -          *           -        *               x       -          -           -                  -           -
23.   Phasing                               -          -           -        -               x       -          x           -                  -           -
24.   Traffic analysis                      *          *           *        -               *       -          -           -                  -           -
25.   School capacity                       *          *           *        -               *       -          -           -                  -           -
26.   Utility capacity                      *          *           *        -               *       -          -           -                  -           -
27.   Parcel Boundaries                     -          -           -        -               C       -          C           C                  -           -
28.   Topography                            -          -           -        -               C       -          C           C                  x           -
29.   Utilities                             -          -           -        -               C       -          C           C                  x           -
30.   Existing Structures                   -          -           -        x               C       -          C           C                  x           -
31.   Final Plat                            -          -           -        -               P       -          -           -                  -           -
 
   See footnote numbers corresponding to item numbers in table for details on
submission requirements.
   Note: Some submissions required by this table may be waived under 1320.02(d)
(3) or 1320.02(d)((5)C1.
(Am. Ord. 182-2012.  Passed 11-13-12.)
Notes for Table 1320B
x :  Required for all applications except if waived under 1320.02(d)(3) or
1320.02(d)(5)C1.
- :  Not required for any application.
* : Required only if considered necessary for review of the application by the
Administrative Officer or applicable Review Body.
[a] Uses with off-street parking or required landscaped areas shall also file
Site Plans as required by Table 1320C, whether or not a Site Plan is otherwise
required by Table 1320B.
[b] Required only if public hearing is held.
[c] Includes Planned Unit Developments.
C : See Table 1320C for requirement.
P : Required only for Planned Unit Developments.
1. NAMES & ADDRESSES
The name, address, and weekday daytime phone number of:
   A. the applicant, and
   B. his or her attorney or agent, if any, and
   C. any developer, site planner, architect, land surveyor, or engineer
involved in project plans.
2. PROJECT NAME
The name of the development project, if any.
3. LEGAL DESCRIPTION
Legal descriptions, using metes and bounds or subdivision block and lot number,
of the subject property as a whole and of each phase of the proposed
development thereof.
4. LOCATION
The street address of the subject property. For subdivisions, location by
government lot, quarter section, township, range, county, and state.
5. ACTION REQUESTED
A description of the action requested.
6. FEES
The applicable fees as provided in 1320.01(b).
7. AUTHORIZATION
Written authorization by the ownership or management of the property, if
different from the applicant, for the filing.  Authorization by a manager shall
be accompanied by evidence satisfactory to the Administrative Officer of his or
her authority to act on behalf of the owner.
8. LAND USE
Types and acreages of present and proposed land uses.
9. CRITERIA STATEMENT
Statement of reasons why applicant believes action requested conforms to
applicable Approval Criteria.
10. INTEREST DISCLOSURE
A Disclosure of Interest as provided in 1320.01(c).
11. NOTIFICATION LIST
A typewritten list of addresses of all parties rerequired to receive written
notification under the provisions on Public Notice in 1320.01(f)(3)A1.
12. ZONING
The zoning classifications of the subject property and all other properties
within 200 feet thereof.
13. OTHER INFORMATION
Any information required elsewhere in this Code.  Any other information that is
reasonably required in the judgment of the Review Body to determine conformance
with the applicable Approval Criteria or other applicable regulations.
14. COMMON AREA MAINTENANCE
Deeds or easement agreements conveying ownership interests in any parcel
required or proposed to be conveyed to any public body.
In projects with common areas not to be dedicated to the public, organizational
details of proposed property owners, condominium, or cooperative associations
to be responsible for preserving and maintaining common areas.  Protective
covenants or deed restrictions to govern open space or other areas.  Other
documents governing maintenance of common open space and other common areas.
15. STRUCTURE HEIGHTS
Building heights or fence heights, both as defined herrein, of proposed
structures and existing structures to be retained.
16. DWELLING UNITS
Numbers of dwelling units in proposed buildings,
and existing buildings proposed to be retained, by number of bedrooms and by
any special populations to which occupancy is to be restricted (e.g., elderly,
students, or low-income households).
17. FLOOR AREA
Gross and net floor area, both as defined herein, of proposed buildings, and
existing buildings proposed to be retained, by type of use.
18. NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES
Proposed number of permanent employees to be accommodated on the property,
including existing employment proposed to be retained, by shift and by full- or
part-time status.  Hours of shifts or other working hours.
19. LOT COVERAGE
Square footages of lot to be covered by:
   A. principal and accessory structures, and
   B. paved surfaces.
20. PLAT OF SURVEY
A plat prepared by a surveyor registered in the State of Ohio showing, as they
exist as of the date of filing:
   A. the legal description of the property, and
   B. the boundary lines and bearings and distances thereof, and
   C. the locations of all improvements and monuments, and
   D. all encroachments, and
   E. the boundaries of all existing streets, rights-of-way, and areas
dedicated to public use within 200 feet of the property.
   F. date of survey and signature, registration number, and seal of surveyor.
21. SITE PLAN
A Site Plan conforming to Table 1320C.
22. RENDERINGS
Architectural renderings showing substantial design intent for proposed
structures but not necessarily final design detail.
23. PHASING
Chronological schedule of expected beginning and ending dates for proposed
stages of construction and improvement of all structures; common or public
areas; circulation ways; parking, loading, and service areas; and utilities,
showing the interim use and maintenance of areas not under construction in each
phase.
24. TRAFFIC ANALYSIS
A professional analysis of estimated vehicular trips generated by each phase of
the completed development per day and during AM and PM peak hours--including
the number of pass-by trips and, for mixed use developments, internal trips;
the hours of expected AM and PM peak volumes; the assignment of traffic volumes
to each driveway or access road into the site; the impact on existing traffic
loads in the area; and road construction or traffic control measures needed to
accommodate the new traffic.
25. SCHOOL CAPACITY
Evidence concerning the capacity of the public schools to handle the enrollment
likely to be generated by the development.
26. UTILITY CAPACITY
Evidence concerning the ability of available treatment and distribution
capacities of sewer and water supply systems to handle the loads likely to be
generated by the development.
27. PARCEL BOUNDARIES
Scaled and dimensioned drawing of parcel boundaries. 
28. TOPOGRAPHY
General information on topography and drainage on property and within 50 feet
thereof.
29. UTILITIES
Information on accessibility of required utilities.
30. EXISTING STRUCTURES
Locations of existing structures on and within 50 feet of the property.
31. FINAL PLAT
A Plat of Subdivision and final engineering plans and specs required by Table
1320C.
Contents of application filings for other Development Approvals not included in
this table shall be as provided elsewhere in this Code or, if not so provided,
as determined by the Administrative Officer.
Table 1320C: Required Contents of Subdivision Plats and Site Plans
                                                                                           Major Subdivisions
                                  Certificate of  Parking          Landscaping Conditional Site               Final
                      �Appropriateness�Plan    Variance Plan[b]     Uses        Plan   Preliminary Plat
                                                  [a]                                      Review Plat[d]     [d]
                                                                                           [c]
                                                                                           Major Subdivisions
                                  Certificate of  Parking          Landscaping Conditional Site               Final
                      �Appropriateness�Plan    Variance Plan[b]     Uses        Plan   Preliminary Plat
                                                  [a]                                      Review Plat[d]     [d]
                                                                                           [c]
1. Scale & other                  x               x       x        x           x           x      x           x
2. Parcel Boundaries              x               x       x        x           x           x      x           x
3. Lots & Blocks                  x               x       x        x           x           x      x           x
4. Easements                      x               x       x        x           x           x      x           x
5. Table 1320B requirements       x               x       x        x           x           x      x           x
6. Other in formation             x               x       x        x           x           x      x           x
7. Project data                   -               -       x        -           x           x      x           x
8. Landscaping
a. Existing                       -               -       *        x           -           x      x           -
b. Proposed                       x               *       *        x           x           x      -           -
9. Structures
a. Existing                       x               x       -        -           x           x      x           -
b. Proposed                       x               x       -        -           x           x      -           -
10. Open uses                     x               -       -        -           x           x      -           -
11. Govt. Boundaries              -               -       -        -           -           x      x           x
12. Circulation
a. On Property                    x               -       -        -           x           x      x           x
b. Adjacent Land                  -               -       -        -           x           x      x           x
c. Detail                         -               -       -        -           -           -      *           x
13. ROW's                         -               -       -        -           -           x      x           x
14. Street Engineering            -               -       -        -           -           x      x           x
15. Street Name Approval          -               -       -        -           -           -      -           x
16. Curb Cuts                     -               -       -        -           -           x      x           x
17. Access Control                -               -       -        -           -           x      x           x
18. Parking                       x               x       x        -           x           x      -           -
19. Public & Common Areas         x               -       -        -           -           x      x           x
20. Topography
a. Existing                       -               -       -        -           -           x      x           x
b. Proposed                       -               -       -        -           -           x      x           x
21. Drainage:
a. Existing                       -               x       *        -           -           x      x           x
b. Grading & Drainage Plan        -               x       -        -           -           x      x           x
22. Subsurface data               -               *       -        -           *           *      *           -
23. Natural Features              -               -       -        -           -           x      x           x
24. Water areas                   x               -       *        -           -           x      x           x
25. Utilities                     -               *       *        -           *           x      x           x
26. Covenants                     -               -       -        -           -           x      x           x
27. Certificates                  -               -       -        -           -           *      x           x
28. Monuments                     -               -       -        -           -           *      -           x
29. Detail drawings               -               -       -        -           -           *      -           x
30. Offer of Dedication           -               -       -        -           -           *      -           x
31. Guarantees                    -               -       -        -           -           *      -           x
 
   See footnote numbers corresponding to item numbers in table for details on
submission requirements.
   Note: Some submissions required by this table may be waived under 1320.02(d)
(3) or 1320.02(d)((5)C1.
Notes for Table 1320C
Items in this table are required only when a Site Plan or subdivision approval
is required under Table 1320B.
Site Plan and subdivision filings shall also include applicable information
required by Table 1320B.
x :  Required for all submissions except if waived under 1320.02(d)(3) or
1320.02(d)(5)C1.
- :  Not required for any submission
* :  Required only if considered necessary for review of the application by the
applicable Review Body or Administrative Officer.
[a]  Required for Certificates of Compliance (see Section 1350.01(c)) and
applications specified in Table 1320B for uses providing over 4 parking spaces.
[b]  Required for Certificates of Compliance (see Section 1350.01(c)) and types
of applications specified in Table 1320B for uses required to provide any
landscaped area in Chapter 1220.
[c]  Includes Planned Unit Developments.
[d] Shall be prepared by registered surveyor or registered professional
engineer.
DRAWINGS  SPECIFICATIONS
All drawings shall be black or blue line diazo prints of such scale and maximum
sheet size and in a number of copies as the Administrative Officer may
require.  Where multiple sheets are necessary, they shall be indexed. 
Original drawings of Final Plats and Final Site Plans shall be in waterproof
India ink on tracing cloth, mylar, or other substantial material from which
legible prints may be made.
Final Plats and Final Site Plans shall have accurate bearings and distances to
the nearest established street corners or official monuments.  Reference
corners shall be accurately described.  Distances shall be to the nearest 1/100
foot and bearings and deflection angles to the nearest second.
For all curves of property lines or right-of-way lines shown, the following
shall be provided:
   A. radius
   B. delta angle
   C. tangent and arc length and bearing
   D. chord length and bearing.
1. SCALE & OTHER
Numeric and graphic scales, north arrow, sheet number, and dates of preparation
and of revision. 
For Final Plats and Final Site Plans, control points to which all dimensions,
angles, and bearings are to be referenced.
2. PARCEL BOUNDARIES
Boundaries of the development and of each phase thereof and total area
included. For Major Subdivision plats, boundaries shall be referenced to a
corner established in U.S. Public Land Survey.
3. LOTS & BLOCKS
Dimensions and block numbers of all proposed blocks.
Lot lines, dimensions, areas, required setback lines, and numbers of all lots
or building sites.
Numbers shall be in numerical or alphabetical order without omission or
duplication.  Numbers and letters shall begin with number "1" or letter "A"
unless the development is an addition to an adjacent development or a
resubdivision thereof.  An addition containing a portion of an already platted
block shall retain the same block number or letter and number lots
consecutively to the existing lots.
4. EASEMENTS
Location, dimensions, ownership, purpose, and limitations on easements and
encroachments on the subject property and easements on abutting property in
favor of the subject property.
5. TABLE 1320B REQUIREMENTS
Items required for application in Table 1320B.
6. OTHER INFORMATION
Any other information required elsewhere in this Code or that is reasonably
required in the judgment of the Review Body to determine whether the
application conforms to the Approval Criteria and other requirements of
applicable regulations.
7. PROJECT DATA
Data indicating for each development phase:
   A. number of dwelling units broken down by number of bedrooms
   B. gross floor area, as defined herein, by use type
   C. number of lots
   D. gross and net site area, as defined herein E. land area devoted to
streets, off-street parking, off-street loading, recreation space, and each
housing and land use type.
8. LANDSCAPING
A. Existing
   Existing wooded areas and isolated trees 4 inches or more in diameter at 4.5
feet above natural grade at the base of the tree.
B. Proposed
For both the property and tree lawns in abutting rights-of-way:
   1. Location, quantity, diameter, installation height, maturity height,
caliper at 1 foot above proposed grade, botanic name, and common name, of all
proposed living and non-living landscaping materials and existing materials to
be preserved, including street tree installation where required
   2. Types and boundaries of proposed ground cover and identification of grass
areas to be sodded, plugged or sprigged, and seeded
   3. Location and contours at 1-foot intervals of all proposed berming
   4. Dimensions and descriptions, renderings, elevations, or photographs
indicating the external appearance, including materials and colors, of all
sides of proposed fences, walls, ornamental lighting, and other landscaping &
screening treatments
   5. Measures to be taken to protect new and preserved existing trees during
construction.
9. STRUCTURES
A. Existing Structures
Location, type, shape, dimensions, gross and net floor area as defined herein,
orientation, height in feet, finished grade elevations at all entrances and
corners, and number of stories of all structures, including buildings, sign
structures, fences, walls, retaining walls, screening, street furniture,
railroads, bridges, culverts, exterior lighting fixtures, and entrance
features.
B. Proposed Structures
The information required in 9a for all proposed structures.
10. OPEN USES
Location, dimensions, area in square feet, and surface type for open storage,
refuse disposal, and service areas.
11. GOVERNMENT BOUNDARIES
Current school district and municipal boundary lines and section and quarter-
section lines on or adjacent to site.
12. CIRCULATION
A. On Property
Existing and proposed number, locations, names, alignment, right-of-way and
pavement widths, approximate grades, dimensions, right-of-way and center lines,
design, and paving of all public and private thoroughfares, sidewalks,
pedestrian ways, bicycle paths, fire lanes, railroad rights-of-way, curb cuts,
and driveways.  Names and functional classifications (minor street, collector,
etc.) of all streets.  Proposed public or private ownership of facilities. 
Radii of all street curves.
B. Adjacent Land
Names, locations, and right-of-way and pavement widths of existing and proposed
streets, intersections, sidewalks, and curb cuts adjacent to the site.
C. Detail
Profiles and cross-sections of proposed streets on the property.
13. RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Locations, widths, right-of-way and center lines, purpose, and names of all
existing street, alley, utility, railroad, and other rights-of-way within or
abutting the subject property.
14. STREET ENGINEERING
Length and bearing of street center lines.  Radii of all street curves
(approximate only required for Preliminary Plat).  Street plans and profiles
showing existing ground surface, existing and proposed street grades and center
line, right-of-way, and ground elevations [a], and cross-sections of proposed
improvements.
Locations of street name signs and street lighting standards.  For Final Plat
or Final Site Plan, street cross-sections at intervals of not less than 200
feet, or at lesser intervals if required by the City Engineer for street
segments with over 6 percent grades.
15. STREET NAME APPROVAL
Letters from the postmaster and the 911 Coordinator of the Police Department
confirming that pro-posed street names are not duplicative of or excessively
similar to names of existing streets that they are not extensions of.
16. CURB CUTS
For all curb cuts:
   A. anticipated users: employees, patrons, delivery trucks, or other users
   B. curb cut location, approximate grade, width, number of lanes, radii of
curb returns or angles of flares, dimensions of medians or islands, if any, and
all other geometrics
   C. distances to existing or proposed property lines, to other existing or
proposed curb cuts on the subject or adjacent lots, and to existing or proposed
street intersections.
17. ACCESS CONTROL
Restrictions imposed by any applicable public agency controlling access to
public streets.
18. PARKING
Location, shape, dimensions, approximate grade, surface type, area in square
feet, and capacity in number of vehicles of off-street parking and loading
spaces and areas, including aisles, curbing, wheel stops, islands, guard rails,
driveways, and curb cuts.  Number and locations of spaces open to the public,
restricted to tenants or customers, and reserved spaces. Number and locations
of spa-ces that are free, available for hourly or daily rental, or leased long-
term.
19. PUBLIC & COMMON AREAS
The number, location, boundaries, acreage, dimensions, proposed ownership, and
provisions for maintenance of any proposed recreational and non-recreational
public or common open spaces, such as parks, playgrounds, and school sites.  A
written statement of the advantages any proposed public or common open space
offers at each proposed location for such use.
20. TOPOGRAPHY
A. Existing
Map showing existing contours [e] at:
   1. no greater than 5-foot intervals on land with an average natural slope of
10 percent or more
   2. no greater than 2-foot intervals for all other land.
B. Proposed
Proposed grading and contours where extensive changes are planned.  Elevations
[e] marked on such contours. 
Description of amounts and methods of any excavation, dredging, or filling
proposed, including use of blasting and pile driving and of potential for
ground movement and settlement during excavation and impact on adjacent
buildings and utility lines.
21. DRAINAGE
A. Existing
Existing and proposed drainage patterns and appurtenances for collecting storm
water.
B. Grading and Drainage Plan
A plan for grading and stormwater drainage of the subject property, including
open ditches, pipes, culverts and other underground structures, manholes, catch
basins, waterway openings, and drain inlets.
22. SUBSURFACE DATA
Boring and sounding data on subsurface soil, rock, and groundwater conditions,
including depths to bedrock and to ground water table.
23. OTHER NATURAL FEATURES
Locations of existing rock out-croppings on or abutting the subject property. 
Any atypical subsurface conditions, such as abandoned mines.
24. WATER AREAS
Dimensions, locations, boundary lines, and water elevations [e] as of date of
survey and approximate high and low water levels of existing and proposed
natural or artificial bodies of water, flood plains, marsh areas, drainage
ditches, wet or dry stormwater detention or retention areas on or abutting the
subject property, and any proposed modifications to existing water courses or
water bodies, including impact on ground water levels.  Any proposed relocation
or alteration of existing water bodies.  Locations of any proposed accesses to
existing water bodies.
25. UTILITIES
Size, purpose, materials, grades, invert elevation [e] (for sewers), and
location of existing and proposed public and private utilities: sanitary sewer,
storm sewer, water supply, gas, electric, and communications.  Utility
easements, and drainage facilities and proposed connections thereto on or
within 100 feet of the property.  Locations of existing and proposed hydrants,
catch basins, manholes, valves, and utility poles.  Direction and distance of
nearest utility connections if not within 100 feet of property.  For Final
Plat, plan and profile drawings of all public utilities.
26. COVENANTS
Protective covenants or deed restrictions to regulate land use in the
development.  An outline only is required for Preliminary Plat or Preliminary
Site Plan.  For Final Plat or Final Site Plan, covenants or restrictions shall
be included on plat or by reference.  For Final Plat or Final Site Plan,
covenant or restriction documents shall be submitted in final form and shall be
recorded.
27. CERTIFICATES
The certificates provided in Table 1320F.
28. MONUMENTS
Locations and descriptions of dimensions and materials of all existing and
proposed survey monuments and markers.
29. DETAIL DRAWINGS
Detail drawings of any special construction, such as concrete aprons,
headwalls, rip-rap, or decorative fences within a right-of-way.
30. OFFER OF DEDICATION
Irrevocable offers of dedication to the applicable governmental body of
streets, parks, other public areas, easements, utilities, and other public
improvements required to be dedicated under applicable City development
regulations.  A notation on the Plat or Plan to reference this offer.
31. GUARANTEES
Certification by the City Engineer that the principal has either installed all
required improvements in conformance with City regulations or has provided a
financial guarantee in conformance with 1350.02.
[e]  Elevations shall be based on mean sea level datum as determined by the
U.S. Geological Survey under Section 204.01 of the Barberton Codified
Ordinances or other datum approved by the City Engineer.
Table 1320D: Notifications
                                   City                       City
 City                    City      Board   Utility            Council  City
 Engineer Parks Planning Utilities of      [c]       ODOT [b] Members  Building
                                   Health  Companies          [d]      Dept.
                                   [a]
                                                  City                  City
                City                    City      Board  Utility   ODOT Council City
                Engineer Parks Planning Utilities of     [c]       [b]  Members Building
                                                  Health Companies      [d]     Dept.
                                                  [a]
1. Amendments:
a. Text         -        -     x        -         -      -         -    x       x
b. Map          -        -     x        x         -      -         x    x       x
2. Variances    -        -     x        -         -      -         x    x       x
3. Conditional  -        -     x        -         -      -         x    x       x
Uses
4. Appeals      -        -     -        -         -      -         x    x       -
5. Changes to
Properties With -        -     -        -         -      -         x    x       x
Nonconformities
6. Temporary    -        -     -        -         -      -         x    x       x
Uses
7.              -        -     -        -         -      -         -    -       x
Interpretations
8. Unlisted     -        -     -        -         -      -         x    -       x
Uses
9. Certificates
of              -        -     x        -         -      -         x    x       x
Appropriateness
10.
Subdivisions:
A. Minor        x        -     x        -         -      -         x    -       x
Subdivisions
B. Preliminary  x        x     x        x         x      x         x    x       x
Plat
C. Final Plat   x        -     x        -         -      -         x    x       x
11. Planned
Unit            x        x     x        x         x      x         x    x       x
Developments
12. Site Plan   x        x     x        x         x      x         x    x       x
Review
See also 1220.03(a) for notification of City Beautification Commission.
[a] For developments lacking public sewer and/or public water supply.
[b] As provided in 1320.02(f)(15).
[c] Ohio Edison, East Ohio Gas Company, and Ohio Bell.
[d] Those Council members elected by wards in whose ward(s) the property that
is the subject of the application is located plus all at-large Council members.
ODOT:     Ohio Department of Transportation
Parks:     Department of Parks and Recreation
Planning:     City Planning Department
City Utilities:     City Utilities Department
Table 1320E: Approval Process Steps
                                                    Change to  Major Subdivision:           Site Plan
Step Amendment Variance Conditional Certificate of  Property                                 Review:
                        Use         Appropriateness with Non-  Preliminary Final Minor       PUD Other
                                                    conformity Plat        Plat  Subdivision
                                                            Change to  Major Subdivision:           Site Plan
Step        Amendment Variance  Conditional Certificate of  Property                                 Review:
                                Use         Appropriateness with Non-  Preliminary Final Minor       PUD     Other
                                                            conformity Plat        Plat  Subdivision
1. Optional
[a] Pre-    x         x         x           x               x          x           -     x           x       x
Filing
Conference
2.
Application x         x         x           x               x          x           x     x           x       x
Filing
3. Review
by Planning x         x         x           x               x          x           x     x           x       x
Department
[b]
4. Advisory PC or DRB -         -           -               -          -           -     -           PC      -
action by:
5. Hearing  Council   BZBA or   PC          DRB             BZBA       [c]         -     -           PC      [c]
by:                   PC
6. Final    Council   BZBA  or PC          DRB             BZBA       PC          PC    PD          Council PC
Action by:            PC
7.
Negotiation -         -         -           x               -          -           -     -           -       -
Period [d]
8. Waiting  x         x         x           x               x          x           x     x           x       x
Period
9.          -         -         -           -               -          -           x     x           x       x
Recording
10. Permit  x         x         x           x               x          x           x     x           x       x
Issued
 
Steps for Appeals, Temporary Uses, Interpretations, Minor Variances, and
Unlisted Uses Similar to Listed Uses are governed by simpler approval processes
and are not listed.  Multi-Stage Review applications go through steps 2 through
6 another time after step 6.
[a]  May be scheduled at applicant's option.
[b]  At the option of the Department.
[c]  Hearing may be held by Planning Commission at Commission's option.
[d]  Applies only if Final Action is disapproval.
   BZBA:    Board of Zoning and Building Appeals
   Council:    City Council
   DRB:       Design Review Board
   PC:      City Planning Commission
Table 1320F: Plat Certificates
Certificates shall be in this or a substantially equivalent form approved by
the Director of Law.
NOTE:  On a plat requiring more than one sheet, the required certificates shall
appear on each sheet.
1. Title
___________________ Subdivision, Part of original tract
______________________________
            _________(city or township)__________
            _____________(county)______________
2. Ownership and Acceptance
I (we) the undersigned ____(name lettered)____ am (are) legal owner(s) of the
property shown and described herein and do hereby freely adopt this plan or
plat of subdivision.
___(date)___, 19/20___ 
Owner:  ___(signature)___   _____      (witness)_____
        (name lettered)      _____      (witness)_____
Owner:  ___(signature)___   _____      (witness)_____
        (name lettered)      _____      (witness)_____
(To be notarized)
3. Dedication
The owner hereby irrevocably offers for dedication forever to _____ all of the
following except where specifically indicated as private: streets, alleys,
local government uses, easements, parks, playgrounds, and other open spaces,
and required public utilities, and other public places or public facilities
shown in the attached plat or plan and construction plans in accordance with an
irrevocable offer of dedication dated _____ and recorded with the ____ County
Recorder.
      By: __________________________
      Date:  _______________________
      (To be notarized)
4. Surveyor or Engineer
I hereby certify this survey and plat drawn by me or under my supervision  to
be a correct representation of all existing land divisions and features
prepared from an actual survey of the property made on the ground by me or
under my supervision that correctly shows the locations, sizes, and materials
of all monuments that are set or will be set upon completion of construction
and that complies with all applicable provisions of City regulations.
___(date)___, 19/20___
      _______________________________
      Registered Surveyor or
      Registered Engineer
      Ohio Registration Number
      (SEAL)
      (To be notarized)
5. Notary
(To appear directly below certificates that are required to be notarized)
State of Ohio         )
County of ______________   )
Before me, a Notary Public in and for said Coun-ty and State, personally
appeared the above owner(s)/officers of the _________________ company, who
acknowledged the making and signing of the foregoing instrument to be their
free act and deed.
IN WITNESS whereof I have hereunto set my hand and official seal at ____
(city)____, ____(state)____, this ________ Day of ____(month)____, 19/20____.
      ________________________________
              Notary Public
My Commission expires ________________________
6. Installation or Guarantee of Required Improvements
I hereby certify:
   that pavements, utilities, and other required improvements have been
installed in an acceptable manner and according to City of Barberton
specifications on the property described hereon.
   ALTERNATE:  that performance guarantees in the amount of $ ______ in
conformance with City regulations have been posted with the ____________ to
assure completion of all required improvements in case of default.
__(date)__, 19/20___   ______________________
             City Engineer
7. Planning Commission Approval
This Plat of Subdivision has been approved by the Planning Commission of the
City of Barberton, Ohio.
_(date)_, 19/20___   _______________________
               Chairperson
         _______________________
               Secretary
8. Acceptance of Dedications
The public streets/easements/parks/other  public areas and improvements
dedicated to public use have been accepted by the Council of the City of
Barberton, Ohio, by Ordinance No. _________.
_(date)_, 19/20___   ________________________
           President of Council
         ________________________
             Clerk of Council
9. Transfer (County Auditor)
Transferred this ______ day of ________, 19/20___.
         ____________________________
               County Auditor
         _______________ County, Ohio
10. Recording (County Recorder)
Received for record this ____ day of ______, 19/20___ at ____  AM/PM.
Recorded in Plat Book ______, Page No. ______ this ____ day of _____, 19/20___
at ___ AM/PM.
         _________________________
             County Recorder
         _____________ County, Ohio
11. Tax Payments
State of Ohio         )
County of ______________   )
I, ______, County Clerk of _____ County, Ohio, do hereby certify that there are
no delinquent or unpaid current or forfeited taxes or special assessments
against any of the land included in the attached plat.
Dated this ___ day of _____ 19/20___.
      _________________________________
                County Clerk
      __________________ County, Ohio
12. Minor Subdivision
State of Ohio         )
County of ______________   )
Approved by Director of Planning, City of Barberton, this ____ day of _____ AD
____; no plat required.
      _________________________________
            Director of Planning
              City of Barberton
13. Other Approval
(For use when other agency approvals are required)
State of Ohio         )
County of ______________   )
Approved this ____ day of _____ AD ____.
      __________________________________
Table 1320G: Form for Performance Bond
   Performance bonds shall be in this or a substantially equivalent form,
approved by the Director of Law.
   NOTE: Language should be modified as appropriate for performance bonds used
to guarantee performance other than the installation of subdivision
improvements.
   Barberton, Ohio
PERFORMANCE  BOND
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS:
WHEREAS, ______________________________, Principal herein is the owner and
developer of the ____________________________ subdivision located in
________________ County, Ohio, and
WHEREAS, the plans and specifications of said Subdivision showing the location,
construction, and installation of street pavements, curbs, sidewalks, sewers,
water mains and other improvements therein have been filed with the City
Planning Commission for final approval, and which are hereby referred to and
made a part of this instrument, as if fully copied and set forth herein, and
WHEREAS, the Principal herein does hereby obligate itself and does agree to
complete the construction and installation of all street pavements, curbs,
sidewalks, sewers, water mains, and all other improvements in the said
Subdivision in accordance with the said plans and specifications now on file,
pending final approval by the said Commission.
NOW, THEREFORE, THE ________________, as Principal and ________________, as
Surety, do hereby firmly bind ourselves, our heirs, executors, administrators,
and successors unto the City Planning Commission of Barberton, Ohio, in the sum
of $ ________ conditioned upon the performance by the Principal of its
undertakings herein, and its completion of the said _________________
Subdivision in the construction of all the street pavements, curbs, sidewalks,
sewers, water mains, and all other improvements therein called for by the plans
thereof, the same to be completed on or before the _____ day of _________ 19/
20____, and upon the completion thereof this obligation to be null and void,
otherwise to remain in full force and effect.
If the Principal fails to complete the construction, and the improvements of
said Subdivision as shown and provided for by said plans and specifications
herein referred to within the time herein specified, the Commission may in its
discretion extend the time for the completion of said work by order duly made
and entered by the said Com-mission for a period of from 30 days to 90 days.
WITNESS our hands this the _____ day of ____________, 19/20____.
WITNESS:
______________   __________________
             PRINCIPAL
______________   __________________
               SURETY
Table 1320H: Time Limits on Application Processing Actions
   NOTE:  This table is for convenient reference only.
        Requirements are as provided in text of the regulations.
Action Taken By Time Restriction on Action:
                Maximum or Minimum Number of Days Before or After Event
                                                                                          Time Restriction on Action:
Action                                                                        Taken By    Maximum Number Before
                                                                                          or      of     or     Event
                                                                                          Minimum Days   After
1.   Notification to applicant of action on acceptance of application      AO          maximum 10     after  Filing of application
(1320.02(d)(7)
2.   Notice to applicant of date of meeting:
A. Public Hearing
1320.02(d)(9)                                                                 AO          minimum 15     before Hearing date (#6, #8)
1320.01(f)
B. Other Meeting                                                              AO          minimum 5      before Meeting date (#6, #8)
1320.02(d)(9)
3.   Public Hearing Notice
1320.01(f)
A. Sign                                                                       App         minimum 15     before Hearing date (#6, #8)
B. Written                                                                    AO          minimum 15     before Hearing date (#6, #8)
C. Published                                                                  AO          minimum 15     before Hearing date (#6, #8)
4.   Agency Notice 1320.02(d)(10)                                          AO          maximum 3      after  Acceptance of application (#1)
Table 1320D
5.   Planning Dept review of application made available 1320.02(e)(1)      PD          minimum 5      before Meeting date (#6, #8)
6.   Meeting of Advisory Action Body 1320.02(f)(3)A                        AAB         maximum 25     after  Acceptance of application (#1)
                                                                              AAB         maximum 5      after  Advisory action taken
7.   Advisory Action Body report made available 1320.02(f)(3)B             AAB         minimum 5      before Meeting of Final Action Body 
                                                                                                                (#8)
8.   Meeting of Final Action Body 1320.02(d)(9)                            RB          maximum 45     after  Acceptance of application (#1)
9.   Action by Final Action Body                                           FAB         minimum 45     after  Acceptance of application (#1)
1320.02(f)(6)A                                                                                                  [a]
1320.02(f)(8)B                                                                PC          minimum 60/90  after  Mandatory Referral
                                                                              FAB         maximum 60     after  Acceptance of application (#1)
10.   Second recommendation to Planning Commission from PUD Technical ReviePTRC        maximum 30     after  PC disapproval of first PTRC
Committee 1320.02(f)(4)                                                                                         recommendation
11.   Notice to applicant and Review Body by Planning Director of decision PD          maximum 7      after  Director's receipt of
not to take action 1320.02(f)(12)C                                                                              application
12.   Final action by Planning Director or Building Commissioner [b]       PD or BC    maximum 14     after  Receipt of application (#1)
1320.02(f)(12)C
13.   Notice of action by Final Action Body                                AO          maximum 5      after  Final Action Body Action (#9)
1320.02(g)(1)A
14.   Appeal of Final Action
1320.02(g)(2)                                                                 App         maximum 10     after  Date of action appealed
1310.03(c)(3)A1
15.   Issuance of permit (or taking of action) requiring Certificate of                        180 or
Appropriateness                                                               BC or App   minimum 270    after  Disapproval of Certificate
1320.02(g)(4)                                                                                     [c]
16.   Issuance of permit                                                   BC          minimum 10     after  Final Action approval (#9) [d]
   1320.02(g)(5)A                                                                                            Final Action approval by City
   1320.02(g)(5)B                                                          BC          minimum 30     after  Council (#9) [e]
   1310.03(i)
                                                                                                                Notification to Bldg. Comm. of
17.   Issuance of permit or certificate approval by Final Action Body      BC          maximum 7      after  FAB approval or expiration of
1320.02(g)(13)                                                                                                  waiting period referenced in
                                                                                                                No. 16.
18.   Notice to permit holder of proposed revocation                       BC          minimum 21     before Revocation of permit
1320.02(g)(14)
19.   Filing of application for Final Plat or Final Site Plan 1320.02(d)(6)App         maximum 360    after  Approval of Preliminary Plat or
                                                                                                                Plan
                                                                              (automatic) -       360    after  Approval of Preliminary Plat or
                                                                                                                Plan [f]
20.   Expiration of Preliminary Plat or Plan approval 1320.02(g)(15)A, B   (automatic) -       720    after  Approval of Final Plat or Plan
                                                                                                                [g]
                                                                              (automatic) -       1,440  after  Approval of Final Plat or Plan
                                                                                                                [h]
21.   Resubmittal of application 1320.02(g)(18)                            App         minimum 360    after  Final Action disapproval of
                                                                                                                application or expiration of
 
Note:    In rare cases these time limits may be affected by the requirements
of  division 1320.02(f)(15), Applications Affecting Highway Acquisitions.
All days are calendar days, not business days.
#__: Refer to item number __ in this table.
AAB: Advisory Action Body
AO: Administrative Officer (Planning Director or Building Commissioner)
App: Applicant      BC: Building Commissioner   FAB: Final Action Body
PTRC: PUD Technical Review Committee
RB: Review Body (usually Planning Commission, Design Review Board, or Board of
Zoning and Building Appeals)
[a] Does not apply if Final Action Body has received a report on the
application from the Advisory Action Body.
[b] When authorized by Code.
[c] Negotiation period.
[d] Required to allow for appeal of action taken.
[e] Unless waived by Council, per Section 5.12 of Charter.
[f] Unless final Plat or Final Plan has been submitted.
[g] Unless construction on development has begun.
[h] Unless all construction on development has been completed.
Chapter 1340
Nonconformities
1340.01 Purpose
The intent of this chapter is to provide for the continuation and, under
appropriate circumstances, elimination of characteristics of existing uses of
property in the City of Barberton that do not con-form to the requirements of
this Code or that may not conform to future amendments thereto.
The provisions herein are designed to accomplish this intent in a way that:
   (a) recognizes the rights of owners of properties that have been rendered
nonconforming by City action to upgrade development policies and standards; and
   (b) allows the property owner or lessee to recover his or her investment in
a Nonconformi-ty, while also recognizing that by virtue of the Nonconformity he
or she enjoys a right not generally available to other properties in the same
district; and
   (c) minimizes the nuisance, reduction in neighboring property values, and
other adverse effects of properties that do not conform to their environs.
1340.02 Types of Nonconformities
(a) Standards Nonconformities
Standards Nonconformities, as defined herein, usually involve failure to
conform to the quantitative development standards established herein, such as
for lot dimensions, yards, off-street parking, Floor Area Ratio, or
landscaping.
Some Standards Nonconformities are difficult and costly to eliminate, while
others are not.  Similarly, some Standards Nonconformities  have significant
adverse impact on their environs, while others have minimal impact.
Examples of a Standards Nonconformity are a house with an interior side yard
smaller than required by the Code or a business with fewer offstreet parking
spaces than the Code mandates.
(b) Use Nonconformities
Use Nonconformities, as defined herein, normally have more significant adverse
impact on their surroundings than Standards Nonconformities.  And Use
Nonconformities  can normally be eliminated more easily and at less cost than
other Nonconformities.
An example of a Use Nonconformity is a business in a Residential District that
was previously conforming when the site was zoned commercial.
1340.03 Rules for Nonconformities
(a) Continuation and Elimination
Nonconformities  shall be lawful hereunder and may continue without time
limitation except when required to be removed by Table 1340A.
(b) Enlargement of Nonconformity
No greater degree or additional instance of nonconformity shall result from any
action taken under Table 1340A than existed before the action was taken, except
as may be specifically authorized by Table 1340A or by Variance under division
1310.03(a).
(c) Certificate Required
A Certificate of Occupancy shall be required for the continuation of all
Nonconformities  created by this Code or any amendment thereto.
When the Building Commissioner determines that a property has any
Nonconformity,  he or she shall notify the owner or lessee thereof of such
Noncon-formity and of applicable regulations.
Such notice shall require that the recipient file with the Director, within 90
days of the date thereof, either satisfactory evidence that the property is
conforming or a completed application for a Certificate of Occupancy to
continue the Nonconformity.
Upon timely receipt of a complete and accurate application therefor, the
Commissioner shall issue a Certificate of Occupancy for the nonconforming
property.
The Commissioner shall maintain a file of all Nonconformities of which he or
she has sent notice and of all Nonconformities  issued Certificates of
Occupancy.
(d) BZBA Action
Action by the Board of Zoning and Building Appeals required under Table 1340A
shall conform to the procedures established in division 1310.03(d), and to the
Approval Criteria for Changes to Properties With Nonconformities in Table
1310F.
(e) AO District
   (1) Classification in AO
   City Council may classify any property in the AO Amortization Overlay
District if it determines that such classification would be consistent with the
purposes of the District as set forth in division 1110.05(b)(2)B.
   Such classification shall be in accordance with procedures specified in
Section 1310.02. 
   (2) Amortization Requirements
      A. Classes of Nonconformities Amortized
      The ordinance that adds the AO classification to a property shall specify
which particular provisions of this Code with which a property may be
nonconforming (such as the number-of-spaces parking requirement or maximum sign
height requirement) shall be subject to amortization.
      The classes of Nonconformities  selected for amortization may be dif-
ferent in each AO District but shall in all cases be based on findings of fact
that amortization of the particular Nonconformity is warranted in the
particular district to achieve the purpose of AO zoning.
      B. Amortization Period
      The ordinance shall also specify the starting point and length of the
amortization period for each class of Nonconformity to be amortized, which may
be different for each class.
      The length of the amortization period shall correspond to the difficulty
or expense involved in removing the Nonconformity and to any other factors
deemed appropriate by City Council.
Table 1340A: Mandatory Elimination of Nonconformities
Event Type [a] of Nonconformity on Property Nonconformity Required to Be
                                            Eliminated? [b]
                                                                        Nonconformity
                                                       Type [a] of      Required to
Event                                                  Nonconformity on Be
                                                       Property         Eliminated?
                                                                        [b]
A. Expansion:
1. ADDITION/ENLARGEMENT
a. Small [c], to Building                              Use              No [d]
                                                       Use              BZBA Decision
                                                                        [f]
b. All Other                                           Parking [e]      Yes
                                                       All Other        BZBA Decision
                                                       Standards        [f] [g]
                                                       Any, on a Sign   Yes
2. INTERNAL EXPANSION
a. Within a Structure                                  Parking [e]      Yes
                                                       All Other        No
b. Of Use of Open Land                              Any              Yes
B. Other Construction:
1. REPAIRS/MAINTENANCE
a. Without Structural Alteration, as defined herein    Any              No
b. Government-mandated                                 Any              No
c. All Other                                           See
                                                       "Reconstruction"
2. RECONSTRUCTION
a. Minor                                               Any              No
                                                       Use              Yes
b. Major                                               Standards        BZBA Decision
                                                                        [f][h]
c. To Reduce Nonconformity                             Any              No
C. Use:
                                                       Use              Partially [i]
                                                       Parking [e]      Yes
1. CHANGE OF USE, as defined herein                    Any, on a Sign   Yes
                                                       All Other        BZBA Decision
                                                       Standards        [f]
2. RESUMPTION of Discontinued Use                      Any              Yes
D. Other:
1. MOVING of Use or Structure [j]                      Any              Yes
2. DEVELOPMENT  OF VACANT LOT for Any Conforming Use  Standards        No
[k]
3. ANY EVENT                                           Exempted         No [g]
4. Expiration of AMORTIZATION  Period                 Per 1340.03(e)   Yes
5. CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY,                                Any, on a Sign   Yes
    as defined herein
                                                       All Other        No
6. ALL OTHER EVENTS                                    Any              No
 
Notes for Table 1340A
Note: For nonconforming signs, see also Section 1230.06.
ACTION ON PROPERTY
A(1) Addition/Enlargement:
Any addition or enlargement to a structure.
A(2) Internal Expansion:
   a. Within a Structure:
   Expansion of a Principal or Accessory Use within a structure involving no
structural alteration, as defined herein.
   b. Of Use of Open Land:
   Extension of a Principal or Accessory Use of a land or water area not
involving a building, or only incidentally involving one as an Accessory Use,
beyond the area occupied as of the time such use became nonconforming.
B(1) Repairs/Maintenance
   (b) Government-Mandated:
   Any repairs or rebuilding mandated by the Building Commissioner or other
authorized government agency or court to correct unsafe or unhealthy conditions
or to secure compliance with any court order, law, or regulation other than
this Code.
B(2) Reconstruction
   (a) Minor Reconstruction:
   Repair or reconstruction work within any 12-month period on, or replacement
of, a damaged or destroyed permanent sign or structure that has a cumulative
value of 50 percent or less of the current replacement value of the structure,
based on figures approved by the Building Commissioner.
   (b) Major Reconstruction:
   Any repair or rebuilding that does not qualify as a Minor Reconstruction,
including total replacement of a permanent sign or structure that is completely
removed with another of the same type.
   (c) To Reduce Nonconformity:
   Repair or rebuilding of any magnitude that has the effect of eliminating or
reducing Nonconformities  on the property.
If a permanent sign or structure to be replaced has been removed--other  than
by natural forces, casualties, or to avoid immediate danger to public health or
safety--prior to a final decision hereunder on any Board of Zoning and Building
Appeals approval required, total elimination of all Nonconformities of the sign
or structure shall be required in the replacement sign or structure.
C(2) Resumption of Discontinued Use
Any resumption, expansion, or change in any use that was discontinued
voluntarily and intentionally in the judgment of the Building Commissioner for
a continuous period of 6 months or more.
The following shall not be considered discontinued uses:
   1. A temporarily closed seasonal use
   2. A use temporarily closed for remodeling or reconstruction under an
unexpired Building Permit issued within the preceding 12 months
   3. A use temporarily closed because of governmental action, such as a street
closure for construction purposes, that has impeded access thereto
   4. A use such as a business that is closed while the use is in the process
of being sold, but not while the real estate is in the process of being sold
   5. A use closed pending the outcome of a legal proceeding
   6. A use showing other indications satisfactory to the Building Commissioner
of an intent to resume the use within a reasonable period.
D(1) Moving of Structure
The relocating of a structure in whole or in part to any other location on the
same or any other lot other than for the purpose of making the location thereof
less nonconforming.
D(2) Development of Vacant Lot
Development of any vacant nonconforming lot of record, as defined herein, that
has no substantial structure upon it, whether or not previously developed.
D(3) Any Action / Exempted Nonconformities:
Exempted Nonconformities  are any Nonconformities resulting solely from changes
in the locations of streets, structures, or uses that were beyond the control
of the owner of the property with the Nonconformity.  Examples are a
nonconforming yard or setback resulting solely from a street widening or a
spacing or setback Nonconformity resulting solely from relocation of a
structure on an abutting lot in different ownership.
OTHER NOTES
[a]  See Section 1340.02.
[b]  A "yes" in the third column of this table requires that any Nonconformity
of the type specified in the second column be completely eliminated when the
event specified in the first column occurs, except as may be authorized by
Variance.
[c]  A one-time addition to or enlargement of a building of no more than 30
percent of existing gross floor area or 500 square feet, whichever is greater. 
All subsequent additions or enlargements of any magnitude on the same property
shall be subject to item A1b of the Table.
[d]  The Use Nonconformity is not required to be eliminated if the use is
allowed as a Permitted Use in the next higher-numbered district with the same
letter prefix (such as "RM" or "C").
[e]  A Nonconformity with required number of parking spaces.
[f]  BZBA Decision:
The specified action shall not be taken unless Nonconformities  are reduced or
eliminated to the extent determined by action of the Board of Zoning and
Building Appeals.  Such determination shall be made as provided under division
1310.03(d), Changes to Properties with Nonconformities.  Approval Criteria
shall be as provided in Table 1310E.
The Board of Zoning and Building Appeals may require:
   1. that all Nonconformities  be completely eliminated, or
   2. that some Nonconformities  be either completely eliminated or reduced in
degree, or
   3. that no Nonconformities  be reduced or eliminated.
As part of its determinations, the Board may establish such conditions as it
deems necessary to conform to applicable Approval Criteria.
No Board of Zoning and Building Appeals decision shall be made hereunder that
would deny all reasonable economic use of the lot.
[g]  Exempted Nonconformities (see note D(3) are not required to be
eliminated.  Elimination of all other Nonconformities on the property is as
required by other provisions of this table.
[h]  Notwithstanding this provision, all Nonconformities shall be required to
be eliminated if a  Building Permit has not been secured within 1 year of the
date of the damage or destruction, and con-struction has not been diligently
prosecuted to completion.
[i]  Use may be changed either to a conforming use or to a different
nonconforming use that is allowed in a more restrictive district, as defined
herein.
[j]  The elevation of the ground previously covered by a moved structure shall
be restored to the grade of the rest of the lot.
[k]  A use that conforms to current Code requirements in all respects except
the nonconforming characteristic(s) of its lot, such as substandard lot area or
lot width.
Chapter 1350
Administration
1350.01 Permits and Certificates
For purposes of administration of this Code certain certificates and permits
are hereby established.
(a) Building Permit
It shall be unlawful to commence the construction, alteration, enlargement, or
repair of any structure in the City without obtaining a Building Permit as
provided in the City Building Code.
Except for signs, interior remodeling, facade renovation, and other Permit
applications exempted by the Building Commissioner, an applicant for a Building
Permit shall submit a plot plan drawn to scale showing:
   (1) all lot lines
   (2) all required yards
   (3) all encroachments beyond lot lines
   (4) all easements on the lot
   (5) all other information necessary for the Commissioner to determine
compliance with all applicable provisions of this Code.
(b) Certificate of Occupancy
   (1) When Required
   Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful to take any of the
following actions without obtaining a Certificate of Occupancy from the City:
      A. occupy or use any structure, land, water area, air rights, or other
premises in the City, or
      B. extend or expand such occupancy or use, or
      C. change the occupancy thereof, or
      D. establish a change of use, as defined herein.
   An application for a Building Permit shall be considered an application for
a Certificate of Occupancy.
   (2) Exemptions
   The following shall be exempt from the requirement for a Certificate of
Occupancy hereunder:
      A. Land used for agricultural cultivation, where permitted hereunder, and
      B. Residential buildings in which there is a change of occupancy but no
change of use, as defined herein, and
      C. Temporary Uses for which a Temporary Use Permit has been issued as
provided herein.
   (3) Issuance
   The Building Commissioner shall issue no Certificate of Occupancy for a new
or remodeled premises unless he or she has inspected the premises after
completion of all construction and has certified that the premises is in
conformity with the plans on which the Building Permit was based.
   He or she shall likewise issue no Certificate of Occupancy for a change of
use or occupancy before issuing a Certificate of Compli-ance for the proposed
use or occupancy.
   The Commissioner shall either issue or deny a Certificate of Occupancy
within 30 days of application therefor.  He or she shall advise the applicant
in writing of the reasons for any denial.
   The Commissioner may issue a temporary Certificate for a period not to
exceed 6 months for occupancy or partial occupancy pending completion of
construction or alterations if he or she determines such issuance is consistent
with the safety of the occupants.
   A Certificate of Occupancy shall become void if the use for which it is
issued is not established within 60 days of the date of issuance thereof.
(c) Certificate of Compliance
The Building Commissioner shall issue no Building Permit, Certificate of
Occupancy, Sign Permit, or other permit or certificate for any use,
construction, or occupancy before a dated Certificate of Compliance has been
issued certifying that the plans, use, occupancy, and completed construction,
if any, for the property for which the Permit or Certificate is sought comply
with:
   (1) all applicable provisions of City development regulations in effect as
of the date of the Certificate of Compliance, except as otherwise permitted by
Variance or other relief approved hereunder, and
   (2) all conditions to which any Development Approval under Chapter 1310 was
made subject.
(d) Temporary Use Permit
The Building Commissioner may issue a Temporary Use Permit for a Temporary Use
as provided in division 1310.04(a).
(e) Conditional Use Permit
The Building Commissioner shall issue no Certificate of Compliance for any use
established as a Conditional Use in the regulations for the applicable zoning
district unless a Conditional Use Permit has been approved or conditionally
approved as provided in division 1310.03(b).
(f) Certificate of Appropriateness
The Building Commissioner shall issue no Certificate of Compliance for any
property in a the PO Preservation Overlay District until a Certificate of
Appropriateness  has been approved or conditionally approved.
(g) Sign Permit
No sign shall be displayed before the Building Commissioner has issued a Sign
Permit, except as otherwise provided in Chapter 1230.
(h) Curb Cut Permit
No driveway shall be permitted onto a public street before the City Engineer
has issued a Curb Cut Permit therefor.
(i) Development Permit
No development shall be undertaken within an Area of Special Flood Hazard
before the Building Commissioner has issued a Development Permit therefor.
(j) Highway Land Acquisitions
No permit authorized herein shall be issued in areas of potential state highway
land acquisition except in conformance with division 1320.02(f)(15).
1350.02 Financial Guarantees
(a) When Required
Financial guarantees shall be required:
   (1) for any improvements--whether  public or private, permanent or
temporary--required by Chapters 1210 through 1240 that have not been installed
or completed and accepted by the City or other applicable public body prior to
approval of a Final Plat or Final Site Plan, or
   (2) for any such improvements required in a site condominium or site
cooperative developpment not yet completed and accepted by the City or other
applicable public body prior to the issuance of any Building Permit therefor,
or
   (3) for any such improvement required on a lot in an existing subdivision
that has not been completed and accepted prior to issuance of a Building Permit
   (4) for any other guarantee of future performance required by this Code or
by a condition to which any approval has been made subject by the applicable
Final Action Body specified in Table 1320A that has not been completed and
accepted by the City prior to issuance of a Building Permit, Certificate of
Occupancy, Conditional Use Permit, or other applicable permit, certificate or
other City approval, or
   (5) as provided elsewhere in this Code.
No City permit or certificate for an action in connection with which a
guarantee is required shall be issued prior to submission of such guarantee to
the City or applicable public body.
(b) Form of Guarantee
   (1) Contract
   When a guarantee is required hereunder, the subdivider, builder, property
owner, business or other principal--all referred to herein as the developer--
shall enter into a contract with the City or other applicable public body.
   In this contract the developer shall:
      A. agree to perform or complete the performance of applicable regulations
or conditions within a time period specified, and
      B. grant the City or other applicable public body and its contractors the
right of entry onto the affected property for the purpose of achieving such
performance should the developer default thereupon, and
      C. warrant that any physical improvement guaranteed will be free of
defect upon completion and for one year from the date of its acceptance
hereunder.
   With such contract the developer shall file a financial guarantee of
performance.  Such guarantee shall be payable to the City and shall be approved
by the Director of Law as to form, sufficiency, manner of execution, and
surety.
   (2) Preferred Financial Guarantees
   A required guarantee may take the form of:
      A. a performance bond executed by a surety company authorized to do
business in Ohio
      B. an irrevocable bank letter of credit
      C. a certified or cashier's check
      D. a deposit of cash, a note, a bond, or other instrument readily
convertible to cash at face value in a trust account with a bank, trust
company, or qualified escrow agent approved by the Director of Law
      E. a certificate of deposit.
   (3) Other Financial Guarantees
   In lieu of the foregoing, the Director of Law may approve use of any of the
following:
      A. a placing in escrow with a qualified agent approved by the Director of
real or personal property of the developer that the Director determines based
on documentation provi-ded by the developer to:
         1. be free of liens and other encumbrances, and
         2. have an appraised value not less than the required amount of the
guarantee, and
         3. be unlikely to decline in value below the amount of the required
guarantee during the term thereof, and
         4. be potentially easy to sell, and
         5. not be pledged as security for any other purpose.
      B. liens, deed restrictions, or other recorded instruments guaranteeing
the work
      C. an improvement credit agreement providing for incremental bank
payments to the developer as performance is completed and accepted hereunder
      D. other guarantee he or she may approve.
   (c) Amount of Guarantee
   To allow for inflation, underestimation of
   costs, administrative expenses, or contingencies, a guarantee shall be in
the amount of 110 percent of the cost of all materials and labor required to
achieve such performance as has not yet been completed and accepted. 
   This amount shall be based on a cost estimate filed by the applicant and
approved by the City Engineer.  Such estimate shall include all obligations to
subcontractors.
   For improvements the cost of which is to be shared with the City or other
property owners, the amount of the guarantee shall be 110 percent of the
developer's share.
   (d) Term of Guarantee
   The term for which the guarantee is held or is valid shall be the time
period specified by City regulations or as a condition of approval plus a
warranty period of one year.
   (e) Timing of Submission
   A guarantee shall be filed not more than 6 months after Final Action
approval or condi-tional approval of the application to which it pertains.
   (f) Earnings on Guarantee Account
   The Finance Director shall deposit a guarantee provided in the form of a
cash equivalent in an interest-bearing account.
   All earnings from interest-earning guarantee instruments that are not needed
to complete the work if the developer defaults shall be paid to the developer
less any charges for the maintenance of the account.  Payment shall be made at
the time all guaranteed work has been accepted or completed by the City or
other applicable body.
   (g) Adjustment for Inflation
   Should an initial guarantee other than a replacement guarantee be submitted
2 years or more after City approval of the plans to which the guarantee
pertains, the amount thereof shall be increased based on a recognized
construction cost index approved by the City Engineer.
   (h) Duplicate Guarantees
   No agency of the City shall require a guarantee for work for which the
developer is also required to post a guarantee with another governmental
agency.
   (i) Acceptance of Work
   Acceptance of work guaranteed shall occur when the City Engineer notifies
the developer in writing that he or she has determined based on an inspection
by the Building Commissioner and/or other appropriate means that the work has
been completed:
      (1) within the applicable time period, and
      (2) in conformance with the approved plans, and
      (3) in compliance with all applicable City regulations, and
      (4) in compliance with any other lawful conditions of City approval, and
      (5) in the case of physical improvements, in a manner free from
construction or materials defects, and
      (6) with all debts to contractors, subcontractors, suppliers, and
employees related to the work having been discharged in full and all liens
having been removed
      (7) with no damage to existing improvements such as adjacent streets
caused by construction or other guaranteed performance, and
      (8) with full clean-up of construction debris, if applicable,
accomplished.
   The City Engineer shall accept or refuse to accept such work within 15 days
of a written request for acceptance from the developer accompanied by valid
lien waivers from suppliers, contractors, subcontractors, and others providing
labor or materials in connection with the guaranteed work. 
   He or she shall refuse to accept such work only on the basis of non-
compliance with the foregoing requirements.  Subject to division (n), the
financial guarantee or applicable portion thereof shall be released at the time
of acceptance.
   Acceptance hereunder shall not constitute waiver of the warranty provided in
division (b)(1)C nor of the guarantee thereof in division (n).
   Acceptance of improvements to be dedicated to the public shall be as
provided in 1240.09(a)(7).
   (j) Reduction After Partial Completion
   After any portion of the installation of improvements or other guaranteed
performance has been completed and accepted, the developer may substitute for
the current guarantee a replacement guarantee.  The replacement guarantee may
be of the same or different permitted form and shall be in the amount of 110
percent of a cost estimate approved by the City Engineer for the remaining
work.
   The replacement guarantee shall be subject to all provisions herein
applicable to the original guarantee.
   If the current guarantee was made in the form of a check, the developer may
instead request that the amount corresponding to the portion of work already
accepted be rebated.  The City shall comply with any such valid request.
   The City shall also reduce or partially rebate a guarantee if the Planning
Director determines during the term thereof that because of changed conditions
certain initially-required work is no longer necessary.
   In no case shall the guarantee after reduction be less than 15 percent of
the original amount.
   (k) Use of Guarantee in Default
   After written notice thereof to the developer, the City Engineer may use
such guarantee to contract for performance of any defaulted actions. 
   Defaulted actions shall be guaranteed performance either not completed and
accepted within the applicable time period or found after acceptance not to be
in compliance with applicable City regulations or conditions of approval.  The
guarantee may also be used for the City's administrative cost in arranging and
managing such contracts. 
   Subject to division (n), the Engineer shall return any funds not used for
these purposes within 15 days of approving the completed work after an
inspection thereof.
   The Engineer shall, if he or she finds the amount of the guarantee
inadequate to complete the defaulted work, notify the developer in writing that
he or she is required to:
      (1) complete such work within a time period specified in the notice, or
      (2) provide within a time period spe-cified in the notice a specified
additional sum of money required to allow the City or other applicable public
body to complete it.
   (l) Phasing
   Any phasing of the installation of improve-ments or other performance 
approved by the City shall be guaranteed.
   Phasing of installation of physical improvements shall be in a manner
generally propor-tionate to the number of dwelling units or amount of gross
non-residential floor area, as applicable, to be built in each phase together
with the phases that preceded it.
   (m) Time Extensions
   The City Engineer shall in writing approve a written request from the
developer for an ex-tension of time necessitated by causes beyond the
developer's reasonable control, such as labor strikes or acts of God.
   The Engineer may also approve any other written request for an extension if
he or she determines that the public interest would not be harmed thereby.
   (n) Maintenance Guarantees
      (1) Landscaping
      The entirety of a guarantee or portion thereof posted for the installa-
tion of street trees or other live landscaping shall be held by the City for
one year after acceptance to ensure that the installations survive.
      (2) Other
      For other physical improvements, 10 percent of the amount of the
guarantee therefor shall be held for one year after completion and acceptance
of the work guaranteed to assure maintenance and support the warran-ty of
division (b)(1)C.
      (3) Replacement Guarantee
      In lieu of retention by the City of part of the original guarantee, the
developer may submit a new guarantee in the same amount.
(o) Form of Bond
Bonds for financial guarantees shall take the form provided in Table 1320G.
1350.03 Enforcement
(a) Ticketable Violations
   (1) Purpose
   Because certain violations have less detrimental impact and can be corrected
easily and at modest expense, a special enforcement procedure is hereby
established for Ticketable Violations.
   (2) Types of Ticketable Violations
   The Building Commissioner shall establish a written list of violations of
this Code to be treated as Ticketable Violations.  Such list shall be available
for public inspection in his or her office.  Ticketable Violations shall be
considered as civil infractions rather than as criminal misdemeanors.
   (3) Issuance of Warning Ticket
   An inspector with the Building Department shall issue a Warning Ticket to
the violator if he or she determines that there exists any Ticketable Violation
as provided herein.  No fine or penalty shall be assessed by a Warning Ticket.
   (4) Issuance of Citation
   The Building Commissioner shall issue a Citation to the violator if he or
she determines that:
      A. the violator has not taken any of the actions specified herein in
response to the Warning Ticket, or
      B. the same violation by the party to whom the Warning Ticket was issued
has been the subject of a previous Citation or Notice of Violation.
   The Citation shall assess a fine in an amount established by City Council.
   Issuance of a Citation may be appealed under division 1310.03(c).
   (5) Conversion to Major Violation
   If in response to the issuance of a Citation the violator has not taken one
of the actions specified in division (c)(6), Actions of Violator, he or she
shall be guilty of a Major Violation and shall be subject to the enforcement
procedures therefor.
(b) Major Violations
   (1) Applicability
   A party shall be guilty of a Major Violation if it has:
      A. violated any provision of this Code, or any condition to which any
approval thereunder has been made subject, other than a Ticketable Violation as
provided in division (a)(2) of this section, or
      B. failed to take one of the actions specified in division (c)(6) in
response to the issuance of a Citation, or
      C. resumed or repeated a Ticketable Violation previously discontinued in
compliance with a Citation.
   (2) Notice of Violation
   If the Building Commissioner determines that a Major Violation exists, he or
she shall issue a Notice of Violation to the violator.
   (3) Legal Action
   If the violator has not taken one of the actions specified in division (c)
(6) of this Section, in response to the Notice of Violation, the Commissioner 
shall request the Director of Law to file an action in court to correct the
violation.
(c)   Penalty
   (1)   Class of Offense.
      Whoever violates any provision of this Code is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the
first offense, such person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on
each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense such person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (2)   Fine and Imprisonment.
      Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this Code
shall be imprisoned for a definite term of fined, or both, which term of
imprisonment and fine shall be fixed by the court as follows:
 
Classification of Misdemeanor Maximum Term of Imprisonment Maximum Fine
Minor                         None                         $100
Fourth Degree                 30 days                      $250
Third Degree                  60 days                      $500
 
 
1350.04 Review Bodies
(a) Review Bodies Established
The following bodies shall serve as Review Bodies in the administration of this
Code:
   (1) The City Planning Commission of the City of Barberton
   (2) The Board of Zoning and Building Appeals of the City of Barberton
   (3) The Design Review Board of the City of Barberton.
(b) General Authority
In addition to any other functions granted in this or other codes, the Review
Bodies designated in division (a) of this section shall have the power and
responsibility to discharge the functions specified in this division.
   (1) Meetings
   To conduct regular and special meetings that are in all cases publicly
announced in advance with the agenda thereof disclosed and are open to the
public.
   (2) Public Hearings
   To conduct public hearings as provided in Table 1320A in Chapter 1320,
Approval Procedures, at such dates and times as the Chair determines.
   (3) Action on Approvals
   To take Final Action or Advisory Action on approval, conditional approval,
or disapproval of applications for Development Approvals as provided in Table
1320A.
   (4) Ordinance Amendments
   To recommend to the Planning Commission or City Council amendments to City
regulations relating to procedures, standards, or Approval Criteria for
applications it reviews and implement such amendments only after Council
adoption thereof.
   (5) Advise Other Bodies
   To advise other boards, committees, or commissions involved in decisions on
development applications of any land use, design, or other plans, policies, or
standards that may relate to the responsibilities of such other bodies.
   (6) By-Laws
   To adopt by-laws or rules of procedure that are not inconsistent with this
or other applicable City codes and that are available for public inspection in
the office of its Administrative Officer.
   (7) Professional Assistance
   To recommend to the City Council the employment of such professional
planning, legal, design, engineering, administrative, or related staff or
consulting assistance as it deems necessary to fulfill its functions.
   (8)   Annual Report
   To file an Annual Report with the Mayor and City Council setting forth its
transactions and recommendations that is available for public inspection in the
office of the applicable Administrative Officer.
   (9)   Continuing Education
   To provide for all its members an opportunity for continuing education in
city planning, real estate development, land use control, historic
preservation, negotiation and conflict resolution, and other subjects related
to their responsibilities not less than once a year subject to budget made
available therefor by City Council.
   (10)   Other Functions
   To carry out any other function conferred upon it by the City Charter, any
other City code, or the Ohio Revised Code or referred or assigned to it by the
City Council.
(c)   Special Authority
   In addition to those granted in Table 1320A, the following Review Bodies
shall have the following special powers and responsibilities:
   (1)   Design Review Board
      A.   To conduct or assist in surveys of areas and properties of
historical, architectural, archaeological, cultural, or aesthetic interest as
it deems necessary and update them periodically
      B.   To initiate applications for classification of areas and properties
in the PO Preservation Overlay District, for discontinuance of such
classification, or for amendment of the boundaries of PO Districts
      C.   To maintain a current register of all areas and properties in
Preservation Overlay Districts with descriptions and photographs thereof and
summaries of the basis for designation
      D.   To develop and recommend for approval by City Council guideline for
evaluating applications for Certificates of Appropriateness as provided in
Section 1310.08
      E.   To hold public meetings no fewer than 4 times a year
      F.   To recommend properties in Barberton for nomination to the National
Register of Historic Places
      G.   To review all National register nominations
      H.   To recommend to the Planning Commission, City Council, and other
bodies or departments of the City other plans, regulations, guidelines, or
programs for the protection or enhancement of properties or areas of historic
or architectural significance in the City
      I.   To cooperate with county, regional, state, national, and private
historic preservation organizations
      J.   To promote the continuing education of City residents concerning
Barberton's historic and architectural heritage.
      K.   To recommend to the Mayor names of persons qualified to fill
vacancies on the Board
      L.   To fulfill all requirements of the Certified Local Government
Program of the Ohio Historic Preservation Office unless in conflict with the
provisions of City ordinances or unless directed otherwise by the City Council
      M.   To recommend to City Council the designation or revocation of
designation of Landmark Signs under division 1230.05(d)
      N.   To assist property owners in PO Preservation Overlay Districts in
finding creative solutions when conflicts arise between the City's need to grow
and change and its desire to preserve the best of its heritage from the past.
   (2)   City Planning Commission
   The City Planning Commission shall have the special powers and
responsibilities specified in Section 6.01 of the Barberton City Charter.
   (3)   Board of Zoning & Building Appeals
   The Board of Zoning and Building Appeals shall have the special powers and
responsibilities specified in Section 6.02 of the Barberton City Charter.
(d)   Membership
   (1)   Membership and Officers
   The membership, appointment, and officers of every Review Body shall be
established in Table 1350A.
   (2)   Eligibility for Membership
   In addition to those otherwise established by law, restrictions on
membership on Review Bodies are established as provided herein.
      A.   Design Review Board:
         1.   All members shall have demonstrated special interest in history,
architecture, city planning, or other fields related to the preservation of
historic properties.
         2.   No member may hold any other office in City government.
         3.   To the extent such people can be found in the City, at least two
members shall be appointed from the professions of architecture, architectural
history, history, archaeology, city planning, or related fields.
         4.   To the extent possible, no more than 3 members should reside
outside the City.
         5.   To the extent possible, the Board should include as members an
attorney, a building contractor, and an owner or manager of a business or an
investment property located in a PO District.
   (3)   Ex-Officio Members
      A.   Planning Commission
         Non-voting ex-officio members of the Planning Commission shall be:
         1.   the Mayor
         2.   the Planning Director
         3.   a member of the City Council selected annually from its committee
having responsibility for planning and zoning.
      B.   Board of Zoning & Building Appeals
         Non-voting ex-officio members of the Board of Zoning and Building
Appeals shall be:
         1.   the Building Commissioner
         2.   the Planning Director
         3.   a member of the City Council selected annually from its committee
having responsibility for planning and zoning.
   (4) Alternate Members
   The appointing authority specified in Table 1350A may appoint to each Review
Body for a term of up to one year no more than two alternate members in
addition to the number of members specified therein. 
   An alternate member may serve in lieu of a member who is absent or who
abstains from voting.  All other regulations herein applicable to members shall
apply to alternate members.
   (5) Compensation
   No regular or alternate member of any Review Body except the City Council
shall receive compensation for his or her service thereupon.
   (6) Secretary
   The Board of Zoning and Building Appeals shall appoint a secretary.  The
Planning Director or his or her designee shall serve as secretary to Design
Review Board.  The Vice Chair of the Planning Commission shall be Secretary
thereof.
   (7) Removal
   The appointing authority specified in Table 1350A shall have the power to
remove any member of any Review Body for cause.  The City Council may by a two-
thirds vote override a removal by the Mayor as provided in Section 6.06 of the
City Charter.
   (8) Vacancies
   The appointing authority specified in Table 1350A shall fill membership
positions that become vacant for the unexpired term.
   The appointing authority shall consider vacant any position filled by a
member who has failed to attend three consecutive meetings of the Review Body,
or 30 percent or more of all regular meetings thereof held during any calendar
year, except for absences excused by prior approval of the appointing
authority.  Vacancies shall be filled within 60 days except when special
circumstances require a longer period.
(e) Other Regulations
   (1) Meetings
   All meetings shall be held at the call of the Chair and at such other times
as the Review Body shall determine.  All meetings shall be open to the public
except when an executive session is authorized by law. 
   The Vice Chair shall serve as Acting Chair in the absence of the Chair.
   (2) Quorum
   No meeting of any Review Body shall be held in the absence of a quorum,
which shall be a majority of the full membership of the Body.  No official
action shall be taken by any Review Body except by affirmative vote of a
majority of the full membership of the Body.
   (3) Minutes
   The Secretary of the Review Body shall keep written minutes of the
proceedings of every meeting that disclose all actions taken and the reasons
for taking them.  The minutes shall show the vote, or absence or abstention, of
every member upon every official action.  They shall be a public record on file
in the office of the Secretary of the Review Body.
1350.05 Administrative Officers
(a) Building Commissioner
The Building Commissioner of the City of Barberton shall be charged with the
enforcement of this Code.  In discharging this responsibility, he or she or his
or her designee shall have the powers and responsibilities listed herein.
   (1) Permits
      A. To issue Building Permits, Certificates of Occupancy, Sign Permits,
and Temporary Use Permits
      B. To maintain records of applications filed for such permits and
certificates, permits and certificates issued and renewed, inspections made,
reports rendered, and notices and orders issued
   (2) Enforcement
      A. To conduct inspections of properties to determine compliance with this
Code
      B. To notify in writing any party believed to be responsible for
violating a provision of such Code and order action to correct the violation
      C. To notify the Director of Law concerning legal actions needed to
enforce this Code.
   (3) Development Approvals
      A. To receive and forward to each Review Body for which he or she is the
Administrative Officer under Table 1320A all applications and notices
reviewable by such body under Table 1320A
      B. To maintain records of applications filed, meetings and public
hearings held, and actions taken thereunder.
   (4) Other
      A. To request the assistance and cooperation of other City officials,
departments, boards, or commissions, or other agencies as necessary in the
discharge of his or her duties
      B.  To procure such engineering, planning, legal, or other assistance
from technical experts outside the City government as may be necessary to
discharge his or her duties and as is authorized by the City Council
(b) Planning Director
In discharging his or her responsibility under this Code, the Planning Director
or his or her designee shall have the powers and responsibilities listed
herein.
   (1) Permits
      A. To issue Certificates of Compliance, Conditional Use Permits, and
Certificates of Appropriateness
      B. To maintain records of applications filed for such permits and
certificates and permits and certificates issued and renewed
   (2) Development Approvals
      A. To receive and forward to each Review Body for which he or she is the
Administrative Officer under Table 1320A all applications and notices
reviewable by such body under Table 1320A
      B. To maintain records of applications filed, meetings and public
hearings held, and actions taken thereunder.
   (3) Other
      A. To prepare and cause to be pub-lished on or before December 31 of each
year a Zoning District Map as amended through the preceding September 15
      B. To request the assistance and cooperation of other City officials,
departments, boards, or commissions, or other agencies as necessary in the
discharge of his or her duties
      C. To procure such planning, design, legal, or other assistance from
experts outside the City government as may be necessary to discharge his or her
duties and as is authorized by the City Council.
Table 1350A: Membership and Officers of Review Bodies
                                                Members'                       
Officers'
      Number     Members      Term    Officers       Term
          of           Appointed      of      Appointed       of
      Members               by            Office       by          Office
BZBA       7 [d]      Mayor [b]    6     [c]        N/A
PC       5 [d]      Mayor [b]    4   Members [e]       1
DRB       7      Mayor [b]    3   Members       1
BZBA:      Board of Zoning and Building Appeals
PC:      Planning Commission
DRB:      Design Review Board
Mayor:      Appointment by the Mayor
Members:   Election by a majority of the membership of the body
Terms of office are in years.
[a]  Officers are the Chair and Vice Chair.  Officers may be removed at the
pleasure of the appointing authority.
[b]  With the advice and consent of the City Council.
[c]  Director of Public Service serves as Chair.
[d]  Number of members excludes ex-officio members specified in 1350.04(d)(3).
[e]  Except that the Vice Chair shall serve as Secretary.
Chapter 1360
Definitions
1360.01 Applicability
Except as specifically provided otherwise, the rules and definitions of this
chapter shall apply to all chapters of the Development Code.
Additional definitions the use of which is largely confined to the applicable
chapter are found in the locations specified below.
          Location of            Chapter Definitions
          Definitions          Apply Mainly to
   1230.08      Chapter 1230, Sign Regulations
   1260.06      Chapter 1260, Flood Plains
1360.02 Rules and Definitions
(a) Rules of Interpretation
The definitions in this chapter and all other provisions of this Code are
subject to the rules of interpretation herein.
   (1) Tense
   The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future tense
the present.
   (2) Singular and Plural
   The singular number includes the plural and vice-versa.
   (3) Mandatory and Permissive Language
   The word "shall" is mandatory.  The word "should" is advisory and not
mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive.
   (4) Gender
   The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
   (5) "Person"
   The term "person" shall refer to any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, or organization of any kind.
   (6) Average
   The term "average," when the type of average is unspecified, shall signify
the mean average.
   (7) Inclusive or Exemplary Terms
   The terms "including," "such as," and terms of equivalent meaning shall be
interpreted as applying without limitation.
   (8) Measured Quantities
   All measured quantities shall be to the near-est integral unit of measure. 
If a fraction is one-half or higher, the next highest integral unit shall be
used.
   (9) Headings and Graphics
   Section and division headings and graphic materials other than the Zoning
District Map are for the convenience of the Code user only.  They should not be
interpreted as conveying the regulations of this Code.  The provisions of this
Code are contained in the text and tables thereof.
   (10) Table Notations
   An "x" in a table signifies that the item applies in the specific case.  A
"--" in a table signifies that the item does not apply.  A "0" in a table
signifies a numerical value of zero.
   (11) Time Periods
   Time periods specified in days shall be construed as calendar days unless
specifically indicated as business days.
   (12) References to Officials
   Any reference to a City administrative official shall be interpreted as
referring to that official or his or her designee.
   (13) Responsibility for Compliance
   When a mandated action is specified herein without identification of the
party responsible for undertaking such action and such identification cannot be
reasonably inferred from the context, it shall be construed as being the
responsibility of the applicant, property owner, or developer, as applicable.
   (14) Sources of Definitions
   Any term not defined in this chapter shall be as defined elsewhere in this
Code. 
   Any term not defined in this Code shall be as defined elsewhere in the
Codified Ordinances.
   Any term not defined in the Codified Ordinances shall be as defined in
Black's Law Dictionary.
   Any term not defined in Black's Law Dictionary shall be as defined in
Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary.
(b) Definitions
Note: In order to group related definitions together for the convenience of the
user, definitions of two-word terms, such as "building height" are sometimes
listed under the second word.
(1a)   Adult Care Facility:
   A residential facility providing personal care services to adults (typically
elderly).  Such services may include assistance in daily living activities and
self-administration of medicine, and preparation of special diets.  There are
two (2) categories of adult care facilities licensed by the Ohio Department of
Health:
   a)   Small Adult Care Facility – An adult care facility providing
accommodations for three (3) to five (5) unrelated adults; and
   b)   Large Adult Care Facility – An adult care facility providing
accommodations for six (6) to sixteen (16) unrelated adults.
(1) Adult Use:
   a)   Any single commercial or recreational establishment from which minors
are excluded from admittance at least 10 percent of the time such establishment
is open by virtue of their age and of the presentation therein of
entertainment, goods, services, or activities, any of which is obscene or
harmful to juveniles as defined by divisions E and F of Section 2907.01 of the
Ohio Revised Code.
   Adult uses include book stores, video stores, motion picture theatres, mini-
motion picture theatres or arcades, drive-in theatres, hotels or motels,
massage parlors, modeling studios, and bathhouses that meet this definition as
well as theatres or eating and drinking places with entertainment that meets
this definition.  Each such use named herein shall be considered a separate
adult use even if located on the same premises and operated under the same
management as another such use, except that a second such use  shall be
considered an Accessory Use to the first if it is established on no more than
20 percent of the total floor area devoted to both uses.
   Uses such as massage parlors or bath houses that are operated by a licensed
medical practitioner, physical therapist, psychiatrist, psychologist, or
similar professional for the exclusive purpose of treatment or therapy are not
considered adult uses.
   b)   Adult use is also defined to include Chapter 836 of the Barberton
Codified Ordinances and all definitions established to define “Amusement
Devices, Skill-Based Amusement Machines, and Arcades.”
(2) Agriculture:
   The use of land for farming, dairying, pasturage, apiculture, horticulture,
floriculture, vitiiculture, animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary
Accessory Uses for packing, treating, and storing produce but not including the
commercial feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other animals.
(3) Airport:
   Any public or private land or other facility de-signed for the landing and
take-off of aircraft, including all taxiways, hangars, airport buildings, and
other related structures and open spaces.
(4) Alley:
   A narrow public right-of-way not constituting a street used primarily for
secondary motor vehicle access to property abutting a street.
(5) Alteration:
   Any construction, reconstruction, paving, repair, replacement, enlargement,
destruction, demolition, or moving of permanent structures or other permanent
improvements to real property, or major parts thereof, whether or not requiring
a Building Permit, Demolition Permit, or other City permit or certificate.
   Alterations include modifications to trees or landscaping; walls and fences;
permanent signs; accessory structures; permanent fixtures of  open parking,
loading, driveway, service, sales, or storage areas; and buildings and
significant architectural elements thereof such as doors, windows, light
fixtures, moldings, railings, and similar appurtenances.
(6) Animal Hospital:
   A building or portion thereof designed or used for the care, observation,
and medical treatment of domestic animals, as defined herein.
(7) Appeal:
   A petition to the Board of Zoning and Building Appeals to reverse or modify
an administrative action taken under this Code.
(8) Awning:
   A roof-like cover of any non-rigid material over a supporting frame, whether
illuminated or not, projecting from the exterior wall of a building and/or from
a free-standing support and that does not move or that moves only when
retracted.
(9) Basement:
   That portion of a building located partially un-derground but having less
than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the mean average  grade of
the adjoining ground.
(10) Bedroom:
   Any private room in a dwelling suitable for regular use for sleeping
purposes.  Bedrooms include rooms designated on floor plans as dens, studies,
or libraries but exclude living rooms, family rooms, dining rooms, kitchens,
bathrooms, laundry rooms, and mud rooms.
   Any room designated as other than a bedroom but that in the judgment of the
Building Com-missioner would normally be usable for sleeping purposes shall be
considered a bedroom.
(11) Berm:
   A raised landscaped mound of earth used for screening, noise reduction, or
beautification.
(12) Block:
   A tract of dry land bounded by streets or by a combination of one or more
streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, bulkhead lines or
shore lines of waterways, or corporate boundary lines.
(13) Block Face:
   The portion of a block that faces a single block boundary, normally a
street.  Block boundaries are as established in the definition of "block."
(14) Board of Zoning and Building Appeals:
   The Board of Zoning and Building Appeals of the City of Barberton, Ohio.
(15) Building:
   Any structure permanently affixed to the land and constructed or used for
the occupancy, en-closure, or storage of persons, animals, or property.
(16) Building, Accessory:
   A building that is or houses only an Accessory Use, as defined herein.
(17) Building, Completely Enclosed:
   A building separated on all sides from the adjacent open space or from other
buildings or structures by a permanent roof and either by exterior walls or
party walls having as openings only windows and normal entrance or exit doors.
(18) Building, Detached:
   A building surrounded by open space.
(19) Building Line:
   The straight line that separates all parts of a building from the open
spaces between the building and a lot line, as defined herein.
(20) Building, Principal:
   A building in which is conducted the Principal Use, as defined herein, of
the lot on which the building is located.
(21) Building Site:
   An area of land in a site condominium or site cooperative consisting of:
   1. the land occupied either by a single condominium unit or by the building
or unit that an individual coop shareholder has the exclusive right to use and
   2. the land area contiguous thereto that the condo owner or coop shareholder
also has the exclusive right to use.
(22) Building, Temporary:
   A building that is a Temporary Use, as defined herein.
(23) Canopy:
   A rigid roof-like structure that projects permanently and continuously from
the exterior wall of a building and/or from a free-standing support.
(24) Car Wash:
   A permanent facility devoted to the exterior washing of motor vehicles by
machine, by personnel of the facility, by the customer, or by any combination
thereof.
   Car washes do not include hand washing of vehicles on residential premises
by residents thereof nor temporary car washes organized for charitable fund-
raising or similar purposes.  A car wash may include facilities for waxing and
drying of motor vehicles, for vacuuming of vehicle interiors, and for sale of
merchandise related to motor vehicle cleaning or care.
(25) Cellar:
   That portion of a building located partially or wholly underground and
having half or more of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the mean average
grade of the adjoining ground.
(26) Certificate of Appropriateness:
   A certification by the City of design review approval required before
certain alterations can be made to properties located in the PRO Preservation
Overlay District.
(27) Certificate of Compliance:
   A certification by the Building Commissioner of conformity with all
applicable regulations of the Development Code.
(28) Certificate of Occupancy:
   A City certificate required under this and other codes prior to the
occupancy and use of a premises.
(29) City Council:
   The City Council of the City of Barberton, Ohio.
(30) City Planning Commission:
   The City Planning Commission of the City of Barberton, Ohio.
Please Note: To view the Certificate of Compliance Graphic, see page 1360-4 of
the printed version of the Barberton Development Code
(31) Clearance:
   The vertical distance to grade from the lowest edge of an object excluding
any pole, tree trunk, or other support structure attached to the ground.
(32) Clinic:
   A place where 2 or more physicians, dentists, or similar professionals
provide care, diagnosis, and treatment on an out-patient basis only of persons
needing medical, dental, or surgical attention.
(33) Club or Lodge, Private:
   The premises of a non-profit association of persons who are bonafide members
paying dues, the use of which is restricted to members  and their guests.
(34) Commencement of Construction:
   The placement of construction materials in per-manent position and fastened
in a permanent manner or the commencement of removal of structures prior
thereto.
(35) Comprehensive Plan:
   The current Comprehensive Plan for the physical development of the City of
Barberton adopted by the City Council.
(36) Condominium:
   Real property portions of which are or are to be in separate ownership and
the remainder of which is or is to be in the common ownership solely of the
owners of those portions.
(37) Cooperative:
   A corporation or trust holding title to real property, each shareholder of
which has the exclusive right to occupy a portion of such property under a
proprietary lease.
(38) County:
   The County of Summit or Wayne, Ohio, as applicable.
(39) Culvert:
   A transverse drain that channels under a bridge, street, or driveway.
(40) Curb Level:
   The height of the established street curb abutting a street line measured at
the midpoint of such line.  Where no curb has been established, the curb level
shall be considered to be the established level of the surface of the center
line of the street opposite the midpoint of the street line.  On lots abutting
more than one street line, the mean average of the measurements at the
midpoints of all street lines shall determine the curb level.
(41) Current Replacement Value:
   The cost of constructing real estate improvements that have the same utility
but are not necessarily exact duplicates of the improvements they replace. 
Such cost shall be based on cur-rent construction materials and  techniques,
shall exclude the value of land and building foundations, shall be as of the
date of commencement of construction, as defined herein, and shall be based on
figures approved by the Building Commissioner.
(42) Day Care Center, Adult:
   A facility that receives senior citizens during the day for supervised
social or recreational activities.
(43) Day Care Center, Child:
   A facility that receives 7 or more children at any one time for daytime care
and that provides per-sonal care, protection, supervision, training, and other
programs.  Child day care centers exclude:
   A. "Type B" day care homes, as defined by division 5104.01(e) of the Ohio
Revised Code
   B. Day care conducted as a home occupation in conformance with the
restrictions on home occupations herein
   C. Day care conducted as an Accessory Use in an office building, industrial
plant, or other employment center for the convenience of its employees or in a
shopping center for the convenience of its patrons
   D. Day care conducted as a Temporary Use in conformance with provisions on
Temporary Uses herein
   E. Kindergartens and other programs run by schools or churches
   F. Day care for children under 2 1/2 years of age.
(44) Develop:
   To engage in development, as defined herein.
(45) Developer:
   Any person that develops.
(46) Development:
   Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including
construction of buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
(47) Development Approval:
   Any action, such as a Variance or Conditional Use, requiring special review
and discretionary approval under Chapter 1310.
(48) District, Less Restrictive:
   A district that allows as Permitted and Conditional Uses, respectively, all
the same Use Groups as the subject district plus one or more additional Use
Groups.
(49) District, More Restrictive:
   A district that the subject district is a less restrictive district, as
defined herein, than.
(50) Districts, Business:
   All C Commercial, O Office, and I Industrial Districts.
(51) Districts, Commercial:
   All C Commercial Districts.
(52) Districts, Industrial:
   All I Industrial Districts.
(53) Districts, Non-Residential:
   All districts that are not Residential Districts, as defined herein.
(54) Districts, Office:
   All O Office Districts.
(55) Districts, Residential:
   All RS, RT, RA, and RM Districts.
(56) Districts, Single-Family Residential:
   All RS and RA Districts.
(57) Dog Run:
   An outdoor area enclosed on all sides by a fence for the exclusive purpose
of continuous or occasional confinement of one or more domestic animals, as
defined herein.
(58) Domestic Animal:
   A cat, dog, or other small animal of the types commonly maintained as
household pets.
(59) Drip Line:
   The perimeter formed by the points furthest away from the trunk of a tree
where precipitation falling from the branches of that tree lands on the ground.
(60) Drive-Through Establishment:
   An establishment other than a public use or public utility at which patrons
may be served in the open without leaving their motor vehicle and without
shutting off the engine thereof while being served, except establishments
specifically exempted herein.
   Any restaurant, bank, savings institution, dry cleaner, car wash, film
developing service, or other non-utility business establishment having  drive-
up or drive-through facilities shall be considered a drive-through
establishment.
   Drive-through establishments do not include drive-up public telephones or
mail deposit boxes, filling or service stations, drive-in theatres, or
facilities that qualify as Temporary Uses.
(61) Drive-Through Facilities:
The open portion of a drive-through establishment that accommodates drive-
through service.  Drive-through facilities include drive-through lanes, curb
cuts and driveways thereto, off-street stacking spaces,  menu boards, and
drive-through stations.  They do not include bypass lanes or off-street parking
areas or aisles related thereto.
(62) Drive-Through Station:
   A facility at a drive-through establishment designed for order-taking, cash
transactions, delivery of merchandise or services, or any other interchange or
communication between customers in motor vehicles and personnel or machines of
the establishment.  Drive-through stations include menu boards with speakers, 
other ordering or communications devices, payment windows, service or pick-up
windows, and drive-up automated teller machines.
(63) Driveway:
   A roadway located on a lot or parcel that provides motor vehicle access from
a public street, alley, or other driveway to a use, structure, or off-street
parking or loading area normally located on the same lot.
(64) Dwelling:
   A building or portion thereof used as a residence, including model homes but
excluding boarding or lodging houses, nursing homes, hotels and motels, tourist
homes, lofts, tents, and recreational vehicles.
Please Note: To view the Dwelling Types Graphic, see page 1360-6 of the printed
version of the Barberton Development Code
(65) Dwelling, Multi-Family:
   A building containing one or more dwelling units that is not a single-family
detached, single-family attached, two-family, or townhouse dwelling.  Upper-
story apartments in buildings also housing ground-floor non-residential uses
shall be considered multi-family dwellings.
(66) Dwelling, Single-Family:
   A single-family detached or single-family detached dwelling.
(67) Dwelling, Single-Family Attached:
   A dwelling unit that is attached by one or more party walls to one or more
other dwelling units each of which is located on a separate subdivided lot or,
in a site condominium or site cooperative, a separate building site.
(68) Dwelling, Single-Family Detached:
   A building or manufactured home housing only a single dwelling unit that is
separated from other buildings by open space.
(69) Dwelling, Townhouse:
   A dwelling unit that is attached by one or more party walls to one or more
other dwelling units on the same lot, that has an individual private ground-
level entrance to the outside, and no portion of which is located above any
other dwelling unit or any other premises or portion thereof.
(70) Dwelling, Two-Family:
   A single building or manufactured home consisting of only two dwelling units
and Accessory Uses thereto that is separated from other buildings by open
space.
(71) Dwelling Unit:
   Space within a building designed or used exclusively as regular living
quarters and Accessory Uses thereto for one family, not more than 2 household
employees, and not more than 2 boarders or roomers or permanent paying or non-
paying guests, and that includes cooking, bathing, and toilet facilities.
(72) Dwelling Unit, Senior Citizen:
   A dwelling unit regularly occupied by at least one person 62 years of age or
older.
(73) Easement:
   1. A grant of a property right to another party for a specific limited
purpose.
   2. The land area on which the easement was granted.
(74) Efficiency Unit:
   A dwelling unit consisting of just one principal room together with
bathroom, kitchen, hallways, closets, and/or dining alcove, and which does not
include a bedroom, as defined herein.
(75) Employee:
   Any person regularly working for a use fullor part-time on the premises of
that use, whether on the payroll or by contract, including owners and managers
working on the premises.
(75(b)) Entertainment Device Arcades:
   Any business, establishment, room, club (public or private) or place where 4
or more entertainment devices are kept for the use by the public or any owner/
operator, where persons give anything of value to access the use of the
entertainment devices or the premises, and the person may be given anything of
value by the operator, whether the giving occurs on or off of the premises or
at the same time or a later time.
   A)   Entertainment Device.  Any mechanical, electronic, video or digital
device that may be capable of accepting anything of value directly or
indirectly, from or on behalf of a person, for the purpose of playing a game,
viewing a video display, hearing an audio transmission or reading entries or
outcomes from any other kind of device.
   B)   Anything of Value.  Cash, cash equivalents, tangible objects, credits
to play, and any other tangibles, no matter how slight. Anything of value
includes playing a game, viewing a video display, hearing an audio
transmission, and reading entries or outcomes from any other kind of device. A
person who gives anything of value for a product or service, whether tangible
or intangible, in any way, directly or indirectly, in association with being
given access to the use of an entertainment device, is deemed to have given
value for the access to the entertainment device.
   C)   Operator.  Any person or organization that owns, controls, operates,
promotes or maintains or knowingly engages in conduct that facilitates the
operation of an entertainment device arcade or the entertainment devices in an
entertainment device arcade.
(76) Erect:
   To build, construct, locate, hang, attach, manually place, suspend, or
affix.
(77) Facade:
   The outside face of a building wall, including windows, doors, and parapets.
(78) Family:
   An individual or two (2) or more persons, each related to the other by
blood, marriage, or adoption, or foster children, and including not more than
three (3) additional persons not related as set forth above, who are all living
together as a single household unit in which members share common kitchen
facilities and have access to all parts of the dwelling.
(79) Far Side:
   The side of an intersection of a street with another street or an alley or
driveway that motor traffic on the same side of the street leaves the
intersection from.
(80) Fence:
   An artificially established barrier of any material(s) intended to enclose,
screen, separate, or decorate areas of land.  Fences include any walls
extending above ground level other than building walls; hedges or other densely
growing shrubbery; and earth berms that meet this definition.  Gates, doors,
and other openings are considered part of the fence.
(81) Fence, Open:
   A fence the surface area of every segment of which contains at least 75
percent open spaces and no more than 25 percent solid materials.
(82) Fence, Ornamental:
   1. A cast iron or wrought iron fence or ornamental aluminum or tubular steel
fence having the appearance of cast or wrought iron, or
   2. An earth berm completely covered with sod or other ground cover that
prevents erosion, or
   3. A hedge or other landscape fence, or
   4. A wood split rail fence, or
   5. Wood bollards and metal chains, or
   6. A wood picket fence, or
   7. A brick or stone fence or wall, or
   8. Any other fence of a decorative character approved by the Planning
Director as compatible with the character of the area in which the fence is to
be established.
(83) Fence, Recreation:
   An open fence, as defined herein, erected to enclose a playground,
playfield, swimming pool, tennis court, golf course, or the like located 
within school grounds or public or private park or recreation areas.
(84) Fence, Solid:
   Any fence that is not an open fence, as defined herein.
(85) Filling Station:
   A business devoted primarily to the retail dispensing of vehicular fuel into
motor vehicles and/or boats that may or may not provide incidental servicing,
as defined herein, to such vehicles but does not perform minor repairs or major
repairs, as also defined herein.
(86) Financial Institution:
   A bank, savings and loan association, savings bank, credit union, or
commercial loan office.
(87) Findings of Fact:
   Citations of specific facts about an application that the Approval Body
finds to be true and which led to its conclusion that the application conforms
or fails to conform to one or more applicable Approval Criteria.
(87A) Firearms, Dangerous Ordnances or Weapon Sales (Retail or Wholesale):
   “Firearm”means any deadly weapon capable of expelling or propelling one or
more projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible propellant.
“Firearm” includes an unloaded firearm, and any firearm that is inoperable but
that can readily be rendered operable.
   “Dangerous Ordnance” means any of the following:
      1) Any automatic or sawed-off firearm, zip-gun, or ballistic knife;
      2) Any explosive device or incendiary device;
      3) Nitroglycerin, nitrocellulose, nitrostarch, PETN, cyclonite, TNT,
picric acid, and other high explosives; amatol, tritonal, tetrytol, pentolite,
pecretol, cyclotol, and ohter high explosive compositions; plastic explosives;
dynamite, blasting gelatin, gelatin dynamite, sensitized ammonium nitrate,
liquid-oxygen blasting explosives, blasting powder, and other blasting agents;
and any other explosive substance having sufficient brisance or power to be
particularly suitable for use as a military explosive, or for use in mining,
quarrying, excavating, or demolitions;
      4) Any firearm, rocket launcher, mortar, artillery piece, grenade, mine,
bomb, torpedo, or similar weapon, designed and manufactured for military
purposes, and the ammunition for that weapon;
      5) Any firearm muffler or silencer;
      6) Any combination of parts that is intended by the owner for use in
converting any firearm or other device into a dangerous ordnance.
   “Weapon” means any instrument, device, or thing capable of inflicting death,
and designed or specially adapted for use as a weapon, or possessed, carried,
or used as a weapon.
   No person shall sell firearms, dangerous ordnances, or weapons within 1,000
feet of any school.
(88) Floor Area, Gross:
   A measure of floor area used to calculate Floor Area Ratio.
   Gross floor area is the sum of the gross horizontal area of space contained
on all floors measured in square feet from the exterior faces of the exterior 
walls of each building on a lot, or from the center lines of party walls
separating two buildings.
   It includes floor area in cellars, basements, attics, and accessory
buildings but excludes:
   A. areas devoted to off-street parking or offstreet loading, including
aisles, ramps, and maneuvering space
   B. attic or half-story space having headroom of 7.5 feet or less
   C. exterior balconies
   D. space on the roof used for mechanical equipment
   E. space occupied by atriums except where there is floor space beneath or
projecting into the atrium.
Please Note: To view the Floor Area Ratio Graphic, see page 1360-8 of the
printed version of the Barberton Development Code
(89) Floor Area, Net:
   A measure of floor area used for purposes of calculating off-street parking
and off-street loading requirements.
   Net floor area is the sum of the gross horizontal area of space contained on
all floors measured in square feet from the exterior faces of the exterior 
walls of each building on a lot, or from the center line of party walls
separating two buildings.
   It includes floor area in cellars, basements, attics, and accessory
buildings but excludes:
   1. areas devoted to off-street parking or off-street loading, including
aisles, ramps, and maneuvering space
   2. areas devoted primarily to storage and not located within selling or
working spaces, except for facilities such as warehouses where the principal
use is storage
   3. basement or cellar areas not devoted to retailing activities, offices, or
production or processing of goods
   4. elevator shafts, stairs, and stairwells
   5. maintenance shafts and rooms
   6. washrooms
   7. display windows
   8. fitting rooms
   9. indoor atriums, pedestrian malls, or other open space areas.
(90) Floor Area Ratio:
   The gross floor area, as defined herein, in square feet of all buildings on
a lot divided by the area of the lot in square feet.
(91) Frontage:
   The length of any street line.  Also called street frontage or lot frontage.
(92) Frontage, Building:
   The linear length of:
   1. the wall of a building that contains the principal entrance to the
building, excluding canopies and roof overhang and non-bearing decorative
walls, or 
   2. an individual unit of a multi-unit building such as a shopping center
measured between the party wall center lines. 
   If the principal building entrance is at a building corner, the length of
the longer adjacent wall shall be considered the building frontage.
(93) Game Room:
   Any premises where there are available to the public more than 4 coin-
operated amusement devices, excluding musical devices and vending machines that
do not incorporate gaming or amusement features.
(94) Grade:
   The mean average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the
exterior wall of the building on a lot that is closest to the front lot line,
where such wall is more than 5 feet from such lot line.  For buildings closer
than 5 feet to a front lot line, the grade is the sidewalk elevation at the
center of the front lot line.  In the latter case, where there is no sidewalk,
or in the case of a through lot, the grade shall be established by the Building
Commissioner.
(95) Group Home:
   A residential facility licensed by the Ohio Department of Mental Health, the
Ohio Department of Developmental Disabilities, or some other state agency or
department, that provides room board, personal care, supervision, and
habilitation, rehabilitation, or mental health services, to one (1) or more
handicapped persons.  (See definition of "Handicapped").  There are two (2)
size categories of group homes:
   a)   Small Group Home – A residential facility that provides the services
listed above for eight (8) or fewer handicapped persons, as defined herein.
   b)   Larger Group Home – A residential facility that provides the services
listed above nine (9) to sixteen (16) handicapped persons, as defined herein.
   The definition of Group Home does not include housing to be occupied by two
or more related or unrelated persons who have been convicted as sexual
predators or sexual offenders, as defined by the Ohio Revised Code.
(96) Guarantee:
   To assure the future provision or installation of by means of a financial
surety in compliance with this Code.
(97) Half Street:
   A street in which only part of the ultimate right-of-way has been dedicated.
(97A) Handicapped:
   With respect to a person; a physical or mental impairment that substantially
limits one or more of such person’s major life activities, or record of having
such an impairment, or being regarded as having such impairment.  Handicapped
shall not include current, illegla use of, or addiction to, a controlled
substance; nor shall it include any person whose residency in the dwelling
would constitute a direct threat to the health and safety of other individuals.
(98) Health Club:
   Any establishment providing physical culture or similar health services,
including gymnasiums, fitness centers, racquetball or tennis clubs, reducing
salons, tanning salons, or massage salons.
(99) Hedge:
   Vegetation--including trees, shrubs, or other natural vegetation--that is
planted in close proximity or clustered together and that has a surface area
that obstructs the view.
(100) Height, Building:
   The vertical distance measured from the mean average elevation of the
finished grade within
   20 feet of the front building line of a principal or accessory building to:
   A. the highest point of the roof of a flat roof, or
   B. the deck line of a mansard roof, or
   C. a height level halfway between those of the eaves and of the ridge of a
gable, hip, or gambrel roof, or
   D. a specified height on the building, as in "a building height level of 35
feet."
   Chimneys, spires, towers, elevator penthouses, tanks, and similar
projections shall not be included in calculating building height.
Please Note: To view the Building Height Graphic, see page 1360-10 of the
printed version of the Barberton Development Code
(101) Height, Fence:
   The height of a fence, antenna, screening, or other applicable object
measured vertically when positioned for normal use between:
   1. the lowest grade level on the same lot (or lowest roof level for roof-
mounted objects or lowest portion of the support structure for objects mounted
as building projections) within 3 feet of any side of the object or its support
structure and
   2. the highest point of the fence or object or part thereof excluding fence
posts, gates, and incidental decorative embellishments, which may extend not
more than 6 inches above allowable fence height.
Please Note: To view the Fence Height Graphic, see page 1360-10 of the printed
version of the Barberton Development Code
(102) Home Center:
   A premises selling hardware and a full line of building materials retail.
(103) Home Occupation:
   A gainful pursuit conducted by one or more residents of a dwelling unit as
an Accessory Use to such dwelling on the premises thereof.
(104) Hospital:
   An establishment that provides accommodations, facilities, and services over
a continuous period of 24 hours or more for observation, diagnosis, and care,
of 2 or more individuals not related to or part of the same family as the
operator, who are suffering from illness, injury, deformity, or abnormality or
from any condition requiring obstetrical, medical, or surgical services.
(105) Hotel or Motel:
   A building containing lodging rooms or suites, each of which has an
individual adjoining bathroom, where more than 50 percent of the rooms are for
rent to transient guests for a continuous period of less than 30 days.
(106) Hotel, Apartment:
   An establishment having the character of a hotel or motel but in which at
least 50 percent of the accommodations are for occupancy by guests staying 30
consecutive days or more.
(107) HUD Code:
   The National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of
1974 (42 U.S.C. 5401-26), as amended.
(108) Incidental Servicing:
   Servicing, repair, or addition or replacement of parts on motor vehicles,
trailers, and boats that can normally be done without major machinery, without
leaving the vehicle on the premises for extended periods, and without
significant disassembling of the vehicle or parts thereof.
   Incidental servicing includes inflation of tires; cleaning of windows;
checking of the level of and additions to oil, antifreeze, water, and power
steering, brake, automatic transmission, and similar fluids; replacement of
readily accessible items such as wipers, fuses, fan belts, batteries, light
bulbs, spark plugs, ignition points, and fuel, oil, and air filters; removal of
a tire or wheel without power or pneumatic tools; hand washing, waxing, and
polishing of no more than one vehicle at a time with no separate structure
therefor; and similar services for such vehicles.
(109) Institution, Educational:
   A public or private school, college, university, seminary, museum, library,
or similar establishment devoted to educational or cultural purposes.
(110) Institution, Philanthropic:
   An office or meeting hall used exclusively by a non-profit public service
organization.
(111) Institution, Recreational:
   A public or private non-profit facility for group recreation or social
activity, including private clubs or lodges, recreation buildings, and
community centers.
(112) Institution, Religious:
   A church, synagogue, temple, mosque, convent, monastery, or other premises
devoted to religious activities and customary accessory uses.
(112A) Internet Café: 
   A place where internet access, most for a fee, usually per hour or minute;
sometimes unmetered access with a pass for a day, month or year. It may serve
as a restaurant as well.
(113) Junk Yard:
   An open area other than a recycling center, recycling collection point, flea
market, yard sale, street vending area, or lawful Accessory Use to a dwelling
where quantities of waste or used or salvage materials are bought, sold,
exchanged, baled, packaged, disassembled, or handled, or stored for over 30
consecutive days, including scrap iron and other metals, building materials,
bottles, paper, rags, and rubber tires.  Uses carried on entirely within
completely enclosed buildings are not considered junk yards.
(114) Kennel:
   Any lot or premises on which 4 or more domestic animals, as defined herein,
are bred, groomed, boarded, sheltered, trained, offered for adoption, or sold
for commercial or humane purposes, including animal shelters.
(115) Land Lease Development:
   A development in which the property on which a Principal Use structure is
sited is not owned by the owner of the structure but are leased from the owner
of the land.
(115A) Limited Indoor Storage Facility:
   A building consisting of individual, indoor, self- contained spaces that are
leased or owned for the storage of business goods, household goods, or
contractor supplies.  The building can have a maximum of 16 units; each unit
can have a maximum density of 10 feet by 10 feet.
(115B)   Limited Outdoor Storage, Special:
   Special limited outdoor storage uses are uses that may be compatible in
certain districts under appropriate conditions which can only be evaluated in
the context of a site-specific proposal, by Planning Commission, as an
accessory use to a permitted use.
   Limited Outdoor Storage, Special, may be defined as storage outside, for
more than 24 consecutive hours, other than as a Temporary Use as regulated by
division 1310.04(a)—of any goods or other materials other than parked motor
vehicles, trailers or recreational vehicles used by the occupants of the
premises or their visitors, customers, suppliers or contractors.
   Special limited outdoor storage items shall not exceed 6' in height, shall
only be permitted on lots 10,000 square feet or greater, the storage area shall
not exceed more than 25% of the lot, bulk items shall be contained on three (3)
sides, and all equipment and material storage shall receive maximum screening
per Table 1220C. Special limited outdoor storage items are not intended for
retail sales; they are intended to be utilized in the operation of the
business.
   Junkyards, wrecking yards, refuse, as defined herein, are not permitted in
special limited outdoor storage areas. No explosive, flammable liquids,
combustible materials, hazardous materials, or substances producing hazardous
or noxious emissions shall be stored outside. Design criteria for all site run
off, including material storage, is governed by the Barberton Comprehensive
Storm Water Management Plan, Ordinance 172-2008 or as amended.
(Ord. 43-2013.  Passed 3-25-13.)
(116) Loading Space, Off-Street:
   An off-street space or berth for the loading or unloading of motor vehicle
freight carriers.
(117) Lodging Room:
   A room or suite other than a dwelling unit rented for use by a single
individual, family, or group as sleeping or living quarters.
(118) Loft:
   A building or portion thereof serving both as:
   A. a place of residence for a single family, as defined herein, and 
   B. a premises for the gainful pursuit, other than as a home occupation, of
an art, craft, profession, or other occupation or business by one or more
members of that family.
   Lofts may be permitted hereunder where dwellings are not permitted and are
not granted the protection from the effects of non-residential activities
afforded under this Code to dwellings.  Lofts are not considered to be
"dwellings" for purposes of this Code.
Please Note: To view the Lot Graphic, see page 1360-11 of the printed version
of the Barberton Development Code
(119) Lot:
   A division of land under the same ownership or control (whether or not
subdivided as one or more contiguous parcels or parts of parcels) located
within a single block, normally occupied or suitable for occupancy by one
principal building, and fronting on an existing or dedicated street.
(120) Lot Area:
   The area within the lot lines of a lot.
(121) Lot, Corner:
   A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets, or a lot located
at the point where the alignment of a single street curves or changes; provided
that an interior angle of not more than 135 degrees is created by the rightof-
way lines of the abutting street or streets or, in the case of a curving right-
of-way, by straight lines projected tangent to the curve from the points of
intersection between the curve and the lot lines.
(122) Lot Coverage:
   The percentage of a lot covered by principal and accessory structures,
either at ground level or at higher levels.  Where a particular height level is
specified, coverage standards shall apply only at that height level.  Where a
height level is not specified, lot coverage standards shall be deemed to apply
at all height levels.
Please Note: To view the Types of Lots Graphic, see page 1360-12 of the printed
version of the Barberton Development Code
(123) Lot Depth:
   The mean average of the lengths of the side lot lines of a lot.
(124) Lot, Double-Frontage:
   A through lot fronting on only two streets.
(125) Lot, Flag:
   A lot located largely behind a lot with street frontage that has access to
the street only by a narrow access corridor.
(126) Lot Frontage:
   The length of any street line abutting a lot.
(127) Lot, Interior:
   A lot that is not a corner lot.
(128) Lot Line:
   The boundary defining a lot, as defined herein.
(129) Lot Line, Corner Side:
   Any street line that is not a front lot line.
(130) Lot Line, Front:
   A. The only street line bordering a lot, or
   B. if the lot is a through lot, the street line determined under division
1140.02(c), or
   C. if the lot is a corner lot:
      1. the shortest street line, or
      2. if more than one street line is the shortest:
         a. the lot line designated as the front lot line on a plat of
dedication or subdivision, or
         b. otherwise, the lot line designated as the front lot line by the
Building Commissioner, or
   D. if the lot is fully or partially land-locked, such as a flag lot, the lot
line that faces the street from which there is access to the lot.
(131) Lot Line, Interior Side:
   A side lot line that is not a corner side lot line.
Please Note: To view the Rear Lot Line Graphic, see page 1360-12 of the printed
version of the Barberton Development Code
(132) Lot Line, Rear:
   That line which is most distant from and is parallel to the front lot line
or a line tangent to a curving front lot line at its midpoint.  If the rear lot
line is less than 10 feet in length, or if the lot forms a point at the rear,
the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line 10 feet in length within the
lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from such front lot line or line
tangent thereto.
(133) Lot Line, Side:
   Any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line.
(134) Lot of Record:
   A lot that is part of a subdivision plat recorded with the Wayne or Summit
County Recorder, or a parcel of land the deed to which was so recorded, prior
to the effective date of the applicable City regulation or amendment.
(135) Lot of Record, Nonconforming:
   A lot of record that has a Nonconformity and that would not create a
conforming lot if taken together with all other lots in the same ownership
having continuous frontage.  Non-conforming lots shall not include any lot that
has a Nonconformity that results from, or has been increased by, the
subdivision into separate lots of--or conveyance or lease of a portion of--
a conforming lot that occurred after the effective date of the applicable City
regulation or any applicable amendment thereto.
(136) Lot, Reversed Corner:
   A corner lot that is a reversed frontage lot.
Please Note: To view the Lot Width Graphic, see page 1360-13 of the printed
version of the Barberton Development Code
(137) Lot, Reversed Frontage:
   A lot with a front lot line at right angles or approximately right angles to
the general pattern of front lot lines in the block.
(138) Lot, Through:
   An interior lot fronting on more than one street.
(139) Lot Width:
   The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured at the applicable
required front yard line.
(140) Major Repair:
   Repair of motor vehicles, trailers, and boats that normally takes
considerable time, necessitates leaving the vehicle overnight, requires major
equipment, or generates significant noise or other adverse environmental
effects.
   Major repair includes replacement or repair of fenders or other body parts,
upholstery, convertible tops, window glass, differentials, axles, and springs;
auto spray painting; undercoating or rustproofing; frame and chassis repair or
straightening; rebuilding of clutches and transmissions; rebuilding or
replacement of engines; recapping or regrooving of tires; radiator repairs
requiring removal thereof; engine repair requiring removal of the cylinder head
or crankcase pan; van conversion or camper installation; any minor repair, as
defined herein, on a vehicle exceeding 8,000 pounds curb weight; and similar
services.
   A premises for vehicle dismantling, wrecking, or parting out is considered a
wrecking yard.
(141) Manufactured Home:
   A factory-produced dwelling, sometimes called a "mobile" or "sectional"
home, designed and used exclusively for long-term residential occupancy that is
built on a permanent chassis, is transportable in one or more sections, and is
ready for occupancy at the building site except for minor and incidental
unpacking, assembly, and connection operations.
   This term shall not include units using prefabbricated subelements requiring
major on-site combination or installation that do not otherwise meet the
requirements of this definition, such as "modular," "component," "panelized,"
or "prefabricated" dwellings.
(142) Manufactured Home, HUD Code:
   A manufactured home fabricated after June 14, 1976, and certified by the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development as conforming to the HUD Code,
as defined herein.
(143) Manufactured Home Park:
   Any lot or tract of land other than a subdivision, site condominium, site
cooperative, or manufactured home sales or storage lot upon which 3 or more
manufactured homes are located.
(144) Mayor:
   The Mayor of the City of Barberton, Ohio.
(145) Mental Health Center:
   Any institution providing inpatient or outpatient care or therapy for the
mentally ill, developmentally disabled, alcoholics, abusers of controlled
substances, or others needing psychological therapy but which does not serve as
a residence for such individuals.
(146) Mental Health Center, Community:
   A mental health center providing outpatient services only.
(147) Minor Repair:
   Any repair, servicing, or addition, replacement, or modification of parts on
motor vehicles, trailers, and boats that is not either incidental servicing, as
defined herein, or major repair, as also defined herein.
   Minor repair includes oil changes; lubrication; engine tune-ups; battery
charging; radiator flushing or draining; wheel alignment; fuel and oil pump and
line repairs; exhaust system repair and replacement; shock absorber and strut
repair and replacement; brake work; minor repair of fuel injectors and
carburetors; vehicle washing, waxing, and polishing not considered as
incidental servicing; any service involving tire or wheel mounting or removal
except spare tires and services considered as incidental servicing; and similar
services.
(148) Monument:
   A permanent iron, stone, or concrete marker used to establish for reference
in land survey all lines of the plat of a subdivision, including boundary
lines, corners of property, and points of change in street alignment.
(149) Mortuary:
   An undertaking establishment or funeral parlor which may include a single
residence as an Accessory Use.
(150) Motor Freight Terminal:
   A building or premises the principal use of which is the receipt and/or
dispatching of freight for forwarding or trans-shipment by motor vehicle.
(151) Motor Vehicle:
   Any self-propelled wheeled vehicle designed primarily for transportation of
persons or goods on public streets. Motor vehicles include automobiles, buses,
trucks, motorcycles, self-propelled recreational vehicles (as defined herein),
and the semi-tractor portions of tractor- trailers.
(152) Motor Vehicle Body Shop:
   A business establishment where there is conducted wholly within a fully
enclosed building collision service such as body, frame, or fender
straightening or repair; painting of more than 10 percent of the surface of a
motor vehicle; or upholstering.
(153) Motor Vehicle Repair Shop:
   Any business that engages in major repair, as defined herein, of motor
vehicles, whether or not it also dispenses fuel.
   A premises for the repair of motor-propelled vehicles not considered as
motor vehicles hereunder--such as boats, lawn mowers, or golf carts--shall be
considered as a repair facility.
(154) Motor Vehicle Sales Use:
   A premises used for the display, sale or lease of five (5) or more new or
used motor vehicles (as defined herein) in a twelve-month period.
(155) Motor Vehicle Servicing Shop:
   A business that engages in incidental servicing, as defined herein, and/or
minor repair, as also defined herein, of motor vehicles but does not dispense
fuel or engage in major repair, as defined herein.
   Motor vehicle servicing shops include quick-lube shops, oil change
establishments, tune-up centers, and stores that install or provide facilities
for the installation of tires, mufflers, brakes, struts, or shock absorbers. 
Auto parts stores are considered motor vehicle servicing shops if they either
install or provide space for customers to install such parts.  Tire stores,
tune-up centers, and the like that also engage in major repair are considered
motor vehicle repair shops.
(156) Near Side:
   The side(s) of an intersection of a street with another street, alley, or
driveway that motor traffic on the same side of the street approaches the
intersection from.
(157) Night Club:
   Any tavern or restaurant offering live entertainment or dancing.
(158) Nonconformity:
   Any characteristic of a use, building, structure, sign, or lot that was
lawful under regulations in effect immediately prior to the effective date of
the applicable current City regulation or of any applicable amendment thereto
but that does not conform to all requirements of such current regulation or
amendment.  A Nonconformity is considered lawful and not a violation, subject
to the provisions of Chapter 1340.
(159) Nonconformity, Standards:
   Any Nonconformity other than a Use Nonconformity.  Standards Nonconformities
typically involve failure to conform to quantitative development standards such
as for lot dimensions, sign height, off-street parking, Floor Area Ratio, or
landscaping.
(160) Nonconformity, Use:
   A Nonconformity consisting of an activity or function carried on at a
premises that is not allowed by the Permitted, Conditional, or Accessory Uses
applicable to the current zoning district classification of the premises.
Temporary Uses in conformance with regulations applicable thereto shall not be
considered Use Nonconformities.
Please Note: To view the Near Side Graphic, see page 1360-15 of the printed
version of the Barberton Development Code
(161) Nursing Home:
   A facility other than a hospital that provides lodging and long-term nursing
or convalescent care to three or more persons who are aged, convalescing, or
chronically but not acutely ill, and are not related, as defined herein, to or
members of the same family as, the operator.
(162) Obstruction:
   Any building, structure, object, or part thereof located in the way of any
yard or open space required by City regulations, excluding landscaping.
(163) Occupancy, Change of:
   The moving into a premises of a new occupant.  A change in the name of an
existing occupant or a change in a franchise held by or product(s) sold by an
existing business occupant shall not be construed as a change in occupancy.
(164) Official Map:
   A map adopted by the City under authority of Chapter 735 of the Ohio Revised
Code designating certain areas that are to be reserved, as defined herein.
(165) Opacity:
   The percentage of vision-obscuring solid materials visible when an object or
surface is viewed horizontally between grade level---or between the level  of
the roof at the base of the object in the case of a roof-mounted object---and
the top of the object.  Opacity shall be considered that existing upon
installation or, in the case of living landscape screening required herein,
starting no later than 12 months after installation.
(166) Open Sales Lot:
   Open land that is used or occupied primarily for the purpose of displaying
aircraft, boats, lawn tractors, trailers, semi-trailers, go- kart vehicles,
motorized golf cars, self-propelled farm and construction implements,
commercial trailers, train and train cars, manufactured homes, non-self-
propelled recreational vehicles (as defined herein), recreational vehicles,
cemetery monuments, nursery plants or supplies, or other merchandise available
for sale, lease, exchange, or other distribution.  EXCLUDED - Items sold
incidentally by a permitted use of the district for not more than seven
consecutive days and not having more than five or more items for sale, lease,
exchange or other distribution in a 12 month period.
(167) Open Space:
   Uncovered area open to the sky on the same lot with a building.
(168) Open Space, Common:
   Land in a development that is not covered by buildings or by vehicular
areas, as defined herein, that is permanently set aside in public or private
ownership for the common recreational use or aesthetic enjoyment of the
occupants of the development or of the community at large.
   Common open space may include parks, playgrounds, and totlots; nature
preserves; outdoor recreation areas; trails, walkways, and bikeways; landscaped
street medians; landscaped green space; water bodies or water courses; and dry
and wet stormwater retention or detention areas.  Common open space shall not
include private yard areas.
(169) Outdoor Cafe:
   A restaurant, tavern, or night club all or part of a seating area of which
is located on a regular basis in the open, either on a public sidewalk,
abutting a public sidewalk, on a balcony or terrace, or in any other outdoor
location.
(169A) Outdoor Furnace:
   An accessory structure or use, designed and intended, through the burning of
wood or other solid fuel source, for the purpose of heating and/or providing
utility, to the principal residential structure, the site, or any other
building or structure on the premises.
(170) Outdoor Storage:
   The keeping outside of a completely enclosed structure, as defined herein,
for more than 24 consecutive hours--other than as a Temporary Use as regulated
by division 1310.04(a)--of any goods or other materials other than parked motor
vehicles, trailers, or recreational vehicles used by the occupants of the
premises or their visitors, customers, suppliers, or contractors.  Some outdoor
storage areas may be considered junk yards or wrecking yards, both as defined
herein.
(171) Outlot:
   The property shown on a subdivision plat located outside the boundaries of
the land to be developed.
(172) Parapet:
   That portion of a wall that extends above the level of the roof where it
meets the wall.
(173) Parapet Line:
   A horizontal line along the top edge or highest point of a parapet.
(174) Parking Area, Attended:
   An off-street parking facility with at least one employee on the premises
when the facility is open for purposes of fee collection and/or valet parking.
(175) Parking Space Depth:
   The longer of the two dimensions of a rectangular parking space.  In the
case of a space that is not rectangular, the depth shall be the length of the
largest imaginary rectangle that can fit within the space.
(176) Parking Space, Off-Street:
   An area outside of any public street or alley right-of-way suitable for
parking a motor vehicle.  A parking space may be for either free or paid
parking.
Please Note: To view the Parking Space Dimensions Graphic, see page 1360-16 of
the printed version of the Barberton Development Code
(177) Parking Space, Reserved:
   A space restricted to use by one or more particular individuals, occupants,
or organizations other than spaces reserved for the handicapped, valet parking,
or for drivers of high-occupancy car pool vehicles or small cars.
(178) Parking Space, Tandem:
   A parking space that a motor vehicle of the type the space is intended to
accommodate cannot enter from outside the lot except by crossing another
parking space.  Sometimes called a stacked parking space.
(179) Parking Space Width:
   The shorter of the two dimensions of a rectangular parking space. In the
case of a space that is not rectangular, the width shall be the width of the
largest imaginary rectangle that can fit within the space.
(180) Parking, Valet:
   Off-street parking in which attendants in the employ of the parking facility
either park or direct the parking of all vehicles.
(181) Peak Hours:
   AM peak hours and PM peak hours, as defined herein.
(182) Peak Hours, AM:
   The hours between 7 AM and 9 AM, Monday through Friday.
(183) Peak Hours, PM:
   The hours between 5 PM and 6:30 PM, Monday through Friday.
(184) Pedestrian Area:
   A sidewalk, pedestrian way, plaza, or other open area designed or used as a
place for pedestrians to circulate or congregate.
(185) Pedestrian Way:
   A non-vehicular right-of-way for the primary use of pedestrians, such as
might be provided through an open space area or in the middle of a long block.
(186) Penthouse:
   A structure attached to the top of a building used to cover the building's
mechanical equipment, such as HVAC equipment, elevator equipment, or auxiliary
water storage.
(187) Permit, Building:
   A permit required under the Building Code before most kinds of building
construction may be started.
(188) Permit, Conditional Use:
   A permit required for the use of any land, water area, building, structure,
air rights, or other premises as a Conditional Use.
(189) Permit, Demolition:
   A City permit required before certain structures may be demolished.
(190) Permit, Sign:
   A City permit required prior to the display of many types of signs.
(191) Permit, Temporary Use:
   A City permit allowing for a limited duration a use not allowed as a
permanent use by the use regulations of the applicable zoning district.
(192) Planned Unit Development:
   A tract of land that is or will be developed as an integral unit based on a
plan that allows for more flexible regulatory development standards than would
normally apply in order to provide a higher quality of planning and amenity
than would otherwise be possible.
(193) Plat:
   A complete and exact map representation of a subdivision of land.
(194) Plat, Final:
   The complete and exact plat of a subdivision that is given final approval by
the City and is recorded with the County.
(195) Plat of Survey, Current:
   A plat prepared by a licensed surveyor showing, as they exist as of the date
of filing:
   A. A legal description of the property, and
   B. the boundary lines thereof, and
   C. the locations of all improvements and monuments, and
   D. all encroachments, and
   E. the boundaries of all existing streets, easements, rights-of-way, and
areas dedicated to public use within 200 feet of the property.
(196) Plat, Preliminary:
   The initial filing of a plat of subdivision upon which the substantive
approval or disapproval of the subdivision by the City is based.
(197) Premises:
   Any improved or unimproved real property.
(198) Primary Property:
   1. A property or portion thereof located in a single-lot PO Preservation
Overlay District, or
   2. A property or portion thereof located in a multi-lot PO District that
would taken by itself meet the Approival Criteria for PO zoning.
(199) Publicly Visible:
   Capable of being seen:
   1. from public streets, or
   2. from the ground or any building story on abutting property that is also
located within the PO Preservation Overlay District.
(200) Reasonable Return:
   A net annual income that is determined by the applicable Review Body, based
on appropriate data or expert opinion, to be within the range typical of
properties with similar characteristics affecting economic value, including
location and the underlying zoning classification.
(201) Reception Window:
   The space between the reflector of a satellite dish antenna and the orbiting
satellite or other extraterritorial object with which it is commun-icating.
(201A)   Recreational Vehicle:
   A vehicular portable structure that meets all of the following conditions:
   1.   It is designed for the sole purpose of recreational travel.
   2.   It is not used for the purpose of engaging in business for profit.
   3.   It is not used for the purpose of engaging in intrastate commerce.
   4.   It is not used for the purpose of commerce as defined in 49 C.F.R.
383.5, as amended.
   5.   It is not regulated by the public utilities commission pursuant to Ohio
R.C. Chapter 4905, 4921, or 4923.
   6.   It is classed as one of the following:
      a.   “Travel trailer” means a non-self-propelled recreational vehicle
that does not exceed an overall length of 35 feet, exclusive of bumper and
tongue or coupling, and contains less than 320 square feet of space when
erected on site.  “Travel trailer” includes a tent-type fold-out camping
trailer as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
      b.   “Motor home” means a self-propelled recreational vehicle that has
not fifth wheel and is constructed with permanently installed facilities for
cold storage, cooking and consuming of food, and for sleeping.
      c.   “Truck camper” means a non-self-propelled recreational vehicle that
does not have wheels for road use and is designed to be placed upon and
attached to a motor vehicle.  “Truck camper” does not include truck covers that
consist of walls and a roof, but do not have floors and facilities enabling
them to be used as a dwelling.
      d.   “Fifth wheel trailer” means a vehicle that is of such size and
weight as to be movable without a special highway permit, that has a gross
trailer area of 400 square feet or less, that is constructed with a raised
forward section that allows a bi-level floor plan, and that is designed to be
towed by a vehicle equipped with a fifth-wheel hitch ordinarily installed in
the bed of a truck.
      e.   “Park trailer” means a vehicle that is commonly known as a park
model recreational vehicle, meets the American National Standard Institute
Standard A 119.5 (1988) for park trailers, is built on a single chassis, has a
gross trailer area of 400 square feet or less when set up, is designed for
seasonal or temporary living quarters, and may be connected to utilities
necessary for the operation of installed features and appliances.
(202) Recycling Center:
   A facility for separating and processing of used material prior to shipment
elsewhere for use in manufacturing.
(203) Recycling Collection Point:
   A container, small structure, or other premises used for drop-off and
temporary storage, but not processing, of small refuse materials to be
recycled.  Incidental collection and sorting of recyclable materials as an
Accessory Use shall not be considered a recycling collection point.
(204) Redevelop:
   To clear the Principal Use structure(s) on a lot and build new Principal Use
structure(s) and/or to undertake substantial rehabilitation, as defined herein.
(205) Refuse:
   All waste products resulting from human activity except sewage.
(206) Related:
   Connected by blood, marriage, adoption, or foster parentage.
(207) Research Laboratory:
   A premises housing facilities for scientific research, testing, or
experimentation but not primarily housing facilities for the manufacture, sale,
or storage of products.
(208) Reservation:
   1. The act of reserving land.
   2. A parcel of land that has been reserved.
(209) Reserve:
   1. To hold and refrain from developing undeveloped land for possible
purchase by a public agency for use as a public area or public facility, such
as a street, park, or school site.
   2. A public open space.
(210) Resubdivision:
   The act of subdividing or of relocating lot lines within a previously
recorded subdivision.
(211) Review Body:
   A board, commission, committee, or officer of the City charged under this
Code with the review and approval of one or more development approvals, as
defined herein.
(212) Right-of-Way:
   A strip of land used for passage of motor vehicles, railroads, or
pedestrians or for the location of utility or communications lines.  An access
easement shall not be considered a right-of-way.
(213) Right-of-Way, Public:
   A right-of-way dedicated to or owned by a public body and available for use
by the general public.  In the case of public streets, the public right-of-way
normally includes the curbs, tree lawns, sidewalks, and lighting and drainage
facilities.
(214) Roof Line:
   A horizontal line along the top edge or highest point of a roof.
(215) Rooming House:
   A building or part thereof that is not a hotel or motel or tourist home and
that provides lodging rooms to 3 or more mostly transient paying guests who are
not part of the keeper's family.
(216) Satellite Dish Antenna:
   A device used to transmit and/or receive microwave or other electromagnetic
waves between the earth and satellites in earth orbit or other extraterritorial
devices, that incorporates a parabolic, spherical, or horn-shaped reflector
greater than 2 feet in diameter.
   Satellite dish antennas include satellite earth stations, TVRO's (television
reception only systems), DBS's (direct broadcast systems), VSAT's (very small
aperture terminals), and satellite microwave antennas conforming to this
definition.
(217) Screening:
   A structure erected, land contoured, and/or vegetation planted to conceal
wholly or partially the area behind it.
(218) Secondary Property:
   A property or portion thereof located within a multi-lot PO Preservation
Overlay District that would not, taken by itself, meet the Approval Criteria
for PO zoning.
(219) Service Director:
   The Director of Public Service of the City of Barberton.
(220) Service Station:
   A business devoted primarily to the retail dispensing of vehicular fuel into
motor vehicles and/or boats and to the performance of incidental servicing, as
defined herein, and/or minor repair, as also defined herein, but that does not
perform major repair, as defined herein.
(221) Setback:
   The shortest horizontal distance between a lot line and the closest part or
projection thereof of any structure or area.  If no lot line is specified, the
applicable lot line shall be the street line(s).
(221A) Sexual Predator/Offender Housing:
   Housing which is to be occupied by 2 or more related or unrelated persons
who have been convicted as sexual offenders or sexual predators, as defined by
the Ohio Revised Code, is subject to the Barberton Development Code,
Conditional Use Permit process, and is not permitted within 2,500 feet of
schools, parks, or public libraries.
(222) Shopping Center:
   A group of three or more retail, retail office, or personal service uses
designed as a single commercial group, occupying premises under common
ownership or management, and sharing a common off-street parking area.
(223) Shrub:
   A woody plant, usually multi-stemmed and lowbranching, that grows to a
mature height of 10 feet or less.
(224) Sidewalk:
   A portion of a street right-of-way improved for use primarily for pedestrian
traffic and separated from the portion for motor vehicle movement.
(225) Sign:
   Any visual or graphic device that is designed and/or used to communicate--
primarily through use of words, numbers, characters, and/or proprietary
symbols, as defined herein--a verbal and/or visual message and that is visible
from ground level beyond the lot or building site in which the sign is
displayted.
   Such a device shall be considered a sign whether or not a message is
currently displayed thereupon.  Sign shells, embellishments, and support
structures shall be considered part of the sign.
   (See Section 1230.08 for additional sign-related definitions.)
(226) Site Area, Gross:
   The total acreage of land within a development including the rights-of-way
of streets.
(227) Site Area, Net:
   The total acreage of land within a development excluding the rights-of-way
of streets.
(228) Site Condominium:
   A condominium in which each condominium unit has the exclusive right to use
a limited common area of land outside and contiguous to the building in which
the unit is located other than a single patio or similar accessory area less
than 100 square feet in area.
(229) Site Cooperative:
   A real estate cooperative in which each shareholder has the exclusive right
to use an area of land outside and contiguous to a building the shareholder
owns or has the exclusive right to use, other than a single patio or similar
ac-cessory area less than 100 square feet in area.
(230) Slope, Percent:
   A slope expressed as the percentage that the vertical rise over a horizontal
distance is of the horizontal length of that distance.  A rise of one foot
vertical in three feet horizontal is a 33 percent slope.
(231) Special Exception:
   An exception to the regulations of this Code that is authorized by a
specific provision pertaining thereto rather than being only generally
authorized, as in the case of Variances.  A Conditional Use is a form of
Special Exception.  Special Exceptions are not required to conform to the
Approval Criteria or other regulations for Variances.
(232) Stacking Space:
   A space designed for the temporary queueing of motor vehicles.
(233) Story:
   That portion of a building included between the top surface of any floor and
the top surface of the floor next above, or, if there is no floor above, the
ceiling next above.  A basement is counted as a story, but a cellar is not.
(234) Story, Half:
   A space under a sloping roof where the line of intersection of roof decking
and wall is not more than 3 feet above the top floor level and in which space
not more than 60 percent of the floor area is completed for a Principal or
Accessory Use.
(235) Street:
   A normally public right-of-way other than an alley intended or used
primarily for the passage of motor vehicles.
(236) Street, Arterial:
   A street or street segment designated as an arterial street in the
Comprehensive Plan.
(237) Street, Collector:
   A street or street segment designated as a collector street in the
Comprehensive Plan.
(238) Street, Cul-de-Sac:
   A Minor Street permanently established with a single point of vehicular
ingress and egress.
(239) Street, Freeway:
   A street or street segment designated as a free-way, expressway, or
Interstate Highway in the Comprehensive Plan.
(240) Street, Frontage Road:
   A street adjacent and normally parallel to an arterial street or freeway
with limited access thereto designed to provide access to abutting parcels that
is not provided by the arterial or freeway.
(241) Street Line:
   The dividing line between a lot, parcel of land, or building site and the
right-of-way of a contiguous existing or dedicated street or a planned street
included in the Comprehensive Plan.
(242) Street, Loop:
   A short minor street each end of which intersects the same street.
(243) Street, Minor:
   1. A street or street segment designated as a minor or local street in the
Comprehensive Plan, or
   2. Any street or street segment not designated as a freeway, expressway,
Interstate Highway, arterial, or collector street or equivalent designation on
such plan.
(244) Street, Private:
   A street not dedicated to the public.
(245) Street, Stub:
   A street having only one outlet for motor vehicle traffic that is designed
to be extended in the future or that does not meet City requirements for a
permanent cul-de-sac.
(246) Street Vendor:
   A cart, stall, vehicle, or other outdoor facility normally located within a
public right-of-way for the purpose of selling or otherwise distributing food,
services, or merchandise. All street vendors must maintain a certificate of
insurance naming the City of Barberton as an additional insured.  Street
vendors are considered to be a temporary use and must conform to Section
1310.04 of this Code.  Street vendors do not include vending machines,
newspaper racks, parking meters, fire or police call boxes, pay telephones, or
farm stands.
(247) Structural Alteration:
   Any change, other than incidental repairs, in the supporting members of a
building or structure, such as bearing walls, beams, or girders.
(248) Structure:
   Anything erected the use of which requires more or less permanent location
on the ground or attachment to something on the ground designed for support
purposes only.  Structures include buildings, manufactured homes and commercial
trailers (but not recreational vehicles, utility trailers, or semi-trailers),
walls, fences, and free-standing ground signs.
(249) Structure, Accessory:
   A structure that is or houses only an Accessory Use, as defined herein.
(250) Structure, Principal:
   A structure that houses a Principal Use, as de-fined herein.
(251) Structure, Temporary:
   A structure that is a Temporary Use, as defined herein.
(252) Subdivider:
   A person that creates a subdivision, as defined herein.
(253) Subdivision:
   1. The division of land into 2 or more lots or other divisions, any one of
which is less than 5 acres for the purpose of transfer of ownership.
   2. Any improvement of land for structures involving the division or
allocation of land for any street or widening or extension thereof that is not
a private street serving one or more industrial structures.
   3. The division or allocation of land as common open space.
   4. The division or allocation of land for easements for public utilities or
other public facilities.
   5. Any of the above actions taken after any previous such action on the same
land (resubdivision).
   6. The land so divided, allocated, or improved.
(254) Subdivision, Major:
   Any subdivision that is not a minor subdivision, as defined herein.
(255) Subdivision, Minor:
   A subdivision of 5 or fewer lots, including the parent lot, that:
   1. is along an existing public street, and
   2. does not involve the opening, widening, or extension of any street, and
   3. does not involve the installation of any public utility.
(256) Substantial Rehabilitation:
   Repair or construction work on a Principal Use building undertaken within
any consecutive 12-month period that preserves the building and that has a
value of over 50 percent of its current replacement value, as defined herein.
(257) Swimming Pool:
   Any temporary or permanent artificially constructed body or open tank of
water together with all related equipment that:
   A. is usable for human wading, swimming, or bathing, and 
   B. is located in or above the ground outside of a completely enclosed
building, and
   C. is supplied with water from a controlled water source, and
   D. is normally capable of containing water to a depth at any point exceeding
2 feet, and
   E. has a floor surface area of 250 square feet or more.
(258) Swimming Pool, Commercial:
   A swimming pool that is not a residential swimming pool or a private
swimming pool, both as defined herein.
(259) Swimming Pool, Private:
   A swimming pool intended for the exclusive use of a limited group of people,
such as the members of a club and their guests, residents of an apartment
community or of a particular subdivision, or tenants of a business park.
(260) Swimming Pool, Residential:
   A swimming pool intended for the exclusive not-for-profit use of the members
of a single household residing on the same lot and their  non-paying guests.
   Residential swimming pools include children's pools of plastic or inflatable
rubber conforming to the above definition.  They do not include outdoor hot
tubs, jacuzzis, spas, whirlpool baths, pools serving multi-family developments,
flood water detention or retention ponds, decorative or reflecting pools, or
man-made lakes or other artificial water features.
(261) Tavern:
   Any commercial establishment selling alcoholic beverages by the drink,
including restaurants serving alcohol.
(262) Tourist Home:
   A building or part thereof where lodging is provided by a resident family to
more than 2 paying guests and mainly to transients.
(262A)  Traditional Neighborhood Development:
   A development that is entirely or mostly residential and that reflects the
pedestrian-oriented pattern of development characterizing the older
neighborhoods of Barberton and other older Ohio cities in such particulars as
lot sizes, yards, location of parking, street widths and street system
configuration.  It features a generally higher-intensity pattern of land use
than contemporary suburban development and a lesser prominence of areas devoted
to automobile uses.
(263) Trailer:
   Any portable structure or vehicle designed for highway travel and used on a
short-term or in-terim basis for living, sleeping, or commercial purposes.
(264) Trailer Park:
   Any site under single ownership or control on which 3 or more trailers or
recreational vehicles other than boats are located in the open other than a
construction site, trailer or RV service or repair facility, trailer or RV
manufacturing plant, trailer or RV sales or storage lot, or wrecking yard.
(265) Tree, Large:
   A tree with a mature height of over 40 feet.
(266) Tree Lawn:
   A strip of land within a street right-of-way separating a sidewalk from the
curb or street pavement that is normally planted in grass and sometimes also
with trees.  Also called planting strip, devil strip, curb strip, or curb lawn.
(267) Tree, Medium:
   A tree with a mature height of 20 to 40 feet, inclusive.
(268) Tree, Small:
   A tree with a mature height of under 20 feet.
(269) Unit Grouping:
   An attached group of single-family attached or townhouse dwellings.
(270) Use:
   The purpose or activity for which land, structures thereupon, bodies of
water, air rights, or other premises are occupied and maintained.
(271) Use, Accessory:
   A subordinate use located on the same lot or parcel as a Principal Use
(except when specifically permitted by this Code to locate on a separate lot)
and serving a purpose customarily incidental to that of such Principal Use.
(272) Use, Agricultural:
   A land use consisting only of agriculture and Accessory Uses thereto.
(273) Use, Business:
   Any use other than a residential use or institu-tional use, as defined
herein, or government or utility use.  Business uses include industrial uses,
office uses, personal service uses, retail uses, and retail office uses, all as
defined herein.
(274) Use, Change of:
   Any change from one use listed in a Use Group in Chapter 1130, Allowable
Uses, to another use listed in the same or any other Use Group, whether or not
a period of vacancy has intervened.
(275) Use, Conditional:
   A use that because of its special character cannot be allowed generally in a
zoning district but may be allowed under special conditions and is therefore
subject to the prior approval of a Conditional Use Permit.
(276) Use, Entertainment:
   A restaurant, tavern, night club, theatre, banquet hall, or any similar
establishment offering amusement or entertainment services.
(277) Use, Existing:
   A use in existence on the date of effect of the applicable regulation.
(278) Use, Industrial:
   Any use involving the large-scale fabrication, assembly, mining, treatment,
packaging, testing, distillation, or similar processing of goods or materials,
or their mass storage, prior to their sale or resale.
(279) Use, Institutional:
   An educational institution, hospital, philanthropic institution,
recreational institution, or religious institution, all as defined herein.
(280) Use, Non-Residential:
   Any use that includes any business, institutional, government, or utility
use other than as an allowable home occupation or other allowable Accessory
Use.
(281) Use, Office:
   A business use primarily involving administrative, professional, or clerical
operations and not involving industrial uses, warehousing, or wholesale or
retail trade on the premises.
(282) Use, Permanent:
   Any use that is not a Temporary Use, as defined herein.
(283) Use, Permitted:
   A use allowable as of right within a zoning district without the need for a
Conditional Use Permit or Amendment.
(284) Use, Personal Service:
   A use providing services to the general public involving care of the person
or his or her apparel.
(285) Use, Principal:
   The main use of a lot as distinguished from an Accessory Use.
(286) Use, Residential:
   A use confined to dwelling units and Accessory Uses thereto such as home
occupations.
(287) Use, Residential, Multi-Family:
   A residential use consisting exclusively of multi-family dwellings and
Accessory Uses thereto.
(288) Use, Residential, Single-Family:
   A residential use consisting exclusively of one or more single-family
detached or attached dwellings and Accessory Uses thereto.
(289) Use, Residential, Two-Family:
   A residential use consisting exclusively of two-family dwellings and
Accessory Uses thereto.
(290) Use, Retail:
   A store selling goods individually or in small quantities directly to the
consumer for personal or household consumption.
(291) Use, Retail Office:
   An office use that regularly attracts significant numbers of customers or
clients from the general public in addition to its employees, such as real 
estate, securities, and insurance brokerages, tax preparation services, loan
offices, travel agencies, drivers license bureaus, unemployment offices, and
the like.
(292) Use, Temporary
   A Principal or Accessory Use that is established for a limited period as
regulated by provisions on Temporary Uses in division 1310.04(a).
(293) Use, Wholesale:
   A business engaged in selling to retailers or jobbers rather than to end
users or consumers.
(294) Variance:
   A modification of the provisions of this Code authorized by division 1310.03
(a).
(295) Variance, Homeowner:
   Any Variance that is for a property that is or is to be used for no more
than one single-, two-, or three-family dwelling.
(296) Variance, Use:
   A Variance that permits in any zoning district a permanent Principal or
Accessory Use not allowed by the use regulations applicable to that district.
(297) Vehicle, Commercial:
   Any motorized vehicle or trailer drawn thereby designed primarily for the
transportation of materials or property (whether or not currently carrying
such), for construction or earth moving, or to operate a power attachment such
as a snow plow, that is not primarily used by a household for non-commercial
personal or family transportation, for residential property maintenance, for
recreation, or for car pooling.
   Commercial vehicles include commercial trucks, buses, commercial vans,
tractors and other motorized farm equipment, semi-tractors and semi-trailers,
garbage trucks, tow trucks, tank trucks, cement trucks, sump trucks, snow
plows, trailers, stake bed trucks, motorized farm vehicles, construction and
earth-moving equipment, and commercial tree-trimming equipment.  They do not
include lawn tractors, snowmobiles, dune buggies, or recreational vehicles, as
defined herein.
(298) Vehicle, Inoperable:
   A motor vehicle that has been in a wrecked, dismantled, or non-operating
condition for more than 30 days since its arrival on a premises.
(299) Vehicle, Junk:
   An inoperable vehicle, as defined herein, that is not a restorable vehicle,
as also defined herein.
(300) Vehicle, Recreational:
   A recreational boat or a vehicle primarily designed as temporary living
quarters in conjunction with recreation, camping, or travel use that either has
its own motive power or is drawn by another vehicle.  Recreational vehicles
include travel trailers, camping trailers, truck campers, motor homes, and
similar vehicles.
(301) Vehicle, Restorable:
   An inoperable vehicle, as defined herein, currently being actively restored
or used in the restoration of another vehicle by its owner in connection with a
hobby of restoring historic or collectable motor vehicles.  The Building
Commissioner may require evidence from the vehicle owner that the vehicle is
actively being so used in order to determine whether a vehicle is a restorable
vehicle.
(302) Vehicular Area:
   Any open area outside of a street or alley right-of-way used for motor
vehicle parking, stacking, loading or unloading, maneuvering, or circulation.
(303) Vision Clearance Triangle:
   A triangular area formed by:
   1. the right-of-way lines of streets and/or railroads, and/or the boundaries
of internal access driveways between:
   A. their at-grade intersection, and
   B. two points at the distances specified herein from such intersection along
each such line, and
   2. a straight line connecting these two points.
(304) Visual Change:
   A significant alteration in the type, size, location, materials, design,
style, color, texture, or other element of the exterior appearance of a
premises that is publicly visible, as defined herein, as determined by the
Planning Director.
   Changes to building interiors, even though publicly visible, shall not be
considered visual changes.
(305) Visually Compatible:
   Exhibiting a visual consistency, harmony, or relatedness that avoids
excessive visual contrast or incongruity by including at least some unifying
element of sameness or similarity.  Judgments of visual compatibility shall be
based on accepted professional principles of design.
(306) Wall, Front:
   The wall of a building nearest the front lot line that is parallel or most
nearly parallel to said line.
(307) Wrecking Yard:
   An open premises used for the dismantling or wrecking of used motor
vehicles, trailers, boats, or similar vehicles or their parts and/or for sale,
storage, or dumping of wrecked vehicles or their parts.  Premises conforming to
the definition of motor vehicle body shops or motor vehicle repair shops, uses
carried on within completely enclosed buildings, and the parking of collector
vehicles authorized by division 1210.05(c) shall not be considered wrecking
yards.
(308) Yard:
   An Actual Yard or a Required Yard, both as defined herein.  Where a yard is
not specified herein to be a Required Yard or an Actual Yard, it shall be
construed to be a Required Yard.
Please Note: To view the Yards Graphic, see page 1360-24 of the printed version
of the Barberton Development Code
(309) Yard, Actual:
   The open space on a lot, as defined herein, between a building line, as
defined herein, or building line extended and the opposite lot line.
   An Actual Yard may be larger than the corresponding Required Yard.
(310) Yard, Corner Side, Actual:
   An actual yard extending between a corner side lot line and the opposite
building line and also extending the full depth of the lot but excluding any
part of an actual front yard.
(311) Yard, Corner Side, Required:
   A required yard extending between a corner side lot line and a line drawn
parallel thereto at a distance therefrom equal to the applicable corner side
yard requirement of this Code and also extending the full depth of the lot but
ex-cluding any part of a required front yard.
(312) Yard, Court:
   An open space on a lot--other than a front, rear, corner side, or interior
side yard--that is bounded on two or more sides by the walls of one or more
buildings.
(313) Yard, Front, Actual:
   An actual yard extending along the full frontage of a lot between a front
lot line and the opposite building line extended to the side lot lines.
Please Note: To view the Required Yards and Actual Yards Graphic, see page
1360-24 of the printed version of the Barberton Development Code
(314) Yard, Front, Required:
   A required yard extending along the full front-age of a lot between a front
lot line and a line drawn parallel thereto at a distance therefrom equal to the
applicable front yard requirement of this Code.
(315) Yard, Interior Side, Actual:
   An actual yard extending between an interior side lot line and the opposite
building line but excluding any part of an actual front or rear yard.
(316) Yard, Interior Side, Required:
   A required yard extending between an interior side lot line and a line drawn
parallel thereto at a distance therefrom established by the interior side yard
requirements of this Code but excluding any part of a required front or
required rear yard.  A required interior side yard may be measured from the
center line of any alley abutting such yard.
(317) Yard, Rear, Actual:
   An actual yard extending the full width of a lot between the rear lot line
and the opposite building line but excluding any portion of an actual corner
side yard.
(318) Yard, Rear, Required:
   A required yard extending the full width of a lot between the rear lot line
and a line drawn parallel thereto at a distance therefrom established by the
rear yard requirements of this Code but excluding any portion of a required
corner side yard.  A required rear yard may be measured from the center line of
any alley abutting such yard.
(319) Yard, Required:
   An open space on a lot, as defined herein, that is required by this Code to
be unoccupied and unobstructed above ground from its lowest level to the sky by
any structure or part or projection thereof other than those permitted in
required yards by City regulations.  Yard requirements are measured
horizontally irrespective of the slope of the land.
(320) Yard Sale:
   A temporary sale open to the public and conducted as an Accessory Use to a
residential premises at which more than 5 items of personal household property
owned and used by members of the household living thereupon are offered for
sale, exchange, or other distribution or displayed in connection therewith and
at which no merchandise purchased for resale or obtained on consignment is
offered.  Yard sales include garage sales, attic sales, basement sales, and
house sales.
(321) Yard, Street:
   A front yard or corner side yard.
(322) Yard, Street, Actual:
   An actual front yard or an actual corner side yard.
(323) Yard, Street, Required:
   A required front yard or a required corner side yard.
(324) Zoning Regulations, or Zoning Code:
   Chapters 1100 through 1199 of the Codified Ordinances of Barberton, Ohio.
(Ord. 148-95. Passed 12-11-95; Ord. 119-1999. Passed 7-26-99; Ord. 197-2006. 
Passed 10-23-06; Ord. 168-2008.  Passed 9-22-08; Ord. 225-2008.  Passed 12-8-
08; Ord. 143-2011.  Passed 10-10-11; Ord. 33-2012.  Passed 3-12-12; Ord. 60-
2012.  Passed 4-23-12; Ord. 43-2013.  Passed 3-25-13; Ord. 180-2013.  Passed
12-9-13; Ord. 89-2014.  Passed 9-8-14; Ord. 47-2016.  Passed 5-9-16.)
